                                         CEC-Electrification-New-V3_1.pdf   A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power AA Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power A       A Canadian Opportunity:  Tackling climate change   by switching to clean power June 2016    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 1  Arriving at A Canadian  Opportunity  In March of 2016, Canada’s Premiers and Prime Minister  launched an unprecedented initiative: they agreed to work  together to reach a national climate plan for adoption   by early 2017.  With federal and provincial officials working hard to develop  policy options, it was clear that a window had opened up to join,  and hopefully influence, the national climate conversation.  Clean Energy Canada believed that a set of policy  recommendations backed by a coalition of stakeholders from  various sectors would carry more weight than any contribution  we could make on our own.   We convened a representative group of stakeholders and  experts on the crucial issue of electrification to an in-person  meeting in Ottawa in May. In advance of that meeting, Clean  Energy Canada:  • performed a review of relevant literature on electrification   • interviewed virtually all participants to understand their  perspective and test for areas of convergence,  • produced a discussion paper listing policy options for  discussion, and  • worked with the SFU Centre for Dialogue to shape an  effective agenda and facilitation for the roundtable.  With federal and provincial officials working hard to develop   policy options, it was clear that a window had opened up to join,   and hopefully influence, the national climate conversation.  Contents Signatories  2  Introduction 4  Supportive Policies for Electrification 6  Transportation 8  Buildings 9  Industrial Processes 10  Electricity Supply 11  The Minister of the Environment and Climate Change,  Catherine McKenna, opened the roundtable. She stressed the  power of coalitions of unusual suspects collaborating on policy  solutions and emphasized the importance of electrification as  a climate change solution.  The May roundtable was very successful: all participants  expressed an interest in continuing to work on a package of  policy recommendations for formal submission to the federal /  provincial climate process. Clean Energy Canada staff worked  with roundtable participants, often one-on-one, to produce a  set of consensus policy recommendations.  The policy package has already been favourably received by  officials involved in the development of the national climate  plan—but we see it as just a first step. We will be working with  the signatories to this document, as well as a wider group of  stakeholders, over the weeks and months to come to advance  the policy recommendations proposed here.   Our thanks to Shauna Sylvester, director of the SFU Centre  for Dialogue, for her facilitation expertise, and to Sustainable  Prosperity for hosting the event.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 2  Signatories    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 3  Chris Bataille  IDDRI.org and Simon Fraser University  Jose Etcheverry  Sustainable Energy Initiative, York University  David Runnalls  Institute for the Environment, University of Ottawa  Individual Signatories  Signatories  CLIMATE ACTION NETWORK  RacCAN RÉSEAU ACTION CLIMAT    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 4  Electrification IN ACTION  Advanced Meter  Smart Charging  Local  Energy  Generation   Heat Pump  Time Varying Rates  Smart Appliances  High Efficiency Homes  Renewable Power Generation  Source: Adapted from the Acadia Centre’s EnergyVision (2014)   Introduction  Expert assessments are clear: to tackle climate change,   we need clean electricity to power far more of our daily   activities than it does today—even factoring in a dramatic  improvement in energy productivity.  Over time, we will need to shift from fuelling our personal  vehicles with gasoline to driving electric cars. Electric pumps  will draw heat from the air or the ground to keep our homes      warm in winter and cool in summer. Innovative industrial   processes will produce the goods and materials we need   using clean power rather than fossil fuels.   The growing interconnectivity of the internet with   electricity generation and consumption will also make   these power flows smarter.  To tackle climate change, we need clean   electricity to power far more of our daily   activities than it does today.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 5  This shift from fossil fuels to clean electricity is needed  in Canada, but to an even larger extent around the world.  While not a one-size-fits-all solution, electrification will be a  big part of the international effort to live up to the climate  commitments countries made at the UN climate talks in Paris1.   As a result, the global market for clean electricity is growing  quickly. So is demand for the technologies and services  that underpin electric transportation, buildings, industrial  processes and smart grids.  And that’s excellent news for Canada: our country already  has one of the cleanest electricity sectors in the world. Today,  well over 60 per cent of our power comes from water, wind and  sun—and that share of renewable electricity is poised to grow,  thanks to government commitments to further decarbonize  Canada’s power supply. With ambitious and effective policies,  Canada’s headstart means our country is positioned to reach  near-zero emission power well ahead of its peers.  In other words, clean electricity is a comparative advantage  for Canada, one that positions us to lead in the global clean  energy economy. With the right policy signals as a foundation,  our country can reap the benefits of a rapid shift to clean  electricity as a source of energy across the economy. We’ll see  those benefits in new jobs, innovation, business development  and export opportunities, while reducing our carbon pollution.  This document frames some of the most important policy  choices governments can make into a strategy to accelerate  the shift to clean electricity as the energy source for Canada’s  economy. We recognise that this strategy must be about  transforming transportation, buildings, and industrial  processes as much as the electricity generation sector itself.  We also describe overarching policies needed to support  electrification as a foundation for a clean and innovative  Canadian economy.   We hope the policy recommendations listed below are useful  as you craft a pan-Canadian climate plan. We welcome any  questions or comments you may have, and look forward to  working with you in the weeks and months ahead.  Original Signatories  Merran Smith, Clean Energy Canada  Cara Clairman, Plug’n Drive  Louise Comeau, Conservation Council of New Brunswick  Ron Dizy, Advanced Energy Centre, MaRS  John Gorman, Canadian Solar Industries Association (CanSIA)  Chantal Guimond, Electric Mobility Canada  Chris Henderson, Lumos Energy, Principal Clean Energy  Advisor to Canada’s Indigenous Peoples  Robert Hornung, Canadian Wind Energy Association  (CanWEA)  Jacob Irving, Canadian Hydropower Association  Paul Kariya, Clean Energy BC  Elisa Obermann, Marine Renewables Canada   The Pembina Institute  Félix-A. Boudreault, Principal, F&B Advisors  Dave Sawyer, EnviroEconomics  David Runnalls, Visiting Professor, Institute for the  Environment, University of Ottawa  With the right policy signals as a foundation, our country can   reap the benefits of a rapid shift to clean electricity as a    source of energy across the economy.  1  See IPCC, 2014: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: Mitigation of Climate Change. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fifth  Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, 20. http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg3/ipcc_wg3_ar5_  summary-for-policymakers.pdf    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 6  Supportive Policies  for Electrification While the policies described in this section may not result  directly in a switch from fossil fuels to clean power, they lay  the groundwork for electrification.   That transition needs to accelerate rapidly to meet our 2030  climate goal—but it’s also a very long-term effort. Policies  to support a durable, effective transition to electrification in  Canada include:  A price on carbon across Canada. The price signal should  apply in all jurisdictions in Canada, start as quickly as  possible (where it doesn’t exist already), grow over time, and  cover the vast majority of emissions.   A national “roadmap” or action plan for electrification  in Canada. Electrification remains a relatively new policy  area, and it faces some significant barriers. A roadmap for  electrification would help fill information gaps that exist today,  and lay out a national vision aligned with the pan-Canadian  effort to tackle climate change and the Council of the  Federation’s Canadian Energy Strategy.   A national action plan for electrification should also include:  • A national goal of reaching a near-zero carbon electricity  supply by a given year, along with interim milestones.  Canada’s electricity sector should demonstrate  continuously decreasing GHG emissions while ensuring  reliability and affordability in power supplies.   • In support of the national electricity sector goal,  assessments of the growth in clean power supply that  will be required in various regions of Canada, and plans  to meet those needs.  • Sector-by-sector electrification goals and pathways for  end use sectors (transportation, buildings, industry, etc.)  for the short, medium, and long term.  • Assessments, including cost-benefit analysis, of the grid  modernization that will be needed and plans to achieve  those improvements, recognizing the advantage and  economic value of the potential electricity storage capacity  of hydro reservoirs as well as smaller-scale storage and  distributed generation. Investments in “smart” grids and  micro-grids will allow for more efficient use of electricity  and greater integration of decentralized power while  maintaining reliability, resilience—especially in the face   of a changing climate— and affordability for consumers.   • Assessments of the financing needs associated with  electrification, and recommendations of how best to  meet those needs. For example, governments may wish  to consider providing seed funding for revolving funds   to mobilize private capital, possibly via green investment  banks. In the building sector, Property Assessed Clean  Energy (PACE) loans merit consideration.  • Analysis of the scale of export opportunity involved,  which goes well beyond clean power itself to include  electrification technologies and services, and  recommendations of the policies and practices that will  allow Canada to capitalize on those opportunities. (We  called this E3P: the Electrons and Expertise Export Plan).  • Targeted approaches for electrification in remote, rural  and Indigenous communities, which also represent  prototype solutions for a world marketplace.  • Assessments of the limits of electrification in the  Canadian context. For example, industrial operations  in remote areas that lack electricity or other power  infrastructure may need to rely on other solutions  to reduce emissions. Similarly, some heavy industry  applications or freight transportation may reduce  emissions more effectively through other means.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 7  • Assessments of the skills training, certification and  human resources needs the transition to a more  electrified economy will require, and recommendations   to meet them.  • Recommendations for world-leading electrification  policies in government procurement, operations and  standards, and  • Plans to better communicate lessons learned and  success stories across Canada.  Developing an action plan of this type would take time.   It requires investment, analysis, and consultation—but we  believe a well-researched action plan would provide the  national vision and technical foundation we need for the  transition to electrification across Canada.   While the full action plan is being crafted, we have identified  policy choices that governments can seize today. In many  cases, these opportunities—which are presented in the  remainder of this document—build on government actions  or global trends that are already well underway. Accelerating  those trends and initiatives will help move Canada to a  leadership position in the global clean energy transition.  A note on existing policies and jurisdiction  In some cases, governments in Canada have already adopted  policies similar to what we propose here, while others at the  federal/provincial table have yet to do so. In those cases, the  experience of the early adopters can offer valuable insight for  the remaining jurisdictions as they design policies to meet or  beat the leaders.   Further, some of our recommendations are explicitly aimed  at either federal or provincial governments, while others do  not specify the government actor involved. In those cases,  adoption of the policy in question by any government would  be good news—and its adoption by all relevant Canadian  jurisdictions would be even better.  An Essential Climate Solution   Below are three recent assessments of the importance   of electrification in reducing Canada’s greenhouse gas  (GHG) emissions.  From Technology and Policy Options for a Low-Emission  Energy System in Canada: The Expert Panel on Energy Use  and Climate Change (Council of Canadian Academies, 2015):   “Low-emission electricity is the foundation for  economy-wide emission reductions in  transportation, buildings, and industry. While  Canada already benefits from relatively low-emission  power generation, remaining high-emission  generation facilities will need to be replaced, and  all provinces will need to expand low-emission  electricity generation capacity to meet growing  demand and enable further reductions.”  “Improved building design can reduce heating  and cooling energy demand by 60 to 90% over  conventional construction, and can facilitate a  transition to low-emission electricity for space  heating. Such buildings feature passive solar  design; enhanced use of insulation; and air-,  ground-, and water-source heat pumps.”  From Pathways to Deep Decarbonization, Canada Report  (Sustainable Development Solutions Network, Carbon  Management Canada and IDDRI, 2015):   “Fuel switching to decarbonized electricity is   the single most significant pathway toward  achieving deep emissions reduction globally.   It allows demand sectors to reduce their end-use  emissions by switching from refined petroleum  products, natural gas and other fossil fuels to  clean electricity. This abatement is only made  possible through both decarbonization of  existing electricity generation as well as a large  expansion of new zero emissions electricity  sources. This trend is already evident, with  electricity production moving strongly towards  decarbonization in the developed world,  including in Canada.”  In some cases, governments in Canada have already adopted   policies similar to what we propose here, while others at   the federal/provincial table have yet to do so.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 8  In Canada, the “buildings, transport and electricity  sectors almost completely decarbonize by 2050,  accounting for less than a quarter of remaining  emissions.” This scenario “envisions a large  increase in electricity generation, with the share  of electricity rising to almost half of total annual  energy consumption by 2050…This translates  into a more than doubling of electricity supply  between now and 2050.”  From Canada’s Challenge & Opportunity: Transformations for  major reductions in GHG emissions (Project Summary, Trottier  Energy Futures Project, 2016):   “In the first 20 years of the simulations (2010 to  2030), the results from the scenario analysis  point to a number of opportunities that, if acted  upon now, will lead to significant progress toward  meeting the GHG emission reduction goals.  • Reduction of dependence on fossil fuels for  end uses, mostly by switching to greater use  of electricity derived from low-carbon sources  or biofuels. This includes, as examples,  replacing combustion of fossil fuels for space  heating, and hot water and steam production  in the residential and commercial sectors,  with electric boilers, electric baseboard  heaters, electrically driven geothermal and  air source heat pumps, and increased use of  ambient solar heating. In the transportation  sector, the dominant changes indicated  by the modelling are toward the use of  electric vehicles for passenger cars and  light-duty commercial vehicles, the use  of biofuels for heavy-duty transport, and  selective electrification of rail transport. In  the industrial and agricultural sectors, the  dominant opportunities involve switching to  increased use of electricity and biofuels.  • Reduction of dependence on fossil fuels for  electricity production. As shown in the analysis,  this is one of the most cost-effective options  for quickly reducing combustion emissions.”  Transportation The electrification of personal transportation, via electric cars,  is a significant opportunity we can start to realize today, as the  technology is ready and increasingly attractive. Support for  electrification in transit also offers a significant contribution to  reducing greenhouse gas emissions. To increase the uptake  of electric vehicles (EVs) in Canada, governments should:  Invest in effective support for EV education in their 2017  budgets. Polling shows that relatively few drivers know about  the EVs available today, or about the benefits—economic and  environmental—of driving them. In response, governments  can support access to updated, abundant, unbiased and user- friendly EV information to potential drivers, and to calculators2  or other tools that allow potential EV drivers to assess the  costs/savings of EV ownership over time. Governments can  also provide funding to support EV “test and trial” initiatives  run by non-profit organizations, which would allow potential  EV buyers to test drive a range of EV models and talk to  current EV drivers about their experience driving, charging  and maintaing EVs. Increasing the fraction of EVs in the  growing number of car-sharing fleets, via support for pilot  programs in interested municipalities, is another very  effective way to introduce drivers to EVs.  Provide incentives for the purchase of EVs. There is strong  evidence, both in Canada and in peer countries, that rebates  to offset the higher upfront cost of EVs are an effective  means of accelerating EV use. For example, 97 per cent of  all EVs sold in Canada last year were purchased in the three  provinces that currently offer rebates. All provinces should  offer a rebate of at least $3,000, and the federal government  should match that level of incentive.   Other kinds of incentives can also be very effective in  convincing drivers to purchase EVs. For example, guaranteed  access to high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) lanes for EVs would  be a very appealing benefit for some commuters. Regulators  should also consider rate structures adapted to EVs that  support low-cost charging and maximize GHG benefits. For  example, Ontario plans to offer free overnight EV charging and  transition to an enhanced time-of-day charging program to  lower electricity bills for EV owners3.   97% of all EVs sold in Canada last year   were purchased in the three provinces    that currently offer rebates.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 9  Make strategic investments in charging infrastructure.  Greater availability of workplace charging would help reduce   “range anxiety” for EV drivers, so governments should offer  incentives to workplaces that invest in EV chargers. Fast  charging stations in public locations where they will be used— for example, at rest stops along national highways or near  public / urban transit hubs—are also an important upfront  investment that governments should support, often via public- private partnerships.  Support the growth of the EV supply chain in Canada through  a dedicated advanced transportation innovation fund and  a Canadian industrial strategy for electric vehicles. Federal  and provincial investments have helped to build clusters  of advanced transportation expertise in Canada, including  electric battery and fuel cell technologies and advanced  transportation software. A new national innovation network  for advanced transportation technologies—an independent  entity that brings together industry, government, and  academic expertise—could build on that foundation and help  position Canada as a leading global destination for advanced  vehicles, including in public transit and other applications  alongside personal vehicles. The federal government could  support a fund of this kind in the 2017 budget.  A more in-depth understanding of the specific areas where  the prospects for job growth are greatest would significantly  enhance the ability of government, academia and the  private sector to prepare to turn the inevitable changes into  opportunities rather than threats. Federal and provincial  governments together can support effective decision-making,  planning and funding at a finer level of detail to ensure that  Canada is prepared to not only protect, but to enhance its  current presence in the auto sector, a critical part of the  Canadian economy. This transportation-specific analysis could  comprise one sector strategy within the overall electrification  roadmap we recommended earlier in this document. Over  time, trilateral cooperation between Canada, the US, and  Mexico could lead to North America being a leading player in  the fast-growing global EV market.  Where predictable demand for EVs has been demonstrated,  design effective and balanced regulations to require  a certain percentage of car sales to be zero emission.  Regulations that mandate a growing percentage of vehicle  sales to come from zero- or low-emission vehicles will help   get more electric vehicles into sales lots, and thus into  consumers’ hands. Because EV uptake and incentives vary  across Canada today, the design of provincial “Zero Emission  Vehicle” (ZEV) policies should reflect that province’s specific  situation. Any federal ZEV policy would need to consider how  best to level the playing field between provinces.  Buildings Everywhere in the economy, electrification works best if it’s  paired with increasing energy efficiency. Having efficiency and  electrification go hand-in-hand is particularly important in the  buildings sector, where efficiency opens the door to greater  use of electric technologies: an electric heat pump may not  be an effective choice to heat a very leaky home, but it could  provide more than enough heat for a cutting-edge green  building. In other words, it’s efficiency that makes it possible  to displace fossil fuel combustion in buildings.  Of course, increasing energy efficiency has other important  benefits. Those include reducing costs for homeowners,  tenants, and building operators; reducing emissions where  fossil fuels are used in buildings; and freeing up electricity  for other economic uses in cases where buildings are already  powered with clean electricity.  The policies below will help to reduce emissions and  encourage electrification in the building sector. They also  build on one another, becoming progressively more stringent  and more mandatory over time.  Existing Buildings  Governments should require all large buildings (for example,  buildings over 25,000 square feet) to report their energy use,  and the associated GHG emissions, annually using Natural  Resources Canada’s ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager. The  information should be public and comparable.   As an immediate first step in advance of mandatory reporting,  all public buildings—federal, provincial, municipal and  broader public sector—should voluntarily report their energy  performance to the database.   2 See, for example, the U.S. Department of Energy’s calculator at http://www.afdc.energy.gov/calc/.  3 See Measure 2.3 of Ontario’s Climate Change Action Plan at https://www.ontario.ca/page/climate-change-action-plan#section-4.   Over time, trilateral cooperation between Canada, the US,   and Mexico could lead to North America being a leading   player in the fast-growing global EV market.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 10  Drawing on this data, governments should set minimum  greenhouse gas and energy performance levels for existing  large buildings, by building type. Because the electricity mix  varies by province, the GHG performance standard would  need different baselines in different provinces.   For an initial period of time, governments should offer targeted  retrofit incentives and/or financing for buildings that do not  meet the established performance target. Over time,  governments should consider moving to regulations that require  buildings in the lower tier of performance to meet minimum  performance targets. In this scenario, governments would  strengthen the performance level over time and communicate  the next set of targets well in advance, in order to encourage  early adoption and to facilitate efficient capital planning.   Existing Homes  Require energy audits and labelling for homes at the time of  sale and major renovations, so that home buyers (and in the  case of renovations, homeowners) can easily understand the  energy costs and potential for improvement associated with a  given home purchase.   Support significant improvements in GHG and energy  performance through incentives for retrofits. Drawing on the  legacy of the EcoENERGY program, require an audit upfront,  and provide incentives based on the level of improvement in  a home’s performance after the retrofits have occurred. Such  incentives could be offered through tax credits calibrated  to the performance improvement achieved; through loans;  or through grants where appropriate. To remove barriers for  homeowners, public or private “one-stop-shop” organizations  could be established to offer technical expertise and facilitate  access to finacing. To ensure high-quality renovations,  investments in training and certification of renovators will   be necessary.   New Buildings (Commercial and Residential)  Require nearly net-zero-ready energy standards via building  codes across Canada in the near term. Building codes should  also require “electrification readiness”: for example, roughing  in EV chargers in homes, condominiums, and commercial  buildings; ensuring solar readiness; and supporting energy  management systems and adaptive technologies like smart  thermostats. This transformation of the industry will require  investments in capacity building and training, which can be  supported by incentive programs and the development and  implementation of stretch codes.   Industrial Processes Even a very low-carbon future will still require cement, iron,  steel, petrochemicals, and so on. Canada has significant  expertise in resource extraction, and innovation related to  electrification is already taking place in our resource sectors  today: for example, the Canada Mining Innovation Council  has developed roadmaps toward zero waste mining, one  component of which is enhancing the deployability of electric  mine haul trucks and other vehicles.   With the advent of greater data collection along with  increased connectivity and automation, the electrification  of industrial processes offers significant emission reduction  potential. But the technological solutions are less advanced  in most heavy industry applications than they are in the  buildings or personal transportation sectors—a state of affairs  that opens up opportunities for Canadian leadership.   Because commercial-scale technical solutions for  electrification are still being developed for some applications,  Canada’s governments will need to consider earlier-stage  research in the electrification of industrial processes  alongside deployment policies and potential for export.   In the context of growing global demand for low- or zero- carbon industrial processes, and as part of the upcoming  federal Innovation Agenda, the federal government should  create a new research institution for zero-carbon industrial  processes. A research institution of this type should bring  together universities, federal and provincial players, industry,  and federal science bodies like the National Research Council.   Canada has significant expertise in resource extraction,   and innovation related to electrification is already taking   place in our resource sectors today.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 11  Governments in Canada should also initiate trade promotion  efforts to attract businesses to Canada to take advantage  of our clean electricity supply. Locating a manufacturing  operation or a data centre in areas of Canada that generate  clean electricity would allow businesses to reduce the  lifecycle emissions (“embedded carbon”) associated with  their products, which confers an important advantage in an  increasingly carbon-conscious marketplace.    Over time and where appropriate, the federal government  should also set mandatory energy performance standards  for heavy industry at high enough levels that electrification  needs to be considered, while offering incentives to support  technology changeover and domestic innovation.  Electricity Supply Of course, electrification works best to reduce emissions  when the electricity comes from zero-carbon sources. In  assessments of pathways to deep emission reductions in  Canada, fuel switching from fossil fuels to electricity produces  significant growth in the electricity sector, particularly for  hydro, wind, and solar power.   This means that governments in Canada need to plan for  significant growth in the clean electricity sector as we reduce  greenhouse gas emissions, even while maximizing energy  conservation and energy efficiency.   The policy proposals below are intended to support more  effective use of clean power resources in Canada, encourage  the growth of clean electricity capacity, and remove barriers  to electrification. They are also intended to help attain the  longer-term national goal of reaching a near-zero carbon  electricity supply that we recommend be included in an  electrification action plan for Canada.  The federal government should facilitate and enable  opportunities for interprovincial and regional cooperation  on electricity needs, as well as increased exports, where such  enhanced connections support the transportation of clean  power to jurisdictions still reliant on fossil fuelled electricity,  and where they enjoy broad regional support.   Laying the Groundwork for Electrification   In some regions, the legislation governing energy boards  and utility commissions can be perceived as presenting  a structural barrier to electrification. Some utilities are  mandated to choose “least cost” electricity generation,  rather than “lowest emission,” “most resilient,” or “best  life-cycle return.” Restrictive utility mandates can also  make it difficult to invest now in new clean power to enable  more electrification; to plan for increased demand as the  transition to electrification takes hold; to conduct pilot  programs; to support R&D efforts; to value energy efficiency  and conservation; to invest in smart grid technology; and  to change rate structures where necessary to support  electrification activities.  Thus, in some regions, utility mandates may need to be  updated for the 21st century, now that electrification and   low-carbon electricity are important policy goals. Updated   acts and regulations could allow for R&D support, pilot  projects, innovation, growing clean power capacity, and   new rate structures, while assuring affordability and   economic competitiveness.  Similarly, as more and more renewable electricity generation  comes online, Canada’s electricity transmission and distribution  system operators will face new challenges. These operators  have already worked hard to develop and implement solutions  as, for example, coal-fired generation has come offline in  Ontario. However, because of the constitutional division of  powers and the current structure of Canada’s electricity grids,  most system operators have worked on these challenges  independently—with many organizations working on similar  challenges at the same time. This leads to duplication of  effort and a failure to consider the potential benefits of work  in other jurisdictions or interjurisdictional cooperation.   Updated acts and regulations could allow for R&D support, pilot projects,  innovation, growing clean power capacity, and new rate structures, while  assuring affordability and economic competitiveness.    A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 12  Building on the Government of Canada’s Budget 2016  investment in regional electicity cooperation, the federal  government should support a forum for transmission and  distribution system operators to share best practices for  managing high penetrations of smart and variable generation  and loads. The forum would allow system operators to share  issues of common concern and support research and  analysis on solutions.   The federal government should also convene expert panels  to recommend best practices for utility legislation and  regulation in a low-carbon world. Drawing on Canadian and  international precedents, the panel would recommend  elements of “model” legislative and regulatory approaches  that jurisdictions could adopt where appropriate. As a next  step, the federal government could make the adoption of some  or all of the best practice recommendations a condition when  considering funding energy-related infrastructure projects.  Building on existing measures and where appropriate, provide  enhanced federal support for the deployment of renewable  technologies. While renewable energy becomes increasingly  cost-competitive all the time, federal support can speed its  deployment, helping to achieve emission reductions in line  with our 2030 climate target. The 2016 federal budget took  the positive step of introducing accelerated depreciation  measures for two additional electrification technologies,  power storage and EV chargers. However, U.S. producers will  continue to benefit from a renewed Investment Tax Credit  and Production Tax Credit into the early 2020s, thus creating  an uneven playing field for some Canadian developers. Any  enhanced federal support could be designed to phase out  on the same timeline as the U.S. credits—by which time a  growing national price on carbon should help make clean  power even more competitive against fossil options.  Build on existing electricity sector regulations by adopting  emission regulations on natural gas-fired electricity  that become progressively more stringent over time. The  regulation should be structured in such a way that renewable  energy investment is permitted as a compliance option. In  addition, and where applicable, governments should assess  the benefits and costs of accelerating the timeline for the full  phaseout of unabated coal power across Canada.   The federal government should also convene expert panels   to recommend best practices for utility legislation and    regulation in a low-carbon world.     A Canadian Opportunity: Tackling Climate Change by switching to clean power 13   