                                                              November 2008  Climate Change and Health  in British Columbia  Aleck Ostry CaNada researCh Chair iN the soCial determiNaNts of health  aNd miChael smith fouNdatioN for health researCh seNior sCholar, assoCiate  Professor, uNiversity of viCtoria  MAlcOlM OgbOrn assoCiate viCe PresideNt researCh (health), uNiversity  of NortherN british Columbia, aNd CliNiCal Professor, PediatriCs aNd NortherN  mediCal Program, uNiversity of british Columbia  tiM tAkArO assoCiate Professor of health sCieNCes, simoN fraser uNiversity  kAte bAssil assistaNt Professor, faCulty of health sCieNCes, simoN fraser  uNiversity  DiAnA Allen Professor iN (grouNd)water resourCes, dePartmeNt of earth  sCieNCes, simoN fraser uNiversity      PaCifiC  iNstitute for   Climate  solutioNs  HEALTH    Pacific Institute for   Climate Solutions University of Victoria PO Box 1700 STN CSC Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2  Phone (250) 853-3595  Fax (250) 853-3597 E-mail pics@uvic.ca www.pics.uvic.ca  The Pacific Institute for   Climate Solutions gratefully   acknowledges the financial   support of the Province of   British Columbia through the   BC Ministry of the Environment.    3health  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY The purpose of this paper is to outline how climate change is likely to affect the health of  British Columbians and to suggest a way forward to promote health and policy research, and  adaptation to these changes.   ❚ BC’s climate has warmed, rainfall has increased and more extreme weather events  are now occurring.   ❚ Climate change will act on the health of British Columbians directly through  physical and biological pathways and, indirectly through complex socio-economic  and environmental pathways.   ❚ The direct physical and biological pathways will be the easiest to investigate,  monitor, and attribute to climate change.   ❚ The indirect socio-economic pathways will have the greatest impact, be the most  complex to investigate and monitor, and be the most difficult to attribute to cli- mate change.   ❚ These indirect impacts on health will be most severe in communities that already  face significant environmental and socio-economic adversity.   ❚ At present, rural and remote forestry-dependent and Aboriginal communities  in mountain pine beetle infected zones are particularly vulnerable because they  are already buffeted by more adverse environmental and socio-economic circum- stances than more diversified communities.   ❚ There is a double de-stabilization threat to rural and remote resource-dependent  and Aboriginal communities because some will also be exposed to increased fre- quency of fires and floods (because forests infested with MPB are at heightened  risk for fire and flood) which will have dramatic and direct effects on health.   ❚ It is essential that research on human health effects of climate change must, not only  grapple with the intensity and pace of climate change but also with the location and  extent of vulnerability of human populations most likely exposed to climate change.   ❚ While there is strong evidence for shifts in climate in BC, there is virtually no direct  evidence yet available on the impact of climate change on human health in BC.   ❚ There is therefore a need for a substantial “made in BC” climate change and health  research program. While waiting for the results of this program of research, the  precautionary principle demands that immediate action be taken to develop the  policy and infrastructure required to promote adaptation to climate change.  We suggest the following five main principles to guide development of research and policy  to better predict future impacts of climate change on health and to enhance adaptation to  these change in BC.  1. Basic research is required to develop “made in BC” models and infrastructure for climate  change and health investigations.    4 health  Including: 1) better local meteorological data, 2) downscaled climate datasets, 3) models  that apply accurate regional climate change predictions to regional topography, hydrology  and ecological systems, to accurately predict flood and fire risk etc., 4) research elucidating  pathways between climate change and diseases that are common in BC, 5) high quality lon- gitudinal health data sets for research building on the BC Linked Health Database.  2. Climate change will aggravate existing health disparities in BC so that research and adap- tive policy must, in the immediate future, be focused on rural and remote resource-dependent  communities, particularly those directly affected by the mountain pine beetle infestation and in  remote Aboriginal communities as well as in vulnerable urban neighborhoods. Risk perception  and social capital research is fundamental to better understanding future health impacts and the  best ways to develop adaptive policies now.  3. Development of adaptation policy requires education and mobilization of the public as well as  health and other professionals. Better understanding of the risk of climate change to health among  the general public and policy makers is essential.  4. Adaptation to climate change will require development of new collaborations across govern- ment, regional health authorities, and non-government agencies as well as an enhanced leader- ship role for public health authorities.  5. Climate change will strain the provincial health service in uneven fashion across regions. To  ensure equitable access to health services better understanding of the future impacts of climate  change on health services is required.    5health  1.0 InTRodUCTIon Much of the research on health in relation to climate change is based upon the impact of  major weather driven disasters on health and on the exposure of human populations to  extreme temperatures, mainly heat. Many of these, and other climate health research investi- gations, have been conducted in developing nations. There is a dearth of studies based in BC  or in places in developed nations with similar climates and environments. As well, research  frameworks describing the complex, indirect, linkage between climate change and the main  diseases of concern in a place like BC (i.e., cardio-vascular, cancer, diabetes, mental health  etc.) have not been well articulated.  Disentangling the complex indirect pathways between climate change and health is a chal- lenging research endeavour that requires the development of new inter-disciplinary academic  partnerships and cross-industry, governmental, and professional alliances as well as the devel- opment of a research infrastructure to provide more accurate data on the future impacts of  climate change on human health in BC. Given the complex way in which climate change will  act in concert with other socio-economic and environmental factors it is best to approach the  study of climate change and health using a social determinants of health framework.  The World Health Organization has encouraged public health officials to act now even in  the face of scientific uncertainty (McMichael et al., 2003). Successful adaptation by com- munities has the potential to reduce the burden of climate change on specific adverse health  outcomes.  The purpose of this paper is to outline how climate change is likely to affect the health of  British Columbians and to suggest a way forward to promote health, policy research, and  adaptation to these changes. Given that climate change is well underway, that we need adap- tive strategies to reduce current and future health impacts and, given the relevance of the  precautionary principle in this situation, it is essential to both develop a coherent provincial  approach to climate change and health research and adaptation based on what we know  about the links between climate change and health at present, and to immediately build the  research infrastructure to better predict future impacts on health of climate change.  In the first section of this paper, we describe the climate changes likely to occur in BC. In the  second section, we outline the evidence linking climate change to adverse health outcomes.  Because there is limited evidence available for BC, we extrapolate this to suggest possible  impacts of climate change on the health of British Columbians. In the third section, we  outline a “made in BC” set of principles and priorities for a research and policy agenda to  improve adaptation to the health impacts of climate change.  2.0 ClIMATE CHAngE In BC BC’s climate has warmed significantly in recent decades with changes in temperature and  precipitation exceeding global averages in southern BC (BC Ministry of Environment, 2006;  Whitfield et al., 2002a; Zhang et al., 2000). Conditions will likely become wetter in most  regions of the province during the winter and spring and drier during summer, at least in the  south and on the coast (Walker and Sydneysmith, 2007).    6 health  As well, more extreme weather events are now documented worldwide with most projections  suggesting these are on the increase (Easterling et al., 2000). In the period 1999 to 2002,  extreme climate-related natural disasters cost BC an average of 10 million dollars per year. In  the period from 2003 to 2005 average yearly costs of these types of disasters rose to 86 million  dollars per year indicating a dramatic recent increase in the impact of extreme weather events  in BC (Whyte, 2006)  In BC, large temperature increases have resulted in reduced snowpack (Stewart et al., 2004).  Reductions in snowpack have changed streamflow volumes and timing. In particular, spring  snowmelt now occurs much earlier in many BC rivers (Zhang et al., 2001) and alpine gla- ciers are melting rapidly (Moore et al., 2007). Increasing temperatures and precipitation will  reduce snowpacks in the future, thus increasing winter runoff for most of BC (Mote and  Hamlet, 2001). Groundwater recharge rates are also sensitive to changing climate conditions  (Rivera et al., 2004). These factors, in combination with higher evapotranspiration, mean  that there will be reduced summer-time flows in many BC rivers, a particular issue for the  Okanagan region and, in terms of sectors, for energy and agriculture.  Sea level rise will be a hazard for coastal communities in BC. However, accurate predictions  about the impacts of sea level rise are difficult to make (Walker and Sydneysmith, 2007).  Nonetheless, sea levels will rise in the future in BC posing challenges, particularly in south- western BC with its concentration of urban population and infrastructure. Sea level rise may  also cause groundwater quality degradation in coastal communities that rely on groundwa- ter.  3.0  WHAT ARE THE long TERM HEAlTH EffECTS of ClIMATE CHAngE In  BRITISH ColUMBIA? In order to assess what these effects might be in the future, it is first necessary to briefly  describe the models that scientists use to investigate the links between climate change and  health. We then review the evidence for possible impacts of climate change on human health.  3.1 Framing studies of climate change and health Several conceptual models have been developed in order to frame research on the impacts of  climate change on health (McMichael et al., 2003). Most of these focus on the health impacts  of climate change in developing nations as they tend to have large populations already suffer- ing from ill health, few resources to adapt to either the direct impacts of severe weather events  or their indirect long term sequelae, and little institutional capacity to drive adaptation to  climate change (Adger et al., 2003; Kristie et al., 2006; Lieshout et al., 2004).  Climate change is conceptualized, in most of these models, as impacting human health directly  or indirectly (Haines et al., 2006a, 2006 b). Direct effects might be death and illness due to  thermal extremes arising from severe heat waves (Campbell-Lendrum and Corvalan, 2007)  or from the direct effects of flooding (Ahern et al., 2005). Most climate change research has  been conducted on the direct effects of climate on health. Since 1970, the WHO conserva- tively estimates 150,000 deaths per annum from such effects (Adger et al., 2003; Campbell- Lendrum and Corvalan, 2007; Kristie et al., 2006; Lieshout et al., 2004). These events have  significant immediate public health impacts (e.g., excess deaths from the European heat-wave     7health  in 2003) (Robine, 2007) and, from a research and policy standpoint, offer the potential to  demonstrate a direct link with climate change.  Indirect effects on health arise from the sustained impact of altered climate, which causes  changes to ecosystems and which, in turn, impacts human health through various pathways  (Martens, 1998). For example, rises in temperature may alter living conditions for animal and  plant vectors of diseases with subsequent, very difficult to predict, impacts on human health  (Patz et al., 1996). Other models posit more complex pathways from climate and ecosystem  transformation to adverse health outcomes including, for example, impacts of social disloca- tion and migration that might arise from these broad changes to ecosystems (Patz et al.,  2000). Still other models focus on secondary health affects (such as malnutrition and vitamin  deficiency) attendant to medium and long term adverse changes in the conditions governing  agriculture and food production (Rosenzweig et al., 1993).  The magnitude of direct and indirect effects of climate change on health will be a function  both of the nature and magnitude of climatic changes and the vulnerability of the affected  populations (Woodward et al., 1998). Thus, it is essential that research on human health effects  of climate change must not only grapple with the intensity and pace of climate change but also  with the location and extent of vulnerability of human populations most likely exposed to climate  change (Haines et al., 2006a, 2006b).  3.2 What will be the impact of climate change on the health of British Columbians? Climate change will act on the health of British Columbians through physical, biological,  and socio-economic pathways. It is likely that the physical pathways will be the easiest to  investigate, monitor, and attribute to climate change. It is also likely that the socio-economic  pathways by which climate change impacts human health will be the most complex to inves- tigate and monitor and the most difficult to attribute to climate change. However, these  socio-economically mediated health impacts of climate change will likely have the greatest  impact on the health of British Columbians.  While there is strong evidence for shifts in climate in BC, there is virtually no direct evidence  yet available on the impact of climate change on human health in BC. However, it is possible to  extrapolate (somewhat tentatively) from some of the evidence, mainly restricted to the direct  impacts of climate change, to suggest ways in which climate change could impact human  health in this province.  The effects of climate change are likely to be complex and far-reaching, and their impact on  health, diverse (Patz et al., 2005; Wilkinson et al., 2007; Haines et al., 2006a; IPCC Secre- tariat et al., 2007). The pathways between climate change and health that have been most  investigated are exposures to extreme heat and the physical hazards resulting from extreme  weather events, including those resulting in floods, fires, storms, and shifting (or entirely new)  distribution of infectious diseases.  3.2.1 Physical changes that will influence health include greater exposure to fire and flood and  increased exposure to heat and air pollution. Heat exposure has been studied in the United  States and Northern Europe mainly in relation to urban heat waves (Semenza et al., 1996).  Cities are disproportionately affected by heat because of the urban heat island effect. In major  urban areas increases in temperature of up to 11°C warmer than in surrounding areas have  been observed (Aniello, 1995). The impact of the urban heat island effect is magnified in     8 health  the very young and very old (Hajat et al., 2005) and for the urban elderly living in poverty  (Buechley et al., 1972; CDC, 1995; Kalkstein and Greene, 1997; Nashold et al., 1996; Oke  1973). For example, during the 1995 heat wave in Chicago, there were 465 heat-related  deaths and those over age 65 accounted for 70 percent of these (NOAA, 1995).  In terms of the impacts of climate related flooding, research on populations in New Orleans  affected by Hurricane Katrina in 2005, demonstrated that low income, less well-educated,  non-white residents of the city were most likely to sustain adverse health outcomes (Knabb  et al., 2006), a result also noted from flooding in other nations (CRED, 2008). Both chronic  and acute impacts of floods in BC communities will likely be greater for vulnerable sub- populations.  Heavy rainfall in coastal communities in BC is common and likely to increase in areas, with  sudden runoff events which can contaminate water supplies, destabilize housing, increase  injury in transport accidents, and impede access to health care and emergency services. As  illustrated by recent events in Prince George, the instability of weather and increased outflow  of water from melting glaciers and snowpack can create new and repeated flood risk from ice  and debris jams in areas previously thought beyond the reach of the usual spring flood levels.  Such floods may have even greater impact on physical infrastructure if they occurring in areas  usually not prone to flooding.  Increased sediment load due to landslides or heavy runoff may also affect water quality. As  recently as November 2006, over two million people in the Greater Vancouver Regional  District were affected by a boil-water advisory due to high sediment load in one reservoir.  Boil-water advisories are common; 530 were in place in BC in May of 2008 (the greatest  number per capita in the country). Such advisories may be only a nuisance for some, but for  vulnerable individuals such as those with compromised immune systems they can be deadly  (Eggerston, 2008). As well, flooding and extreme precipitation contributes to water turbid- ity which reduces the effectiveness of drinking water purification (LeChevallier, 1981). The  possibility of groundwater contamination is also increased and, given that about one quarter  of British Columbians receive drinking water from this source, this poses a future health  concern (BC Ministry of Environment, Land, and Parks, 1993).  Paradoxically, some regions of the province are at risk of shortages of both surface and ground  water (Walker and Sydneysmith, 2007). Retreating glaciers, declining snowpack, earlier  spring melt, higher evapotranspiration, shifts in the timing and amount of precipitation, and  prolonged drought are expected to limit water supply during peak demand periods, and lead  to increased competition among water users. Declining stream flow and groundwater levels,  which also effect water quality, coupled with increased runoff due to extreme events, may  lead to greater impacts from water-borne pathogens and other contaminants (Moore et al.,  2007; Whitfield et al., 2002b).  Impacts of climate change on health due to fire and flood could be considerable given the  complicating factor of widespread forest kill due to mountain pine beetle (MPB) infestation  in northern and central regions of the province. Dead standing trees are a fire risk and also  exacerbate rapid water runoff patterns in the spring, which are likely with climate change,  increasing the potential for flooding and water system contamination. It is therefore likely  that increased fire and flood will occur, particularly in the zones of the province affected by  MPB (Patriquin et al., 2005).    9health  In Western North America, forest fires are now more frequent and severe (Westerling et al.,  2006), and are projected to become more frequent and severe in Western Canada (Flannigan  et al., 2005; Gillet et al., 2004). We know also from recent fires in the towns of Barriere and  Kelowna that there are direct and often severe impacts on people (Volney and Hirsch, 2005).  For example, an investigation during a three week period during the 2003 fire season near  Kelowna showed an increases in physician visits for respiratory diseases of between 46 and  78% above aggregate rates for the same weeks in the previous ten years (Moore et al., 2006).  As well, according to Nelson Ames, Medical Officer of Health for the Kootenays Region  in discussing the impact of the Kelowna fire, “cases of mental and physical exhaustion have  already surfaced, and some people are exhibiting symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder”  (MacKay, 2003). Thus, the impacts of fire on health may be complex and chronic extending  well beyond acute respiratory effects.  Air pollution has a well known adverse impact on respiratory health (Brauer et al., 2002,  2003). Air pollution occuring with temperature increase may potentiate adverse health  impacts particularly in urban regions in BC and especially by enhancing exposure to ozone  (Katsouyanni, 1993). Air pollution/temperature interactions could be further potentiated by  increased particulate exposure due to wood smoke exposure from more severe and frequent  forest fires (Simkhovich et al., 2008).  For vulnerable groups such as the elderly and those with existing cardio-pulmonary disease,  increases in temperature in conjunction with increases in pollution pose a much greater risk  to human health than exposure to these hazards on their own (Rainham and Smoyer-Tomic,  2003). Fire and heat events are likely to occur at the same time due to seasonal meteorology.  Additionally, temperature increases will increase the production of ozone from traffic-related  pollution. As BC ports and airports increase the levels of diesel, jet-fuel and marine emissions  this climate effect could become more significant, particularly in the eastern parts of the  Lower Fraser Valley that already experience significant ozone pollution (BC Ministry of the  Environment, 2008).  Other indirect effects arising, for example, from secondary effects on agricultural and marine  resources are difficult to assess, but it is likely that the most affected places will be those that  are already environmentally and socially stressed (McMichael et al., 2003). However, there  will be some regional winners in agriculture as the temperature increases in the province and  these may lead to human health benefits.  For example, many scientists predict that the area of arable land and the range of crops  planted will increase, at least in nations situated in temperate regions, as the earth warms. Pro- jections for BC indicate longer growing seasons in the future (Zebarth et al., 1997), which  will increase the range of crops that can be grown in BC. With a moderate climate change  scenario, by 2020, it may be possible to grow cereals, cabbage and potatoes, in the central  interior, and corn and tomatoes along the Fraser River valley as far north as Prince George.  By 2050 these latter crops may be growable in the Peace River region (Zebarth et al., 1997).  There may also be greater potential for expansion of agriculture in the Peace River region.  The impacts on human health of this expansion in agriculture could be positive by increasing  food security. Other potential benefits to health from climate change are extremely difficult  to predict.  3.2.2 Biological changes will arise when temperatures and precipitation increase. Water-borne  diseases may increase as a result of increased precipitation and flooding (Mullens, 1996). For     10 health  example, the incidence of pneumonic infections due to the water-borne infectious agents  legionellosis (which causes Legionnaires disease) is likely to increase. Legionnaire’s disease  and other pneumonic infections are directly related to increases in rainy humid weather, the  type of changes we are likely to see in BC (Fisman et al., 2005). Many respiratory patho- gens, such as influenza, exhibit winter seasonality. Some data has shown increased influenza  with the arrival of El Nino patterns in the United States (Choi et al., 2006). Given that the  increased temperature and rainfall associated with El Nino is likely also important to BC’s  future climate, this may indicate the potential for increased influenza rates in BC.  Food–borne gastroenteritis, particularly illnesses related to Campylobacter and Salmonella,  currently exhibit a summertime pattern of occurrence (Bowman et al., 2003). Rises in tem- perature will likely see growth in the prevalence of these types of illness in human populations  in BC (Gubler et al., 2001).  A rise in temperature may alter living conditions for animal and plant vectors of diseases  (Patz et al., 1996). Climate change impacts vector-borne disease by increasing the range and  abundance of animal or insect reservoirs, prolonging transmission cycles, and increasing the  importation and range of new vectors. As noted by Wilkinson (2008), there is a risk of greater  spread of a number of vector-borne diseases in many jurisdictions although more research is  needed to obtain reliable predictions within the context of complex regional environmental  co-factors.  The higher average rainfall and temperatures and earlier onset of spring predicted for BC  could result in prolonged transmission cycles for vectors of human disease (Sutherst, 2004).  Evidence is sound enough at this point to conclude that there is a risk of greater spread of a  number of vector-borne diseases such as malaria to climates as far north as BC (Martens et al.,  1999). In particular, higher temperatures and precipitation may extend the northern ranges  of currently established vector borne disease such as Lyme disease (Ogden et al., 2008). In  Europe during the 1990s, for example, a northern expansion was observed for ticks causing  Encephalitis and Lyme disease (Lindgren et al., 2000) and such a phenomenon is possible  in BC.  Vectors for West Nile disease include birds and insects (mainly mosquitoes). Earlier onset  of spring in combination with increased temperature and rainfall increases the likelihood of  mosquito infection from birds and transmission to people and will likely result in establish- ment and expansion of this disease in BC (Gould and Higgs, 2008; Morshed, 2003). As  well, Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome caused by the Hanta virus carried by rodents has  been expanding in BC, an increase linked to growth in rodent populations due, in turn, to  warming temperatures, particularly mild winters (Drebot et al., 2000).  New fungal pathogens that originate in warmer and wetter climates may find the local soil  ecology and climate more welcoming with climate change. For example, Cryptococcus gatti,  a tropical fungus, first appeared in 1999 on the South East coast of Vancouver Island, an  emergence that may be due to changing climatic conditions (Kidd et al., 2004). This fungus  has caused over 100 cases of human illness and appears to be spreading from Vancouver Island  to the Lower Mainland (Greer et al., 2008).  3.2.3 Socio-economic changes. Most of the discrepancy in chronic and physical and mental  illness seen across cultural, economic, ethnic, and geographic dimensions arises as a result of  social rather than biological determinants of health (Paradis, 2008). BC’s vulnerable com- munities will likely be more heavily impacted than more robust ones, even without factoring     11health  in the unequal regional physical effects of climate change (Woodward et al., 1998). There is  a need, therefore, to focus climate change research on vulnerable populations and vulnerable  communities. It will be particularly important to determine the impact of climate change  among children and the elderly, as these populations are the most vulnerable to climate  change (Paulson, 2007).  To the extent that vulnerable people live in vulnerable communities and given that health  research and adaptive policies are usually directed at the community level, it will be important  also to identify the communities most vulnerable to climate change in BC. Once identified,  it will be important to prioritize research and adaptive policies towards them.  The importance of a focus on vulnerable rural and remote communities in BC cannot be over- stated. First, approximately 30 percent of the province’s population lives in rural and remote  places (Mitura and Bollman, 2003). Second, the socio-economic conditions in most rural  and remote places in BC are systematically worse than they are for urban British Columbians  (Ostry, in press). Third, the health status of rural British Columbians is systematically worse  across a broad range of health outcomes than for urban citizens (BC Health Atlas, 2004).  Fourth, of all rural and remote communities in BC, Aboriginal communities have by far the  worst socio-economic and health profiles, so that research on these communities, especially  those most affected by climate change, is essential.  Fifth, rural and remote places in central and northern BC are already facing a severe climate- change related disaster, namely infestation of pine forests by the mountain pine beetle. This  infestation has resulted in the death of over 90 percent of BC’s pine forests (Patriquin et al.,  2005). There is no argument that this is a climate change related disaster.  Rural and remote resource-dependent communities may be the most vulnerable among  climate change vulnerable communities. Health effects of climate change on rural resource-  dependent communities will likely arise through socio-economic de-stabilization directly  arising from depletion of the main resource, particularly in vulnerable communities and  communities with vulnerable populations. These effects will be magnified in these types  of communities, as they are already buffeted by more adverse socio-economic winds than  more diversified urban communities (Hayter, 2000; Hayter and Barnes, 1992). This double  de-stabilization threat to communities will then be further potentiated because many of  these communities will also be exposed to increased frequency of fires and floods (as forests  infested with MPB are at heightened risk for fire), which will have dramatic and direct effects  on health (Barnes et al., 2001).  4.0 A ClIMATE CHAngE And HEAlTH RESEARCH And PolICY AgEndA foR BC We suggest five principles to guide development of research and policy to enhance adaptation  to the health impacts of climate change in BC.  1. Basic research is required to develop “made in BC” models and infrastructure for use in climate  change and health investigations.  There are four dimensions to investment in this type of research:    12 health  First is the need to obtain better local meteorological data, as climate monitoring networks  are not adequate to measure BC’s highly variable climate (Miles and Associates, 2003). It  is also essential to provide appropriate downscaled climate datasets that better match the  administrative areas and data boundaries utilized for most population health studies.  The second need is to develop models that apply accurate regional climate change predic- tions (once available) to regional topography, hydrology and ecological systems to accurately  predict flood and fire risk, surface and ground water quality change, and that model the  introduction and spread of new and existing vector-borne and other infectious illnesses.  Third, little research has gone into conceptualizing and designing studies to elucidate path- ways between climate change and diseases that are common in BC, such as coronary heart  disease, cancer, and respiratory disease. Given the high prevalence of these kinds of illnesses  in BC, relatively small adverse impacts exacerbated by or due to climate change could result in  fairly large increases in prevalence. Research is required, in conjunction with a better predic- tion of region-specific impacts of climate change, to elucidate these indirect pathways.  Fourth, in order to apply enhanced climate change and environmental impact data to  improved conceptual models at the regional level, it will be essential to have good quality  longitudinal health data available for research, as climate change and health studies require at  least 30 years worth of data (Kovats et al., 2001). BC is uniquely positioned to be a leader in  climate change and health research because of the BC Linked Health Database. This world-  class health database consists of inter-linked health, socio-economic, and educational data  that can be utilized in studies down to very small local areas. It is essential that these data be  further developed and ways found to facilitate their availability for climate change and health  research.  2. Climate change will aggravate existing health disparities in BC, so that research and adap- tive policy must, in the immediate future, be focused on rural and remote resource-dependant  communities, particularly those directly affected by the mountain pine beetle infestation and in  remote Aboriginal communities as well as in vulnerable urban neighborhoods.  Action is required to enhance the adaptive capacity of the most vulnerable regions and the  most vulnerable people within regions. An emerging research agenda must focus on under- standing regional and community resilience, particularly among vulnerable sub-populations,  in order to build on these. Research on social capital of communities, flexibility and innova- tion of government, private sector and non-profit agencies, and programs is needed. In short,  the role of collective coordination and action in facilitating adaptation is important (Adger  et al., 2003).  As well, in order to create a context where people are able to respond to multiple types of  change and hence reduce vulnerability under future climate change, adaptation policy efforts  need to take a broad approach to address the structures and factors that presently create  vulnerability among different groups (Eriksen and Lind, 2008). In particular, climate change  adaptation policy needs to be oriented towards enabling local and regional policy (Thomas  and Twyman, 2005).  3. Development of adaptation policy requires education and mobilization of the public as well as  health and other professionals.    13health  The effectiveness of strategies for adapting to climate change depend on the social accept- ability of options for adaptation, the institutional constraints on adaptation, and the place  of adaptation in the wiser landscape of economic development (Adger, 2003). Promotion  of local adaptation policies requires public and professional buy-in. This requires fostering  strong collaborations with health authorities, municipalities and others responsible for indi- vidual and public health, and developing strong policies promoting knowledge transfer from  researchers to stakeholders. Most importantly, adaptation strategies must be customized for  local conditions and populations (US Climate Science Program, 2008).  However, mobilization of the public, government and non-government stakeholders may  not be easy even in relation to climate change. For example, Leiserowitz (2006) has shown  in a population-based survey of Americans, that most individuals feel that climate change is  a moderate danger likely to impact people and places that are far away and of little personal  importance. Lorenzoni and Pidgeon (2006) have also shown that these attitudes are largely  shared by Britons and suggests that engaging the public on this issue is challenging. These  attitudes are likely quite common among Canadians.  Engagement is key to moving individuals and community leaders forward in developing  adaptive strategies to deal with climate change as it unfolds, because it is only when individu- als in communities feel vulnerable to the impacts of climate change and understand that their  community livelihood and their health may be threatened, that they will be moved to make  individual changes and press their communities for adaptive strategies. A key area of research  to develop is in risk perception of climate change impacts of health in order to understand  regional variation in these perceptions as these will be a marker of the potential for successful  adaptation polices to be enacted at the local level.  It will be essential to investigate the perceived risk of climate change relative to other life  risks in relation to physical and mental health, and well-being. A focus on rural resource- dependent communities located in places where extreme weather-related climate change  events are expected in the near future and in these types of communities located in the MPB  zone is recommended. Comparisons of risk perception among individuals living in com- munities impacted by climate change and in control communities where these effects are not  yet manifest, will be important.  4. Adaptation to climate change will require development of new collaborations across govern- ment, regional health authorities, and non-government agencies as well as an enhanced surveil- lance role for public health authorities.  There are five objectives of adaptation to climate change (Niang-Diop and Bosch, 2005):  These are 1) increasing the robustness of infrastructure designs, 2) increasing the flexibility  of vulnerable managed systems, 3) enhancing the adaptability of vulnerable natural systems,  4) reversing trends that increase vulnerability, and 5) improving societal awareness and pre- paredness. These five ways of moving forward on adaptation are inherently cross-sectoral.  They require new collaborations and partnerships, both horizontal and vertical, to promote  adaptation.  The public health system in BC has a key leadership role to take in these collaborations.  There are several reasons why. First, the public health system in place in BC (now with better  support from the federal government) has the credibility, the medical and managerial skills  (ranging from disease surveillance to disaster response planning), as well as experience and     14 health  engagement across ministries and sectors and at the provincial and local levels, to coordinate  policies to adapt to the health impacts of climate change.  Also, several public health principles point to well established public health approaches to  climate change. First, what public health professionals understand as primary prevention  would be mitigation. Secondary and tertiary prevention would be adaptation (i.e., efforts to  anticipate and prepare for effects of climate change thereby reducing the associated health  burden). These latter categories fall under the framework of public health preparedness. The  idea that steps to protect public health from threats of climate change cannot await full sci- entific certainty is also consistent with prevailing public health practice and management.  Public health surveillance, emergency preparedness, and research functions must be bolstered  in order to take on a stronger leadership role in climate change and health adaptation policy  development and implementation.  5. Climate change will strain the provincial health service in uneven fashion across regions. To  ensure equitable access to health services, a better understanding of the future impacts of climate  change on health services is required.  BC already has major challenges in ensuring equitable access to health services across its  communities. As climate change is likely to produce changes in demography, changes in the  health problems they experience, and widen existing disparities, the pressure to innovate in  service delivery, particularly in vulnerable communities, will increase.  It is important to recognize that the specific challenges posed to the healthcare system will be  different across regions. For example, the Interior will likely be the first to deal with the con- sequences of excessive heat. Similarly, the Vancouver Island and Vancouver Coastal Health  Authorities will be first affected by the introduction of new warm weather vector-borne dis- eases. The impacts of heavy flooding may be particularly important for the Northern Health  Authority as will be the climate change and health impacts from destabilization from already  vulnerable forestry-dependent communities.  The BC Linked Health Database will be a key research resource for monitoring change in  access and equitable availability to health services across regions. As a current deficiency of  this database is its ability to capture health data of individuals and communities accessing  services outside of the BC Health fee for service framework, many of whom live in remote  or rural areas that are already bearing the health burden of climate change, this database must  be further developed to improve data on impacts of climate change on health services in the  immediate future.  5.0  ConClUSIonS To the extent that reasonably good evidence is available, it is in relation to direct effects  of heat on human health, of climatically induced natural disasters, and the direct effects of  increased temperature and precipitation on various pathogens and disease vectors. In all cases  researchers have noted that effects on human health will always be greater among those sub- populations that are most socio-economically vulnerable.     15health  The indirect and distal effects of climate on human health acting, for example, through desta- bilization of communities and agriculture, which are very difficult to study, measure, and  attribute exclusively to climate change, will likely be most important in terms of their popu- lation-attributable risk. In other words, the methods, models, and evidence base to investigate  climate change and health links and outcomes that matter most for British Columbia are,  at present, under-developed and speak to the need to invest resources and infrastructure to  build the necessary evidence base.  Based on our review of the impacts of climate change on health in BC we, in the previous  section, outlined five principles that should guide development of research and adaptation  policy in this realm and we recommend that government move on these quickly.  Finally, extrapolating from the limited evidence available on the direct effects of climate  change on health, we draw policy-makers’ attention to eight areas of particular concern for  the province. These areas are identified because of their potential impact on public health and  the importance of the development of a robust database in these areas.  1. Direct or indirect climate change-related de-stabilization of communities will  have the most immediate and severe impact on the health of British Columbians.  2. It will be important to investigate the impacts of climate change in vulnerable  communities, such as those currently affected by and in the future path of the  mountain pine beetle infestation.  3. Communities that rely upon glacier and snowfields for their water supply are  likely to face adverse health effects related to water quality as well as quantity.  4. If climate change produces more frequent and more severe fires and floods in  the province, both acute and chronic illnesses in relation to these hazards will  increase.  5. If fires increase, if industrial and residential pollution remains the same or increases,  interactions with increased temperatures may lead to increases in respiratory and  cardiovascular disease.  6. The frequency of heat events are likely to increase in BC and will be significant  for vulnerable populations in the interior.  7. The prevalence of vector-borne illnesses already established in the province will  likely increase as temperatures and precipitation increase in BC.  8. Some, as of yet unknown number and type of illnesses with vectors from warmer  and wetter climes may be introduced and establish themselves in BC as the cli- mate changes.    16 health  REfEREnCES Adger N. Social Capital, Collective Action, and Adaptation   to Climate Change. Economic Geography, 79(4):  387–404, 2003.  Adger N, Huq S, Brown K, Conway D, Hulme M. Adapta- tion to Climate Change in the Developing World.  Progress in Developmental Studies, 3(3): 179–195,  2003.  Ahern M, Kovats R S, Wilkinson P, Few R, Matthies F.  Global Health Impacts of Floods: Epidemiologic Evi- dence. Epidemiological Review, 27(1): 36–46, 2005.  Aniello C, Morgan K, Busbey A, Newland L. Mapping  Micro-Urban Heat Islands Using Lansat TM and a  GIS. Computer & Geosciences, 21: 965–969, 1995.  Barnes TJ, Hayter R, Hay E. Stormy Weather: Cyclones,  Harold Innis, and Port Alberni, BC. Environment  and Planning C, 33: 2127–2147, 2001.  Bowman C, Flint J, Pollari F. Canadian Integrated Surveil- lance Report: Salmonella, Campylobacter, pathogenic  E. coli and Shigella, from 1996 to 1999. Canadian  Community Disease Reports, 3: 29 (Suppl 1):i-vi,  1–32, 2003.  Brauer M, Hoek G, Van Vliet P, Meliefste K, Fischer P, Wi- jga A, Koopman L, Neijens H, Gerritsen J, Kerkhof  M, Heinrich J, Bellander T, Brunekreef B. Air Pollu- tion from Traffic and the Development of Respiratory  Infections and Asthmatic and Allergic Symptoms in  Children. American Journal of Respiratory and Criti- cal Care Medicine, 166: 1092–1098, 2002.  Brauer M, PetkauJ, Vedal S, White R. Air Pollution and  Daily Mortality in a City with Low Levels of Pollu- tion. Environmental Health Perspectives, 111: 45–51,  2003.  BC Health Atlas, 2nd Edition. Centre for Health Services  and Policy Research, University of British Columbia,  Vancouver, 2004. http://www.chspr.ubc.ca/files/pub- lications/2004/chspr04–12.pdf  BC Hydro. 2006 Integrated Electricity Plan and Long  Term Acquisition Plan: BC Hydro, Vancouver BC,  2006.  BC Ministry of Environment. British Columbia’s Coastal  Environment. BC Ministry of Environment, 2006.  BC Ministry of Environment, Land, and Parks. Ground- water Management in Stewardship of the Water of  British Columbia: A Review of British Columbia’s  Water Management and Policy Legislation. Section 1.  BC Ministry of Environment, Land, and Parks, 1993.  BC Ministry of the Environment, Environmental Protec- tion Div. No Room To Breathe: Photochemical  Smog and Ground-Level Ozone. (web p. accessed  Oct 2008: http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/air/vehicle/ nrtbpsag.html).  Buechley RW, Van Bruggen J, Truppi LE. Heat Island =  Death Island? Environmental Research, 5: 85–92,  1972.  CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention). Heat- related Mortality—Chicago. Morbidity and Mortal- ity Weekly Report, 44: 577–579, 1995.  CRED (Centre for Research on the Epidemiology of Di- sasters). EM-DAT: The OFDA/CRED International  Disaster Database. Universite Catholique de Louvain,  Brussels, Belgium, 2008.  Choi KM, Christakos G, Wilson ML, El Nino Effects on  Influenza Mortality Risks in the State of California.  Public Health, 120: 505–516, 2006.  Drebot MA, Artsob H, Werker D. Hantavirus Pulmonary  Syndrome in Canada, 1989–1999. Canada Commu- nicable Disease Report, 29(8): 65–69, 2000.  Easterling DR, Meehl GA, Parmesan C, Changnon S,  Karl TR, Mearns LO. Climate Extremes: Observa- tions, Modeling and Impacts. Science, 289(5487):  2068–2074, 2000.  Eggertson L. Investigative Report: 1766 Boil-water Adviso- ries Now in Place Across Canada. Canadian Medical  Association Journal, 178: 1261–1263, 2008.  Eriksen S, Lind J. Adaptation as a Political Process: Adjust- ing to Drought and Conflict in Kenya’s Drylands.  Environmental Management, 2008.  Fisman DN, Lim S, Wellenius GA. It’s Not the Heat, it’s  the Humidity: Wet Weather Increases Legiionellosis  Risk in the Greater Philadelphia Metropolitan Area.  Journal of Infectious Disease, 192: 2066–2073, 2005.  Flannigan MD, Logan KA, Amiro BD, Skinner WR,  Stocks BJ. Future Area Burned in Canada in Canada.  Climatic Change, 72: 1–16, 2005.  Gillet NP, Weaver AJ, Zweirs FW, Flannigan MD. Detect- ing the Effect of Climate Change on Canadian Forest  Fires. Geophysical Research Letters, 31(L): 18211,  doi:10.1029/2004GL020876, 2004.  Greer A, Ng V, Fisman D. Climate Change and Infectious  Disease in North America: The Road Ahead. Cana- dian Medical Association Journal, 178(6): 715–722,  2008  Gould EA, Higgs S. Impact of Climate Change and other  Factors on Emerging Arbovirus Diseases. Transcripts  of Research on Social and Tropical Medicine and  Hygiene, 2008.  Gubler DJ, Reiter P, Ebi KL, Yap W, Nasci R, Patz JA.  Climate Variability and Change in the United States:  Potential Impacts on Vector- and Rodent-borne Dis- eases. Environmental Health Perspectives 109 (Suppl.  2): 223–233, 2001.  Haines A, Patz J A. Health Effects of Climate Change.  Journal of the American Medical Association, 291(1):  99–103, 2004.  Haines A, Kovats R S, Campbell-Lendrum D, Corvalan C.  Climate Change and Human Health: Impacts, Vul- nerability, and Mitigation. The Lancet, 367(9528):  2101–2109, 2006a.  Haines A, Kovats R S, Campbell-Lendrum D, Corvalan C.  Climate Change and Human Health: Impacts, Vul- nerability and Public Health. Public Health, 120(7):  585–596, 2006b  Hajat S, Armstrong B G, Gouveia N, Wilkinson P. Mortal- ity Displacement of Heat-Related Deaths: A Com- parison of Delhi, Sao Paulo, and London. Epidemiol- ogy, 16(5): 613–620, 2005.    17health  Hayter R. Flexible Crossroads: The Restructuring of British  Columbia’s Forest Economy. Vancouver: University  of British Columbia Press, 2000.  Hayter R, Barnes T J. Labour Market Segmentation,  Flexibility, and Recession: a British Columbian Case  Study. Environment and Planning C: Government  and Policy 10(3): 333—353, 1992.  IPCC Secretariat/ World Meteorological Organization/ United Nations Environment Programme. Climate  Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulner- ability. Contribution of Working Group II to the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Fourth  Assessment Report. Summary for Policy Makers.  Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and  New York, 2007.  Kalkstein LS, Greene JS. An Evaluation of Climate/Mor- tality Relations in Large United States Cities and the  Possible Impacts of a Climate Change. Environmental  Health Perspectives, 105(1): 84–93, 1997.  Katsouyanni K et al. Evidence for Interaction between Air  Pollution and High Temperature in the Causation of  Excess Mortality. International Journal of Biometeo- rology 48(4): 235–242, 1993.  Kidd SE, Hagen F, Tscharke RL, Huynh M, Bartlett KH,  Fyfe M, MacDougall L, Boekhout T, Kwon Chung  KJ, Meyer W. A Rare Genotype of Cryptococcus  Gatti Caused by Cryptococcosis Outbrreak on Van- couver Island. In: Microbiology, Proceedings of the  National Academy of Sciences of the USA 101(49):  17258–17263, 2004.  Knabb R, Rhome J, Brown D. Tropical Cyclone Report:  Hurricane Katrina: 23–30 August 2005. Miami,  Florida (USA): National Hurricane Center. National  Hurricane Center, 2006.  Kovats RS, Campbell-Lendrum D, McMichael AJ, Wood- ward A, Cox J. Early Effects of Climate Change: Do  they Include Changes in Vector Borne Diseases?  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B,  356: 1057–1068, 2001.  LeChevallier MW, Evans TM, Seidler RJ. Effects of  Turbidity on Chlorination Efficiency and Bacterial  Persistence in Drinking Water. Applied Environmen- tal Microbiology. 42(1): 159–167, 1981.  Leiserowitz A. Climate Change Risk Perception and Policy  Preferences: The Role of Affect, Imagery, and Value.  Climatic Change, 77(1/2): 45–72, 2006.  Lindgren E, Talleklint L, Polfeldt T. Impact of Climatic  Change on the Northern Latitude Limit and Popula- tion Density of the Disease-Transmitting European  Tick (Ixodes Ricinus). Environmental Health Per- spectives, 108(2): 119–123, 2000.  Lorenzoni I, Pidgeon NF. Public Views on Climate  Change: European and USA Perspectives. Climatic  Change, 77(1/2): 73–95, 2006.  MacKay B. Massive BC Fire Also Affecting Residents’ Men- tal, Physical Health, Canadian Medical Association  Journal News, August 28th, 2003. http://www.cmaj. ca/news/28_08_03.shtml.  Martens WJM. Climate Change, Thermal Stress and Mor- tality Changes. Social Science and Medicine, 46(3):  331–334, 1998.  Martens P, Kovats RS, Nijhof S, de Vries P, Livermore MTJ,  Bradley DJ, Cox J, McMichael AJ. Climate Change  and Future Populations at Risk of Malaria. Global En- vironmental Change, 9 (Supp1.1): S89-S107, 1999.  McMichael A J, Campbell-Lendrum DH, Corvalan CF,  Ebi KL, Githeko AK, Scherage JD, Woodward A.  Climate Change and Human Health: Risks and Re- sponses, World Health Organization, Geneva, 2003.  Related Observation Networks: An Adequacy Review. BC  Ministry of the Environment, Victoria BC, 2003.  Mitura V, Bollman RD. The Health of Rural Canadians: A  Rural Urban Comparison of Health Indicators. Rural  and Small Town Canada Analysis Bulletin, 4(6): 23,  2003.  Moore D, Copes R, Risk R, Joy R, Chan K, Brauer M. Pop- ulation Health Effects of Air Quality Changes Due to  Forest Fires in British Columbia in 2003: Estimates  from Physician-visit Billing Data. Canadian Journal  of Public Health, March/April: 105–108, 2006.  Moore RD, Allen DM, Stahl K. Climate Change and Low  Flows: Influences of Groundwater and Glaciers. Final  Report for Climate Change Action Fund Project  A875, 211 pp, 2007.  Morshed MG. West Nile Virus in North America: Coast to  Coast? Canadian Medical Proficiency Testing Con- nections, 64: 2–3, 2003.  Mote PW, Hamlet AF. Anthropogenic Climate Change  and Snow in the Pacific Northwest. In: Proceedings  of the 69th Annual Meeting of the Western Snow  Conference. April 16–19, 2001. Sun Valley, Idaho,  p.51–52.  Mullens, A 1996, Canadian Medical Association Journal,  15411: 1721–1724, 1996.  Nashold R, Remington P, Peterson P, Jentzen J, Kapella  R. Heat-Wave-related Mortality—Milwaukee, Wis- consin, July 1995. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly  Report, 45: 505–507, 1996.  NOAA (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administra- tion), July 1995 Heat Wave, Natural Disaster Survey  Report. United States Department of Commerce,  Washington, DC, 1995.  Niagn-Diop I, Bosch H. Formulating an Adaptation  Strategy. In: Adaptation Policy Frameworks for  Climate Change : Developing Strategies, Policies, and  Measures, Lim B, Spanger-Siegfried E (eds), United  Nations Development Program, Cambridge Univer- sity Press, Cambridge, UK, Technical Paper 1, 2005.  Ogden NH, St-Onge L, Barker IK, Brazeau S, Bigras- Poulin M, Charron DF, Francis CM, Heagy  A, Lindsay LR,Maarouf A, Michel P, Milord F,  O’Callaghan CJ, Trudel L, Thompson RA. Risk Maps  for Range Expansion of the Lyme Disease Vector,  Ixodes Scapularis, in Canada Now and with Climate  Change.” International Journal of Health Geography,  7: 24, 2008.    18 health  Oke TR. City Size and the Urban Heat Island. Atmospher- ic Environment, 7: 769–779, 1973.  Ostry A (ed). The Social Dimensions of Rural and North- ern Health in British Columbia. UBC Press, In Press.  Paradis G. The Social Determinants of Health: An Impera- tive for Canadian Public Health. Canadian Journal of  Public Health, 99(2): 85, 2008.  Patriquin M, Heckbert S, Nickerson C, Spence M, White  W. Regional Economic Implications of the Mountain  Pine Beetle Infestation in the Northern Interior of  British Columbia. Natural Resources Canada, Cana- dian Forest Service, Pacific Forestry Centre, Victoria,  BC. Mountain Pine Beetle Initiative Working Paper  2005–3. 58 pp, 2005.  Patz J, Epsttein P, Thomas A, Burke A, Balbus J. Global  Climate Change and Emerging Infectious Diseases.  Journal of the American Medical Association, 275:  217–223, 1996.  Patz J, Engelberg D, Last J. The Effects of Changing  Weather on Public Health. Annual Review of Public  Health, 21: 271–307, 2000.  Patz JA, Campbell-Lendrum D, Holloway T, Foley JA. Im- pact of Regional Climate Change on Human Health.  Nature, 438(7066): 310–317, 2005.  Paulson JA. The State of Children’s Health and the Envi- ronment. Archives of Environmental and Occupa- tional Health, 62(2): 53–57, 2007.  Rainham DGC, Smoyer-Tomic KE. The Role of Air Pollu- tion in the Relationship between a Heat Stress Index  and Human Mortality in Toronto. Environmental  Research, 93: 9–19, 2003.  Rivera A, Allen DM, Maathuis H. Climate Variability and  Change- Groundwater Resources. In: Threats to Wa- ter Availability in Canada, pp. 77–83, Environment  Canada, National Water Research Institute, 2004.  Robine JM. In: The Excess Mortality in Summer 2003:  Results of the Canicule Project. World Health Orga- nization Meeting: Regional Office for Europe: Public  Health Responses to Extreme Weather Events—Euro- HEAT; March 22–23; Bonn, Germany, 2007.  Rosenzweig C, Parry M, Fisher G, Frohberg K. Climate  Change and World Food Supply. Rpt No 3. Oxford:  Oxford University, 1993.  Semenza JC, Rubin CH, Falter KH, Selanikio,JD, Flanders  WD, Howe HL Wilhelm JL. Heat-Related Deaths  During the July 1995 Heat Wave in Chicago. New  England Journal of Medicine, 335(2): 84–90, 1996.  Simkhovich BZ, Kleinman M. Air Pollution and Car- diovascular Injury Epidemiology, Toxicology, and  Mechanisms.” Journal of the American College of  Cardiology, 52(9): 719–726, 2008.  Stewart IT, Cayan DR, Dettinger MD. Changes in Snow- melt Runoff Timing in Western North American Un- der a “Business as Usual” Climate Change Scenario.  Climatic Change, 62: 217–232, 2004.  Sutherst RW. Global Change and Human Vulnerability  to Vector-borne Diseases. Clinical Microbiological  Revue, 17(1): 136–173, 2004.  Thomas DSG, Twyman C. Equity and Justice in Climate  Change Adaptation Amongst Natural-Resource- Dependent Societies. Global Environmental Change,  15(2): 115–124, 2005.  US Climate Science Program. Synthesis and Assessment  Report 4.6 Analysis of the Effects of Global Change  on Human Health and Welfare and Human Systems.  3rd Draft April 2008. http://www.climatescience. gove/Library/sap/sap4–6/sap4–6-draft3.pdf.  van Lieshout M, Kovats RS, Livermore MTJ, Martens P.  Climate Change and Malaria: Analysis of the SRES  Climate and Socio-economic Scenarios, Global Envi- ronmental Change, 14(1): 87–99, 2004.  Volney WJA, Hirsch KG. Disturbing Forest Disturbances.  The Forestry Chronicle, 81: 662–668, 2005.  Walker IJ, Sydneysmith R. British Columbia. In: From Im- pacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate.  Lemmen DS, Warren FJ, Lacroix J, Bush E, (eds),  pp.329–386, Government of Canada, Ottawa, 2007.  Westerling AL, Hidalgo HG, Cayan DR, Swetnam TW.  Warming and Earlier Spring Increase Western  U.S. Forest Wildfire Activity. Science, 313(5789):  940–943, 2006.  Whitfield PH, Bodtker K, Cannon AJ. Recent Variations  in Seasonality of Temperature and Precipitation in  Canada, 1976–1995. International Journal of Clima- tology, 22: 1617–1644, 2002a.  Whitfield PH, Reynolds CJ, Cannon AJ. Modelling  Streamflows in Present and Future Climates: Exam- ples from Georgia Basin, British Columbia. Canadian  Water Resources Journal, 27(4): 427–456, 2002b.  Whyte J. Extreme Weather Impacts on Provincial Emer- gency Programme (PEP) and Public Safety: Canadian  Water Resources Association Conference, Victoria,  BC, 2006.  Wilkinson, P. Climate Change & Health: the Case for  Sustainable Development. Medicine, Conflict and  Survival, 24(1): 26–35, 2008.  Woodruff RE, McMichael AJ, Butler C, Hales, S. Action  on Climate Change: the Health Risks of Procrastinat- ing. Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public  Health, 30(6): 567–571, 2006.  Woodward A, Hales S, Weinstein P. Climate Change and  Human Health in the Asia Pacific Region: Who  Will be the Most Vulnerable? Climate Research, 11:  31–38, 1998.  Zebarth B, Caprio J, Broersma K, Mills P, Smith S. Effect of  Climate Change on Agriculture in British Columbia  and the Yukon. Volume 1. Canada Country Study:  Climate Impacts and Adaptation. Taylor E, Taylor  B. (eds), Environment Canada and BC Ministry of  Environemnt, Lands, and Parks, 1997.  Zhang X, Vincent LA, Hogg WD, Nitsoo A. Temperature  and Precipitation Trends in Canada during the 20th  Century. Atmosphere-Ocean, 38(3): 395–429, 2000.  Zhang X, Harvey DK, Hogg WD, Yuzyk TD. Trends in  Canadian Streamflow. Water Resources Research,  37(4): 987–998, 2001.    pg    Pacific Institute for   Climate Solutions  University of Victoria PO Box 1700 STN CSC Victoria, BC V8W 2Y2  Phone (250) 853-3595  Fax (250) 853-3597  E-mail pics@uvic.ca www.pics.uvic.ca  Printed on 100% postconsumer recycled paper.   