Large Industrial Emitters
Large industrial sectors such as mining and manufacturing 
contribute significantly to Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas 
emissions. Saskatchewan’s large emitters produce 6 Mt of 
CO2e every year. (Note: upstream oil and gas, and electricity 
industries are addressed elsewhere in this strategy since they 
are regulated separately). These industries continually improve 
operations to meet international standards while remaining 
competitive in a global marketplace. 

Bringing in provincial performance standards encourages 
industry to further reduce emissions. These standards are most 
effective when accompanied by policies that recognize and 
reward companies that choose to take the lead. By stipulating a 
carbon intensity threshold, the approach rewards performance 
and early action. 

This approach doesn’t put a cap on total industrial emissions, 
which could inhibit provincial economic development and 
growth. Instead, our approach encourages and engages 
Saskatchewan’s industry to produce innovative solutions that 
can reduce the intensity of our emissions and, at the same time, 
stimulate provincial economic development and growth. 

 We will:
•   Implement sector-specific output-based performance 

standards on facilities emitting more than 25,000 tonnes of 
CO2e per year.

•   Obligate facilities that annually emit more than the regulated 

performance standard to take compliance actions. Flexible 
compliance options will allow these facilities to meet 
their obligations in the way best suited to their business 
models through:

•  Making improvements at their facility to reduce 
emissions intensity.

•  Purchasing an offset, representing a reduction in 
greenhouse gas emissions made by a non-regulated 
entity (e.g., in agriculture, forestry or other approved 
offset protocol).

•  Using best performance credits, which will be generated 
by a regulated facility reducing emissions beyond what is 
required in the performance standard. Best performance 
credits could also be purchased from another entity, from 
another facility.

•  Engaging in the market mechanisms outlined in the 
Paris Agreement, specifically internationally transferred 
mitigation outcomes (ITMOs).

•  Paying into the provincial technology fund.

Technology and Innovation
A technology fund is one way regulated emitters can comply 
with their sector’s performance standard. If they are unable to 
meet their sector-specific target through on-site actions, offsets, 
best performance credits or other approved mechanisms (such 
as those adopted from the Paris Agreement) they could make 
up the difference by paying into a technology fund.

The Government of Saskatchewan will use the technology 
fund to invest in industrial innovation. The aim is to stimulate 
and drive innovation to bring down greenhouse gas emissions 
while providing transformative technologies and strategies to 
strengthen our resilience to climate change.

 We will:
•   Enact a provincial technology fund as a compliance 

mechanism to further enable investment in transformative 
technologies and innovation.

Upstream Oil and Gas Industry
Saskatchewan will develop and pass greenhouse gas emissions 
regulations specifically suited to our upstream oil and gas 
industry. These will include reporting requirements and 
emission reduction targets. 

Regulations tailored to Saskatchewan producers need 
appropriate timing and flexibility in terms of investments in 
emission reduction technologies. 

8

Saskatchewan.ca
