to sequester carbon. Farmers have diversified their crops to 
enhance soil health and manage pests and diseases. Producers 
are implementing 4R nutrient stewardship to enhance fertilizer 
efficiency and adopting new crop varieties that are more 
drought resistant. Producers also implement grazing rotations, 
and adopt beneficial management practices such as seeding 
marginal land to grass. These actions can enhance yield, 
improve carbon sequestration and fortify the climate resilience 
of their operations.

Current tillage practices sequester about 9 Mt of CO2e 
in our soils annually. Saskatchewan’s commercial forests 
store an estimated 3.5 Mt of CO2e every year. Increased 
innovation, stimulated by an offset system, could drive carbon 
sequestration even further.

Crop selection can also have an impact. Planting more 
nitrogen-fixing crops such as lentils and other pulses could 
reduce emissions beyond the 2 Mt CO2e currently being 
sequestered annually.  Pulse crops, for example, have increased 
from 400,000 acres in 1990 to more than seven million acres 
in 2017.  

Agriculture also offers other opportunities to develop co-
products from production that would otherwise go to waste. 
For example, six to eight per cent of Saskatchewan’s canola 
crop is too damaged to be used as a food ingredient, but 
this resource is being used by innovative companies to 
produce biodiesel. 

Another example is the Livestock and Forage Centre of 
Excellence at the University 
of Saskatchewan. Researchers 
there are developing different 
processing, local crops and 
feedstock compositions that 
reduce methane as well as use 
crop co-products that would 
otherwise have little value.

Innovation in 
agricultural and 
forestry management 
practices needs to be 
recognized.

For many decades, 
Saskatchewan has actively 
managed and regulated its 
public and commercial forests – another important carbon sink. 
Forest resilience is a priority, helped along by initiatives such as 
the forest-assisted migration project, under which five million 
Jack pine seedlings have been planted since 2013. These efforts 

add to routine replanting programs that occur as part of normal 
forestry operations. 

Lumber from Saskatchewan forests is used both in our province 
and in export markets to build thousands of homes and other 
durable structures. 

Innovation in agricultural and forest management practices 
could further increase the amount of CO2e removed from the 
atmosphere and stored in our soils and forests. This valuable 
contribution needs to be recognized.

Safeguarding the health of our water systems is another critical 
element in responding to climate change. How we use our 
lands and our actions to preserve and restore wetlands builds 
resilience into our landscapes through greater ability to retain 
carbon and reduce the effects of flood and drought. Our water 
strategy assesses past drought events, identifies where floods 
are most likely to happen and how severe they might be, 
and conducts continued assessment of water resources. This 
knowledge guides planning for infrastructure such as roads and 
highways as well as land use policies.

These are a few of the ways Saskatchewan businesses and 
researchers are demonstrating the resilience our province 
draws upon to meet challenges such as those posed by 
climate change.

It’s important that Canada and its partner nations in the 
Paris Agreement develop accounting systems to credit past 
and future land use and management decisions that help 
sequester carbon.

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to the health 
of our landscapes and continues to support initiatives in 
agriculture, forestry and water security.

 We will: 
•   Develop and implement an offset system that creates additional 
value for actions that result in carbon sequestration or reduced 
emissions, especially from our soils and forests.

•   Ensure natural and commercially forested lands are 

managed in a manner that enhances the removal and 
storage of carbon from the atmosphere while allowing for 
sustainable harvesting, respecting normal forest cycles and 
fire preparedness.

4

Saskatchewan.ca
