•   Maintain or restore landscape integrity to optimize ecological 

PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

goods and services, enhance resilience to extreme weather 
events and manage the risk to biodiversity. 

•   Increase our understanding of future climate trends and 

adaptation options to address impacts that extreme weather 
events such as flooding and droughts could have on future 
water supplies.

•   Advance options to improve Saskatchewan’s ability to measure 

stream flows and provide flow forecasts to aid in adapting 
to the potential effects of climate change on watersheds and 
infrastructure operations.

•   Continue to implement Saskatchewan’s agricultural water 

management framework in the province to help assure 
continued productivity, enhance wetland habitat conservation 
and improve runoff management in times of both drought 
and flood.

•   Advance options to focus on permanent flood damage reduction 

and flood mitigation projects and thereby increase resiliency of 
flood prone areas.

•   Continue to improve the condition and resilience of provincially 

owned dams and water infrastructure. 

•   Commit, in partnership across Canada, to help develop 
a pathway to achieve Canada’s Target 1 and establish a 
coordinated network of parks and conservation areas 
throughout Canada that will serve as the cornerstone for 
biodiversity conservation for generations to come.

Physical infrastructure is how we shelter ourselves, produce 
and move goods and manage the built environment. Our 
infrastructure needs to perform in ways that enable lower 
carbon emissions. Building infrastructure more resilient 
to climate change means moving to more fuel-efficient 
vehicles, machinery and transportation options, cutting our 
reliance on greenhouse gas-emitting electricity generation 
and building more energy-efficient buildings.

Saskatchewan has deep, 
established expertise in 
these areas. Our researchers 
developed the building 
techniques and technologies 
now codified in Canada’s 
R2000 standard for energy-
efficient homes. These 
energy-saving technologies 
are used not only in homes, 
but in commercial, industrial 
and public facilities. They 
continue to be improved through research partnerships with 
Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions – an activity that 
also trains professionals to work in these green industries. 

Saskatchewan is a 
pioneer in developing 
world-leading 
technologies to save 
energy.

Electricity
The province has made significant investment in reducing 
electricity emissions through development and installation 
of the world’s first major post-combustion carbon capture 
use and storage (CCUS) facility at Boundary Dam Unit 3. 
Carbon captured using this technology can be permanently 
sequestered underground, whether in deep saline formations 
or by using it to enhance oil recovery.

CCUS technology could be applied to reduce global electricity 
sector emissions and has the potential for uses in other high-
carbon-emission sectors such as steel and concrete production.

SaskPower has committed to reducing emissions, in part 
through the expansion of renewable energy sources up to 
50 per cent of generating capacity. To maximize the benefits of 
these renewable sources, energy storage, including batteries, is 
needed to help meet the ups and downs of electricity demand. 
Saskatchewan researchers at the Canadian Light Source 

5

Saskatchewan.ca
