MEASURING, MONITORING, AND REPORTING
Industry Reporting
All climate change policies need a regulatory system for 
measuring, monitoring, and reporting greenhouse gas emissions.

In Saskatchewan, facilities that emit more than 50,000 tonnes 
of CO2e every year are already reporting to the federal 
government. We will modify this to include smaller emitters and 
introduce voluntary reporting to supplement this measure. This 
will give us a more detailed picture and better understanding 
of Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas sources.

Saskatchewan’s publicly traded companies can move to the 
cutting edge of accounting and investor confidence through 
climate-related financial disclosures. These types of disclosures 
help investors to know how a company may be at risk due to 
climate change, how it is preparing to mitigate those risks, and 
what actions it is taking to make their business more resilient to 
climate change. In future, markets are likely to respond better 
to companies that show how they are reducing emissions 
through their supply chain and efficiency choices. 

This novel approach can help strengthen Saskatchewan’s 
reputation as a forward-thinking player in the global economy.

 We will:
•    Develop annual reporting regulations for industry that apply to:

•  All emitters of more than 25,000 tonnes of CO2e annually
•  A voluntary opt-in for emitters over 10,000 tonnes of 
CO2e annually.

•   Explore options for tracking the import and export of emissions.

•   In conjunction with the business community and the Canadian 
Securities Administrators, develop a draft guidance document to 
require climate-related financial disclosures by publicly-traded 
companies based in Saskatchewan.

Government Reporting
We are committed to tracking and reporting on our progress. 
We will provide an overall integrated score against a 
transparent, easily understood target. This will let people know 
how we are progressing in building our resilience to anticipated 
challenges from a changing climate. Progress will be reported 
annually and targets adjusted periodically (e.g., every five years) 
as we learn more about the effects of climate change. 

This approach will give us a much more comprehensive picture 
of our resilience to climate change than simply measuring 
whether total greenhouse gas emissions are up or down. Our 
approach will show us what effects climate change is having 
on our people and our economy, and how our efforts are 
building resilience.

The specifics of our plan to meet the challenges of climate 
change will be developed over the next several months. This 
will include clearly defined measurement areas, including how 
much weight each one carries in our assessment. 

 We will:
•     Track and report across all areas of focus to convey progress in 

making our province more resilient to climate change.

•   Report to the national and international community, through 
Canada’s annual submission to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, on how Saskatchewan’s actions 
are impacting greenhouse gas emissions and mitigating the 
effects of climate change.

The table on the following page shows the kinds of things 
we could measure to get a better picture of our resilience. 
Note the examples of specific determinants are for illustrative 
purposes only.

10

Saskatchewan.ca
