The Government of Saskatchewan’s relationship with First 
Nations and Métis peoples is critical to success in the face 
of climate change. As many of these citizens live in rural 
and remote communities, they are particularly vulnerable 
to the effects of climate change, such as increased forest 
fires. Importantly, they are also keepers of deep traditional 
knowledge that can help us all prepare and adapt.

Individual communities also help to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by managing landfill, waste, and sewage facilities.

A strong provincial resiliency plan must ensure the continued 
well-being of its citizens. We will foster people’s capacity to take 
advantage of new and changing opportunities. This means 
continued efforts to attract, train, and retain qualified people 
for future job growth in diverse and emerging industries.

 We will:
•    Examine current floodplain mapping to identify local 

communities at greatest risk of flooding, fire, and extreme 
weather events. 

•   Encourage family preparedness plans, by making 

emergency preparedness guides and suggested emergency 
kit content lists available through Saskatchewan and local 
government websites. 

•   Maintain and enhance partnerships with First Nations and 

Métis communities to address and adapt to a changing 
climate through actions that are guided by traditional 
ecological knowledge.

•   Encourage communities to develop appropriate plans 

and preparedness to respond and recover from extreme 
weather events.

•   Encourage municipalities to consider disaster mitigation 

projects a priority when applying for infrastructure funding.

•   Promote the upgrading of municipal waste and sewage 

management services to reduce, capture and use GHG emissions 
and biogas that would otherwise be released into the air, by 
making these projects a priority category for support under joint 
federal/provincial funding programs.

Methane from petroleum operations is often burned (flared) or 
vented into the atmosphere, producing the largest source of 
greenhouse gas emissions from this industry sector. To address 
this, policies will be explored aimed at creating market demand 
for this potential resource.

These measures are expected to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions from Saskatchewan’s upstream oil and gas 
industry by 40 to 45 per cent of 2015 levels or between 4 and 
4.5Mt of CO2e.

 We will:
•    In consultation with the oil and gas industry, develop  

regulations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from oil and gas 
wells and facilities using a results-based system that:

•  Provides each oil and gas operator the ability to efficiently 
prioritize emission reduction investments

•  Supports adoption of innovative emissions reduction 
technologies

•   Firmly establishes provincial regulatory oversight of 
emissions from the oil and gas industry

•   Includes a strategy to support the increased use of 
methane produced in association with oil for heating and 
electricity production, including the establishment of usage 
requirements for this source of natural gas.

COMMUNITY PREPAREDNESS

Our province is one of strong community and family bonds. As 
extreme weather events become more unpredictable, frequent 
and intense, the resilience of Saskatchewan’s communities will 
be vital to their security and growth. This resilience will come 
both from individuals and their communities.

This strategy aims to 
protect our environment 
for everyone’s benefit and 
enjoyment, while ensuring 
people are protected from 
extreme weather events 
such as floods and wildfires. 
It will also support people’s 
livelihoods, helping ensure 
they have stable jobs to 
provide for their families.

We will foster people’s 
capacity to take 
advantage of new 
opportunities.

9

Saskatchewan.ca
