Prairie Resilience:   
A Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy 

Introduction

Saskatchewan people are pragmatic, resourceful, innovative.

Throughout our history, we have faced complex, challenging 
problems imposed on us by geography and climate. Our 
population spread over a vast land has taught us self- reliance 
and resilience.

We’ve learned when we are faced with a challenge, it is up to us 
to solve it.

Today, we face the global challenge of climate change, and 
once again our province is motivated to develop an effective 
response. Our industries are heavily dependent on fossil fuels 
to produce energy, food, fertilizer, products and commodities 
needed around the world.

It’s up to us to come up with made-in-Saskatchewan solutions 
that encourage action to meet the challenges posed by 
climate change.

When faced with a complex problem, there is a temptation 
to reach for the simple, quick answer. Climate change is such 
a problem.

We wholeheartedly support efforts to reduce greenhouse 
gases. But those efforts must be effective and they must  not 
disadvantage one region of Canada more than another. A 
federal carbon tax is ineffective and will impair Saskatchewan’s 
ability to respond to climate  change.

Our opposition to the federal government’s carbon tax should 
not be seen as a reluctance to act. Rather, it is a recognition that 

we must act, and act decisively, with all our economic strength. 
For Saskatchewan, mitigation is not enough.  Our agriculture 
and resource-rich province must also focus on climate 
adaptation and resilience in order to be effective. 

A strong economy is one with the resilience and resources to 
seek solutions and fund the innovations that we simply must 
have to respond effectively to climate change.

We propose a broad and comprehensive approach, one that 
connects the very real global problem of climate change to 
the day-to-day priorities of people. An approach that sets out 
actions people can see and be a part of. An approach that 
allows Saskatchewan to continue to grow and prosper while 
contributing to Canada’s efforts to address climate change.

Saskatchewan people and businesses have already begun 
this monumental task. Their actions range from world-leading 
innovation and technology development in agriculture 
and power generation, to community and infrastructure 
developments that continue to strengthen the resilience of 
our economy and the integrity of our environment.

In this strategy, the Government of Saskatchewan builds upon 
actions we have already taken and introduces measures to 
strengthen our province and build resilience to climate change. 
Our plan is bold, broad and made for Saskatchewan. It is the 
best way for our province to harness our valuable resources 
while contributing solutions to an issue that affects the 
entire world.

1
1

Saskatchewan.ca
