How did we get here?
Saskatchewan has a demonstrated, long-standing commitment 
to action on climate change. 

In 2015, our provincial utility, SaskPower, set a target of 
doubling its percentage of electricity capacity from renewable 
energy sources. The ultimate goal is to get 50 per cent of our 
power from renewables by the year 2030.

Between 2008 – 2015, the Government of Saskatchewan 
invested $60 million in GoGreen funding through public-private 
partnerships to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, enhance 
biodiversity and educate the public about the effects of 
climate change. 

Saskatchewan continues to be a leader in technologies and 
knowledge about carbon capture use and storage (CCUS).
We have applied that expertise to our provincial electricity 
generation system since 2014, further reducing our emissions 
by more than 1.75 million tonnes of carbon – the equivalent of 
taking 440,000 cars off our roads.
Saskatchewan’s GHG Emissions by Economic Sectors (2015)

Waste and Others

3%

Agriculture

24%

Oil and Gas

32%

Buildings

4%

Heavy Industry

4%

Transportation

14%

Electricity

19%

Sask Total (2015) = 75.0 Mt CO2e

Sources: Canada’s National Inventory Report 1990-2015 (2017)

In December 2015, Canada signed the Paris Agreement on 
climate change. This was the biggest international commitment 
on this issue since the Kyoto Protocol 20 years earlier. It is even 
more significant because of the full inclusion and commitment 
of developing nations. 

Under the Paris Agreement, Canada committed to reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 
the year 2030. 

In March 2016, Canada’s leaders from the federal, provincial and 
territorial governments gathered in Vancouver to discuss next 
steps, culminating in the signing of the Vancouver Declaration 
on Clean Growth and Climate Change by all partners including 
Saskatchewan.

Saskatchewan did not sign the subsequent Pan-Canadian 
Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, in large 
part because the Framework promotes a carbon tax as the 
central approach to reducing emissions. A carbon tax would 
not significantly reduce emissions in our province where our 
economy and geography don’t allow for easy alternatives. In 
fact, a carbon tax would make it more difficult for our province 
to respond effectively to climate change because a simple tax 
will not result in the innovations required to actually reduce 
emissions. We believe the challenges we face are complex and 
will not yield to simple measures.

The conversation about climate change must be broader 
than carbon pricing. It must encompass how we as Canadians 
prepare, mitigate and adapt. 

A note on greenhouse gases
Much of the discussion on greenhouse gases centres on 
carbon dioxide, or CO2. This is often shortened further 
to simply, “carbon.” However, there are other important 
greenhouse gases such as methane (CH4) from the petroleum 
industry, livestock and landfills as well as nitrous oxide (N2O) 
from agricultural fertilizers.

To avoid confusion, the term “carbon dioxide equivalent” or 
“CO2e” has been used throughout this strategy. Quantity is 
given in megatonnes or “Mt.” Canada produces about 722 Mt 
per year, about two per cent of the global total. Saskatchewan 
produces about 10 per cent of Canada’s greenhouse gas 
emissions or 75 Mt per year.

2

Saskatchewan.ca
