doing so, companies are able to review  and improve logistics 
operations while reducing their carbon footprint.

Although our road and rail network is vital to Saskatchewan’s 
economy, it produces a significant portion of our greenhouse 
gas emissions. We are committed to working towards greater 
efficiency and lower emissions with our own government fleet 
and in partnership with the transportation industry.

We will: 
•    Monitor the highway system for vulnerabilities that could impact 

human health, property and transportation efficiency to help 
prioritize preventative maintenance and redesign.

•   Create a freight strategy to improve delivery times, reduce fuel 

use, and increase efficiency.

•   Increase the use of idle time limiters in government trucks to 

reduce fuel usage.

•   Evaluate government fleet vehicles for lower-carbon technology 

opportunities.

•   Continue to support industry in expanding the size and usage of 

the short haul (short line) rail systems.

•   Expand the Trucking Partnership Program to increase fuel 

efficiency in freight hauling.

•   Facilitate traffic data specific to Saskatchewan to mitigate 

emissions from congestion and idling.

Although exact total emission reductions are not yet counted, 
the benefits are clear. For example, current government-
industry partnerships have already resulted in an estimated 
annual reduction of 50,000 tonnes of CO2e per year.
Homes and Buildings
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to reducing 
the life cycle costs of new buildings and improving the energy 
efficiency of existing buildings to match the demands of 
geography, climate and conditions specific to Saskatchewan.

We continue to show leadership by enhancing energy 
efficiency and conserving energy use in and around 
government buildings.  For example, in 2016-2017, eight 
government buildings in Saskatchewan received BOMA BEST 
certification, bringing the total number of certified government 
buildings to 47. This independent national certification for 
buildings recognizes excellence in energy and environmental 
management and performance.

7

 We will:  
•    Adopt the 2015 National Building Code, effective January 1, 

2018, with provisions that improve energy efficiency standards 
for houses and small buildings taking effect January 1, 2019.

•   Adopt the 2015 National Energy Code for Buildings, applicable to 

large buildings effective January 1, 2019.

•   Facilitate provisions in the 2015 National Building Code that 
provide for increased use of wood in building construction in 
order to extend carbon storage.

•   Explore options to label buildings for energy performance.

•   Encourage industry to further develop innovative solutions to 

meet energy performance requirements.

•   Increase the number of government buildings with a 

sustainability certification.

•   Require new and renovated government buildings to exceed the 
energy performance requirements of the 2015 National Energy 
Code for Buildings by ten percent.

•   Work with other provincial and territorial governments in 

collaboration with the National Research Council to improve 
standards for climate resilience in building design.

ECONOMIC SUSTAINABILITY

Economic sustainability is our ability to remain competitive in 
a global marketplace, encourage investment and maintain or 
increase personal economic 
well-being. It’s also our ability 
to balance economic growth 
and industrial competitiveness 
with our commitment to 
reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions. 

We will recognize and 
reward companies 
that take the lead 
in reducing carbon 
emissions.

This includes ensuring our 
businesses and industries 
enjoy the support they 
need to develop marketable 
innovations to address climate change. Federal and provincial 
policies must work in concert to ensure Saskatchewan 
continues to be a preferred jurisdiction for investment. 

Saskatchewan.ca
