national synchrotron facility are already at work on cutting-
edge energy storage technologies. 

-  Updating the provincial electricity dispatch method with 
emissions criteria to support reduced emissions.

Another way to reduce emissions is to modernize the electricity 
grid to integrate more renewable energy.

•   Explore additional energy efficiency and conservation products 

and services to support emission reduction targets.

An equivalency agreement with the federal government 
on electricity sector emissions from conventional coal-fired 
electrical generation in Saskatchewan will enable SaskPower 
to manage reduction of its greenhouse gas emissions 
across its entire fleet rather than on a unit-by-unit basis. 
This agreement will give SaskPower increased flexibility in 
operating its existing coal units, helping to maintain low rates 

for SaskPower customers. At the same time, SaskPower will be 
able to focus investment into lower emitting and renewable 
energy projects and agreements. These will play a key role 
in enabling SaskPower to achieve greenhouse gas emission 
reduction targets.

Actions taken on electricity generation will result in a 40 per 
cent annual reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from 2005 
levels by 2030, representing a reduction of about 6 Mt of CO2e.

•   Determine the viability of extending carbon capture use and 

storage technology to remaining coal power plants while 
continuing to work with partners on the potential application for 
CCUS technology globally.

Transportation and Related Infrastructure
Saskatchewan is a trading province, producing fuel, food, 
fertilizer, products and commodities for consumers in markets 
around the world. Supporting this trade is an extensive 
transportation network including rail lines and roads. 

Our highways are a connecting network for all other 
critical infrastructure and communities, helping increase 
Saskatchewan’s resilience in overcoming climate emergencies. 
All-weather roads support access to northern communities and 
require attention as the climate changes.

This is critical infrastructure, vulnerable to climate change. 
Extreme weather events and longer-term climate changes 
cause floods that overwhelm culverts, wash out roads and 
destroy property.

Saskatchewan has responded with:
•   Improved design of highway systems to reduce the amount 

of maintenance and repairs needed

•   Improved culvert design to protect against events such as 

spring ice flow damage

•   Longer culvert lengths where failures are more likely to occur 

during flood events

  We will:
•   Introduce regulations governing emissions from electricity 

generation by SaskPower and Independent Power Producers. 

•   Increased documentation of water levels at culvert crossings 

during floods to provide historic water level information to 
support new culvert designs

•   Meet the province’s commitment of up to 50 per cent electricity 

capacity from renewables, through:

-  Increasing renewable energy sources, including wind  
and solar

-  Investigating the feasibility of energy storage services to 
expand renewables capacity 

In one industry example, companies participate in the 
SmartWay Transport Partnership.  This voluntary public-
private collaboration aims to reduce fuel costs and improve 
environmental performance in the transportation industry. It 
does this by providing a system to measure, benchmark and 
share information about fuel use and freight emissions. In 

6

Saskatchewan.ca
