Resilience is the ability to cope with, adapt to and recover from stress and change.

Nevertheless, the Government of Canada announced a carbon 
tax of $10 per tonne to be introduced by 2018, rising $10 per 
tonne annually to $50 per tonne in 2022. Provinces that don’t 
introduce a tax of their own are expected to have a tax imposed 
upon them by the federal government. This ‘backstop’ consists 
of a carbon tax on the combustion of fossil fuels and an output-
based pricing system on industrial facilities.

Money generated from this federal backstop is to be returned 
to the province, but the mechanism for this has not yet been 
explained.

The Government of Saskatchewan continues to be committed 
to action on climate change. We set out our position in October 
2016 with the release of the Climate Change White Paper which 
recommends that we:

•   Capture unrealized value from agricultural and non-renewable 

resource sectors.

•   Elevate the importance of adaptation in the provincial and 

national conversation about climate change.

•   Improve the profile and accounting of carbon sequestration.

•  Get credit for the international transfer of knowledge.

•   Develop regulations for the flaring and venting of methane.

•  Expand use of renewables by SaskPower in electricity generation. 

The White Paper makes clear that our province’s ability to 
adopt lower-carbon technology and innovation as well as 
adapt to climate change are critical to building the resilience 
Saskatchewan must have to respond to climate change.

What is Saskatchewan’s approach to 
climate change?
Resilience is key to Saskatchewan’s approach to climate change. 
Resilience is the ability to cope with, adapt to and recover from 
stress and change. This is essential, as some effects of climate 
change are already underway and unavoidable. 

Resilience is a much stronger indicator of effective climate 
action than simply measuring reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions, because it measures our overall ability to adapt, 
innovate and even thrive. 

Focusing on resilience will yield a stronger approach for 
Saskatchewan – a growing agricultural and resource-based 
economy not only rising to the challenge, but providing 
leadership through forward-looking policy change.

Saskatchewan has strong motivation to seek solutions. We 
have recently endured many varied and costly climate-related 
events and are acutely aware of our exposure to changing 
climate because the land is integral to our economy. Our 
province is expected to experience more extreme weather 
events, including an increase in the severity and frequency 
of droughts and flooding, and more intense forest fires1,2.  
For Saskatchewan, climate change resilience is critical.

Multiple systems need to be strengthened to improve the 
resilience of the province as a whole. This includes the ability of 
Saskatchewan’s natural systems (including our land, water, and 
forests), infrastructure, communities and economy to adapt and 
thrive in a changing, low-carbon economy. 

What steps will Saskatchewan take?
Critical to a resilience strategy is identifying efforts that can be 
undertaken within specific areas of focus.  The province has 
developed climate resilience policies in several areas, including: 
natural systems, physical infrastructure, economic sustainability 
and community preparedness. These policies cover the ways 
climate change is affecting Saskatchewan. Although many 
policies have implications for more than one area of focus, they 
are identified under the area of best fit. 
 
NATURAL SYSTEMS

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to stewardship 
and responsible development of our province’s remarkable 
abundance of natural resources. How we grow our crops, 
harvest our forests and protect our vital water systems will be 
critically important to how we prepare, respond and adapt to a 
changing climate.

In agriculture, the province is a global leader in low-emissions 
practices. Our soils are an important carbon sink, sequestering 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Since the 1980s, our 
growers have been developing, refining and implementing 
zero- and low-tillage practices, increasing the ability of our soils 

1   Wheaton, E., B. Bonsal, V. Wittrock. 2013. Future Possible Dry and Wet Extremes in Saskatchewan, Canada. Prepared for the Water Security 

Agency, SK. 35 p. SRC Pub #13462-1E13.

2   Parisien, M.-A.; Kafka, V.; Flynn, N.; Hirsch, K.G.; Todd, J.B.; Flannigan, M.D. 2005.  Fire behavior potential in central Saskatchewan under 

predicted climate change. PARC (Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative), Regina, Saskatchewan. 12 p. PARC Summary Document 05-01.  

3


