Sector

Description of Approach

Technological and Policy Options

Municipal 
Services

Cities exercise direct control over how 
they manage waste, deliver water, and 
maintain the urban tree canopy. While 
the GHG emissions reductions are 
relatively modest, climate-friendly waste 
management is cost effective, affordable 
and readily available. At the same time, 
greater use of the “3Rs” (Reduce, Reuse 
& Recycle) and waste-to-energy projects 
support diversion targets. Capturing 
methane from landfills helps control a 
powerful GHG, while protecting local air 
quality. And increasing urban vegetation 
sequesters CO2, while reducing energy 
consumption for air conditioning.  

14.  Support the 3Rs and increase 
sorting and recycling to divert 
wastes from landfill and offset the 
demand for virgin materials.

15.  Divert organic wastes from landfill 

to produce biogas and compost.

16.  Support waste incineration and 

gasification that replace fossil fuels, 
divert wastes from landfill and 
recover the Btu value of feedstocks. 

17.  Capture methane from landfills.

18.  Manage water demand and 
increase treatment / delivery 
efficiencies.

19.  Maintain and expand urban 

greenery and the tree canopy.

20.  Support and promote urban 
agriculture and CO2-enriched 
greenhouses.

21.  Investigate geological 

sequestration.

22.  Purchase carbon offsets.

Many cities are finding it difficult to take this next step, translating their inventory data into an effective strategy 
of programs, policies and projects designed to reduce GHG emissions. Getting to Carbon Neutral facilitates the 
transition from data collection to strategic action. 

Nearly  70  case  studies  are  used  to  showcase  the  successful  implementation  of  municipal  GHG  reduction 
technologies and policies. Each example describes the application of a particular control option, weighs the 
advantages,  considers  the  costs,  and  calculates  the  GHG  reduction  benefits  that  have  been  realized.  Before 
investing in its own emission mitigation program, a municipality has a chance to benefit from the experience of 
others, learning how they overcame barriers and solved problems to maximize results.

The C-Train, Calgary’s light rail transit system, is powered by 12 wind turbines installed in the hills of southern 
Alberta to catch the westerly winds coming through the Rockies. The C-Train is now 100% emissions free, saving 590 
kilotonnes of CO2e when compared to automobile use.

7


