A climate change action strategy need not be restricted by the size or location of a municipality. The case studies 
in the guide cover the experiences of large, medium and smaller communities selected from across Canada, 
North  America  and  around  the  world. There  is  a  wide  array  of  practical  options  available  to  a  municipality 
attempting to reduce its carbon footprint. Getting to Carbon Neutral lets a municipality select the mix that best 
fits its individual economic, social and environmental conditions.

building a stRong economic case foR action
To provide the environmental rationale for action, Getting to Carbon Neutral lays out a series of basic formulae 
–“Estimation Guidelines” – for calculating the GHG reductions that accrue to each of the selected options. For 
example, these Estimation Guidelines can be used to predict the expected GHG reductions from: installing X 
kilometres of light rail; constructing a gasification plant to process Y tonnes of solid waste; or servicing Z hectares 
of a municipality using a district energy scheme.

Once a municipality has calculated the potential GHG reductions that may be achieved, the guide shows users 
how to integrate different combinations of control options and compare scenarios of multiple GHG reduction 
strategies.  This analysis can assist municipal users in making decisions based on the cost-effectiveness of various 
options to meet their individual emission targets.

The GHG reduction actions described in Getting to Carbon Neutral have already proven effective in municipal 
projects and undertakings throughout the world. They will also make a significant impact on the GHG emissions 
of Canadian municipalities.

Some communities may be in a position to take a more aggressive approach to GHG reduction. Others may 
adopt a more measured, step-wise strategy. To illustrate the practicality and versatility of the various approaches, 
the authors applied the technical matrix to generate two comprehensive GHG reduction scenarios for the City 
of Toronto.

This analysis highlights the potential of combining various reduction options to create an integrated reduction 
strategy  or  action  plan  that  could  be  successfully  applied  in  any  municipality  in  Canada.  Individually,  these 
options have proven to be affordable, feasible and successful in reducing energy use and cutting GHG emissions. 
Integrated into a bold and innovative municipal plan, they will invigorate and renew our urban infrastructure, 
and help Canadian municipalities down the path to becoming carbon neutral.

The Metrus Building in Concord (ON) augments its heating and cooling needs with one of the largest ground source 
heat pump systems in the province. The 28 heat pump units placed throughout the building`s suspended ceiling 
and 88 boreholes beneath the parking lot will cut GHG emissions by an estimated 2,862 tonnes over the life of the 
project.

8


