Tens sTeps To carbon neuTraliTy

Getting to Carbon Neutral offers a set of ten basic strategies that, in combination, would be highly effective at 
bringing reducing a city’s carbon footprint. These recommendations coincide with the key areas identified in the 
guide as having the greatest potential to reduce GHG emissions, such as energy efficiency in buildings and reducing 
vehicle use.  In many cases, maximizing the GHG reduction potential of these strategies will require a collaborative 
effort between multiple levels of government.

1.  Develop  bold,  ambitious  building  codes  and  municipal  by-laws  that  ensure  new  construction  incorporates 
green design and building techniques to conserve energy, reduce demand, and utilize renewable solar and even 
geothermal heat sources. 

2.  Accelerate the retrofitting of the existing energy inefficient building stock to modern building standards and 

incorporate solar and other renewable energy features. 

3.  Build  transit  systems  supported  by  appropriate  land  use  and  sustainable  financing  mechanisms  that  could 

include road tolls, area pricing, higher parking fees and other innovative sources.

4.  Design neighbourhoods that support public transit and where residents love to walk and cycle.

5.  Encourage the use of electric or low-emissions vehicles by greening municipal fleets, regulating taxi fleets and 

providing reduced parking fees or other advantages for green vehicles. 

6.  Green the electricity supply. Reaching carbon neutral will be particularly challenging for those municipalities that 
depend on high carbon intensity electricity. They will need to consider investing in larger scale green electricity 
supply systems based on wind, small hydro, wave and tidal, solar and geothermal power sources.

7.  Harness energy from a variety of community-scale sources, such as aquifer and borehole thermal energy storage, 

combined heat and power facilities, or other energy technologies that tap waste streams.

8.  Keep ‘harvesting’  your  solid  wastes.  Reduce  GHG  emissions  through  recycling,  pursuing  energy-from  waste 

opportunities and capturing methane gas from landfill. 

9.  Seek efficiency in municipal services. Implement energy conservation opportunities in municipal buildings and 

services. Increase the efficiency of water and wastewater systems. 

10.  Green the city. Promoting green roofs, urban agriculture and CO2 enriched greenhouses, while expanding the 

‘urban forest’, will reduce GHG emissions while mitigating the impact of climate change.

WheRe do ouR ghg emissions come fRom?
Many  Canadian  cities  have  already  taken  the  first  step  toward  reducing  carbon  emissions  by  conducting 
an  inventory  of  GHG  emissions.  This  work  has  shown  that  the  ‘big  three’  sources  –  electrical  generation, 
transportation and the combustion of heating fuels – account for up to 95 per cent of a community’s direct GHG 
emissions. The remainder comes from the management and disposal of municipal waste and the emissions from 
certain industrial processes, such as cement production, steel making and chemical processing. This statistical 
breakdown varies from one municipality to the next, depending on a number of factors including the mix of 
heating fuels, the availability of public transit, and the source of their electrical power. For example, coal and gas-

The Enwave district energy system in Toronto, pumping cold water from the bottom of Lake Ontario, provides 
enough cooling for 100 downtown office towers. The water, which also supplies a share of the drinking water needs 
of the city, eliminates 79,000 tonnes of CO2e per year, and reduces electricity demand by 90%.

3


