Getting  to  Carbon  Neutral  does  not  dictate  which  GHG  reduction  options  are  best  or  how  they  must  be 
implemented. Rather, it offers a menu of practical and proven options for cutting GHGs. A municipality can 
develop and evaluate different mitigation scenarios to help it design a unique strategy or action plan, applying 
only those technologies and policy options that best meet local realities and aspirations. The guide helps to 
prioritize the strategies that can be implemented in the short term, while laying the policy groundwork for more 
substantive, long term changes.

Responding to climate Risk
Climate change is emerging as the defining challenge of our time. Greenhouse gases generated by human 
activity – primarily carbon dioxide, as well as methane, ozone and several others – have risen sharply as the 
world’s  population  expands,  industrialization  spreads  and  the  consumption  of  resources  accelerates.  The 
inescapable consequence of all this growth is an inexorable increase in greenhouse gas emissions, leading to 
a rise in average global temperature, the disruption of climate patterns and the irreversible alteration of the 
ecological balance of our planet. The effects of climate change are pervasive, and left unchecked, could have 
both severe and indiscriminate impacts on our social and economic systems. 

Though daunting, addressing climate change offers a focal point for global collaboration and innovation. A 
well-crafted response to climate change will spur technological advances, create new sources of employment 
and stimulate the economic growth needed to propel us forward into a more sustainable future.  If decisive 
action is taken today, it is still possible to slow the process and mitigate the resulting damage. However, the 
window of opportunity is closing quickly.

What is caRbon neutRality?
The  concept  of  “carbon  neutrality”  is  an  important  benchmark  for  gauging  our  progress  toward  overall 
sustainability.  In a municipal context, it means that all the GHG emissions generated, directly or indirectly, by a 
city and it residents, less those sequestered in the urban forest, stored or offset in other ways, sum to zero. 

Without  balancing  the  rate  of  GHG  emission  generation  with  the  rate  of  sequestration,  climate  change  is 
inevitable. A commitment to work toward “carbon neutrality” is a commitment to live within one’s ecological 
means,  to  make  sustainability  a  priority  and  to  consume  resources  at  a  rate  that  does  not  compromise  the 
legacy we bequeath future generations. 

Achieving  GHG  reduction  targets  –  proceeding  down  the  path  to  carbon  neutrality  –  within  the  necessary 
timeframe  will  require  coordinated  effort  from  all  levels  of  government,  corporations  and  individuals. With 
more than half of the world’s human population living in urban areas, municipalities are uniquely positioned to 
leverage their skill base and financial resources and assume a leadership role in reducing global GHG emissions. 
By individually and collectively embracing the goal of carbon neutrality, municipalities can significantly lessen 
the rate and impact of climate change.

A 1.6 km-long district energy system in Revelstoke (BC) delivers steam to local industry and hot water for space and 
water heating to residents. By burning wood waste from a nearby mill, the system replaces 45,000 GJ of fossil fuels 
and reduces GHG emissions by 3,700 tonnes annually.

2


