fired generating stations emit large amounts of carbon dioxide and other pollutants, while hydroelectric and 
nuclear facilities produce almost no GHGs, therefore the carbon footprint of a municipality varies significantly 
based on the source of electricity generation.

Carbon inventories are a critical first step to understanding a city’s emissions and to developing appropriate plans 
to address municipal contributions to climate change. Under the Partners for Climate Protection (PCP) program, 
more than 200 Canadian municipalities have agreed to compile accurate inventories of their GHG emissions. A 
joint initiative of the Federation of Canadian Municipalities and ICLEI (founded as the International Council for 
Local Environmental Initiatives), the PCP program ensures that emission sources are quantified in a systematic 
and  comparable  manner. These  comprehensive  inventories  will  provide  a  solid  baseline  for  developing  an 
effective GHG control strategy, tracking subsequent reductions, and participating in carbon trading schemes.

using The MunTag Model 

Getting to Carbon Neutral presents an innovative and user-friendly mathematical model for estimating the per 
capita passengers kilometres travelled in a community and translating them into GHG emissions for the entire 
transportation network. The MUNicipal Transportation And Greenhouse gases – or MUNTAG – model integrates 
the series of individual Estimation Guidelines devised to estimate the impacts of land use, public transportation, 
walking and biking, the various financial policies designed to promote greener transport, and alternative vehicle 
technologies. MUNTAG is a powerful planning tool for assessing the potential GHG reductions that can be achieved 
by addressing urban transportation issues.

Sources of municipal 

GHGs

municipalities leading the Way
Municipalities have the capacity to be powerful agents of change in reducing 
global GHG emissions, and a carbon inventory is a critical first step to assuming 
this leadership role.

But just as the emission profiles of no two communities are identical, there is 
no generic, one-size-fits-all solution for addressing climate change that works 
for every municipality.

Natural gas heating
Gasoline & diesel
Electrical generation
Other

Once we know the origins of our GHGs, we can start targeting the primary 
sources. Organized into four strategic categories – buildings, transportation, 
energy  supply  and  municipal  services  –  the  guide  covers  22  different 
technological and policy options for reducing municipal GHGs. The summary 
table  (on  pages  7-9)  illustrates  the  diversity  and  breadth  of  the  options 
discussed.

The 52 homes in the Drake Landing Solar Community, Okotoks (AB), are connected to a district heating system 
that includes solar collectors and a borehole energy storage system. With 90% of space heating needs met by solar 
energy, the network saves more than 110 GJ of energy and 5 tonnes of GHG per home each year.

4


