 ghg Reduction stRategies

Sector

Buildings

Transportation

Description of Approach

Technological and Policy Options

As major consumers of heating fuels 
and electricity, the operation and 
maintenance of buildings account for up 
to 40% of GHG emissions. Fortunately, the 
state-of-the-art in sustainable building 
design is capable of producing carbon 
neutral buildings even in Canada. By 
employing modern technologies, such as 
energy efficient envelopes, photovoltaics, 
solar water and air heaters, passive solar 
design and ground source heat pumps, 
GHG emissions from buildings can be cut 
to nearly zero.

There are two fundamental approaches 
to reducing transport-related GHG 
emissions: (1) reduce automobile use 
by encouraging electric public transit, 
walking and cycling; and (2) promote the 
use of low emission vehicles, including 
electric cars, by providing the necessary 
infrastructure and offering financial 
incentives to vehicle owners to change 
behaviour.

1.  Reduce energy demand by: 

retrofitting residential, commercial 
and industrial buildings to increase 
the level of insulation; upgrading 
windows; minimizing air leakage; 
and installing energy efficient 
appliances and equipment.

2.  Utilize solar energy through 

photovoltaics, solar water and 
space heating and passive solar 
design.

3.  Exploit waste heat through ground 

source heat pumps.

4.  Maintain appropriate land use and 

population densities to reduce 
the average passenger kilometres 
travelled.

5. 

Improve public transportation (i.e. 
bus rapid transit, light rail transit, 
subways and commuter rail).

6.  Support active transport modes, 

such as biking and walking.

7. 

Introduce financial policies to 
reduce vehicle use, including tolls, 
taxes, HOV lanes and increased 
parking fees.

8.  Promote the use of alternative 

vehicles powered by biomass, fuel 
cells and electricity.

In 2002, the Toronto Renewable Energy Cooperative installed the first urban wind turbine in North America. The 
single 750 kW turbine located in Exhibition Place on the shore of Lake Ontario has an average annual production of 
1,400 MWh and displaces up to 380 tonnes of GHG per year.

5


