 

 

Quantitative  analyses  involve  the  formal  assessment  of  climate,  impacts,  and  outcomes  within  a  modelling  framework.  Ecological 
response models provide a way to assess the sensitivity and potential adaptability or resilience of species, habitats, and ecosystems 
to climate change (Glick et al., 2011). Models should be suited to the local geographic and biophysical characteristics of habitats and 
ecosystems. Different types of response models can be used as part of a vulnerability assessment (see Appendix 1). The academic 
literature of individual disciplines also discusses how to carry out assessments, and relevant information can also be found in several 
reports in the MNR Climate Change Report Series. Rapid assessment tools also exist for some areas that can be used in conjunction 
with other analyses (for example, vulnerability ratings for Canadian tree species [Johnston et al., 2009]). It is important to note that 
models do have limitations and may not account for other factors that can affect vulnerability to climate change such as changes in 
interactions  between  species,  including  competitive  interactions  and  disease,  nonlinear,  complex  responses,  and  interactions 
between climate change and other important stressors such as land-use change.  

Qualitative analyses can be completed using a number of methods, such as ranking  information  in order of importance, identifying 
critical  control  points  within  relationships,  and  quantifying  interactions  through  sensitivity  analyses  (e.g.,  through  workshops,  focus 
groups  and  questionnaires)  (UNDP,  2005).  Engaging  local  communities  through  surveys  using  structured  questionnaires  can  also 
provide information about observed changes and vulnerabilities. In many cases, scientific knowledge and expertise can be accessed 
by consulting with scientists and practitioners working for government agencies, industry, academic institutions and organizations.  

An example of a qualitative analysis was conducted as part of the Kamloops Future Forest Strategy in British Colombia. The analysis 
used  GCMs  to  project  changes  and  impacts  on  12  biogeoclimatic  subzones  in  the  Kamloops  Timber  Supply  Area.  Ecological 
sensitivities  were  discussed  and  assessed  qualitatively  in  expert  workshops.  Input  and  advice  were  provided  by  local  ecologists, 
resource  specialists,  practitioners,  and  academics.  The  study  team  synthesized  this  information  into  “ecological  narratives”  to 
generate plausible stories of how ecological conditions within these subzones may change over time with a warming climate, and the 
ecological sensitivities that could emerge (Zielke et al., 2009). 

Assessing Non-climatic Factors 

In  addition  to  climatic  factors,  project  teams  are  encouraged  to  assess  non-climatic  factors  wherever  possible  as  part  of  future 
vulnerability. In some cases, non-climatic factors such as habitat fragmentation may have greater impact on species and ecosystems 
than climatic factors. From a social perspective, teams can, for example, consider using local/regional population growth projections 
from  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing  (where  available),  or  local  planning 
authorities. Other factors can include information on economic shifts and anticipated land-use changes. For a review of the benefits 
and challenges of integrating non-climatic factors and methodologies for looking at regional economic impacts and landscape values, 
refer to Williamson et al. (2007). 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   39 

 


