Developing Adaptation Options 

Many  different  types  of  decision-facilitation  tools  can  be  used  to 
identify  and  evaluate  adaptation  options,  including  scenario 
planning,  emerging  issues  analysis,  multi-criteria  analysis,  and 
idea-generating  strategies  using  expert  judgement  such  as 
workshops, focus groups,  and  the  policy  Delphi.  Each  technique 
has  strengths  and  weaknesses  depending  on  the  required 
outcome,  the  location,  and  the  stakeholders  involved  in  the 
process.  For  the  purposes  of  the  Lake  Simcoe  Climate  Change 
Adaptation Strategy, the policy Delphi tool was used to generate 
a list of adaptation options. The project team convened a meeting 
of  experts  in  November  2010  to  review  the  results  of  the 
vulnerability  assessments,  facilitate  an  initial  round  of  discussion 
about  adaptation  options,  and 
the  policy  Delphi 
procedure.  

introduce 

 

 

Invasive species awareness in Lake Simcoe, [MNR] 

The project team elected to use an electronic survey with two rounds of questions for the Delphi process. The first round provided 
survey  participants  with  climate  change  vulnerability  reports  prepared  by  the  scientists,  including  the  list  of  three  primary 
consequences  of  climate  change.  The  survey  presented  11  questions  organized  according  to  7  general  categories  of  action: 
legislation and policy, strategic planning, land-use and/or resource management planning, management and operations, monitoring, 
research, and knowledge dissemination. Recommendations generated by the workshop breakout groups and the first-round Delphi 
survey were used to develop a synthesized suite of adaptation options for each of the 11 themes. These ideas were then evaluated 
in  the  second-round  survey  for  their  perceived  priority  and  feasibility  (affordability  and  ease  of  implementation).  The  first  priority 
options were identified, aggregated, and edited for presentation at a second workshop. In total, 92 recommendations were identified 
as  first-order  priorities  and  48  recommendations  were  identified  as  first-/second-order  priorities.  Participants  evaluated  the  92 
recommendations  at  the  second  workshop  and  selected  27  strategies  for  consideration  in  the  development  of  the  Lake  Simcoe 
climate  change  adaptation  plan.  The  report  details  the  process  and  reveals  the  adaptation  recommendations  that  informed  the 
strategy; it can be found at:  

http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/workshop/2011LakeSimcoe/Lake%20Simcoe%20Adaptation%20Options%20Final%20Report%20J
une%20%202011.pdf (Douglas et al., 2011). 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   59 

 


