 

 

3.0 A CLIM ATE CHANGE   ADAPTATION FRAMEWORK FOR ECOSYSTEMS 

A climate change adaptation framework (Figure 2) comprises a series of  steps that serve as a roadmap for practitioners seeking to 
mainstream climate change into natural resource management. The framework is based on a conceptual model for adaptation that 
was  derived  from  adaptive  management  principles.  The framework  is  not  strictly  linear. It  begins  with  the formation  of  a team  and 
identification  of  a  focus  for  the  assessment,  and  then  outlines  assessment  of  existing  vulnerabilities  and  the  application  of  future 
climate  scenarios  in  order  to  estimate  future  vulnerability  and  risks.  The  process  then  seeks  to  identify,  prioritize,  and  implement 
adaptation measures. Where new data and learning can be integrated, re-evaluations and changes can be made over time. 

The ability to know when to act and what actions to take depends on understanding and projecting the effects of climate change on 
ecosystems. Uncertainty about future greenhouse gas emissions and the spatial distribution of climate change effects requires that 
we  use  a  dynamic  and  ongoing  approach  through  adaptive  management.  Accordingly,  monitoring  and  the  acquisition  of  new 
knowledge enable practitioners to detect change, assess the success of actions, and modify and adjust decisions over time.  

This  framework  builds  on  existing  frameworks  and  information  in  the 
literature (e.g., Glick, Stein, and Edelson, 2011; Kasperson and Berberian, 
2011;  Alberta  Sustainable  Resource  Development,  2010;  Williamson  et 
al., 2007; Füssel and Klein, 2006; Smit and Wandel, 2006; UNDP, 2005), 
as  well  as  guidance  currently  in  development  in  Canada  and  the  United 
States  (i.e.,  Swanston  and  Janowiak,  in  review;  CCFM,  in  prep).  This 
framework  also  builds  on  the  experience  gained  in  a  pilot  vulnerability 
assessment  project  in  the  Lake  Simcoe  watershed  in  Ontario,  which 
informed  a  local  climate  change  adaptation  planning  process.  The  guide 
illustrates elements of the adaptation framework used in the Lake Simcoe 
pilot in a case study format. 

This  guide  provides  a  step-by-step  description  of  the  framework  and  of 
tools  and  techniques  available  to  practitioners.  Worksheets  provided  in 
guide  are  intended  as  examples  that  practitioners  can  adapt  and  use  to 
meet the specific needs of their sector or planning area.  

Dragon fly, [MNR] 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   17 

 


