Worksheet 2.1: Assessing Current Exposure, Sensitivity and Adaptive Capacity 

At this stage, experts on the assessment team will typically begin their assessments of sensitivity, exposure, and adaptive capacity 
using  the  best  available  information  (e.g.,  studies,  observations,  expert  judgement,  datasets,  model  outputs,  etc.).  This  simplified 
worksheet may be used either to guide experts in providing their final results or to summarize the analysis that experts provide.  

To  assess  current  exposure  and  sensitivity,  gather  information  to  describe  the  study  area’s  historic  and  current  climate,  and 
observations  of  change  to  explore  how  climate  has  affected  an  indicator  (or  environmental  theme  more  broadly)  within  the  study 
area. Rank the current exposure and sensitivity to climate as High (H), Medium (M), or Low (L).  

 

 

 High – Exposure and sensitivity to climate is the central driver or plays a 
significant role in the current state, structure or function of the indicator.  

 Moderate – Exposure and sensitivity to climate plays a moderate role in 

the current state, structure or function of the indicator.  

 Low – The indicator is currently not exposed or sensitive to climate. Its 

current state, structure or function shows very limited evidence of a 
relationship to climate.  

The assessment of adaptive capacity is one of the more challenging aspects of 
vulnerability analysis. The measurement of adaptive capacity is a relatively new 
and  evolving  area  of  study;  adaptive  capacity  has  traditionally  been  examined 
from  either  an  ecological  or  a  social  perspective.  Efforts  are  underway  to 
integrate knowledge of adaptive capacity of social and ecological systems  (see 
for example Miller et al., 2010; Turner, 2010). 

One  approach  is  to  examine  multiple  time  periods  before,  during,  and  after  a 
historic climatic event to see whether a system prepared for and/or adapted to 
the  stress.  If the  system  adapted  or  adjusted,  whether  or  not  it  was  negatively 
impacted  to  some  degree,  then  some  capacity  to  adapt  had  to  have  existed 
(Engle, 2011).  

 

Figure  4.  Alberta’s  Climate  Change  Adaptation 
Framework  Manual  illustrates  one  approach  to 
depicting  vulnerabilities.  (Source:  adapted  from 
Alberta  Sustainable  Resource  Development, 
2010.) 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   28 

 


