New Information and Research  

Climate  change  adaptation  is  an  ongoing  process.  Assessing  new  information  and  research  as  it  emerges  can  help  the  team  re-
evaluate  both  the  results  of  initial  vulnerability  assessments  and  the  adaptation  options  that  were  identified  as  priorities.  Project 
teams can consider planning a review every few years to explore some of the following questions: 

 

 

  What societal, economic, or political factors have changed since the 

process began? Do any changes affect the successful implementation of 
adaptation actions (e.g., funding, public perception, or political support)? 

  Have new scientific findings improved or changed the understanding of 

vulnerabilities to climate change? Update the relevance and accuracy of 
information to inform future decisions.  

  Based on changes in scientific information, have vulnerabilities or high-risk 

areas changed? A re-evaluation of scientific information may lead your 
community to change the focus of priority actions. 

Depending  on  the  information  derived  from  monitoring  and  research,  some 
modifications to adaptation actions may be justified. 

Communicating Accomplishments 

As  noted  previously,  it  is  important  to  communicate  with  organizations,  staff, 
stakeholders, and decision-makers throughout the adaptive management process.  

is  a  success 

implementation  of  adaptation  actions 

The 
that  should  be 
communicated to those involved in the project and others that may potentially help 
effect change within their spheres of influence and responsibility. Communication at 
this  stage  is  also  an  opportunity  to  build  momentum  for  ongoing  implementation. 
Some  tools  that  teams  can  consider  include  annual  progress  reports,  press 
releases,  briefing  notes,  website  updates,  workshops,  ‘lunch-and-learns,’  and 
celebration events.  

Agawa Canyon, [Gilbert Racine, MNR] 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   56 

 


