 

 

A  sensitive  species  example  of  vulnerability:  Eastern  Hemlock  (Tsuga 
canadensis) 

Hemlock,  an  important  tree  species  found  in  the  Great  Lakes-St.  Lawrence 
forest  ecosystem,  can  be  used  as  an  example  of  how  the  components  of 
vulnerability relate to one another. Brief definitions introduce each component. 

Exposure:  the  nature  and  extent  to  which  the  species  or  system  is 
exposed  to  significant  climate  variation.  More  extreme  weather  events, 
including extended droughts and heat waves, are projected with climate change 
throughout  Ontario,  including  southern  and  central  Ontario  where  hemlock 
grows.  

Sensitivity:  how  affected  a  species  or  system  is  by  being  exposed  to  a 
stress. Eastern hemlock requires cool, moist sites to regenerate and thrive. It is 
quite sensitive to dry and hot conditions and experiences significant stress under 
these  conditions.  In  addition,  hemlock  is  a  preferred  browse  species  of  white-
tailed  deer;  since  warmer  winters  result  in  less  snow  cover,  hemlock  seedlings 
would be exposed to more browsing pressure. 

Adaptive  Capacity:  the  ability  or  potential  of  a  species  or  system  to 
respond  successfully  to  climate  variability  and  change.  Hemlock’s  natural 
ability  to  adapt  to  climate  change  stresses  is  limited.  Its  slow  growth  rate  as  a 
seedling makes it less adaptable to heat and drought conditions that would limit 
its  growth,  cause  significant  mortality,  and  make  it  less  competitive  than  other 
Great Lakes-St Laurence tree species. Strategies to keep hemlock in the Great 
Lakes-St.  Lawrence  forest  ecosystem  could  include  management  techniques 
such as seeding and planting of hemlock on suitable sites around water bodies 
and assisted migration to appropriate sites further north. 

 

 

 

Hemlock  [Stan Vasiliauskas, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   15 

 


