Future levels of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere can be modelled with scenarios that describe different possible ways the world 
may develop in response to human activities. Forty scenarios have been approved by the IPCC for use in climate change impact and 
vulnerability  assessments.  Each  scenario  has  a  unique  set  of  assumptions  about  future  social  and  economic  conditions.  For 
example, the A2 scenario (one of the more commonly used scenarios) anticipates higher greenhouse gas levels by 2100, reaching 
1,320 parts per million by volume (ppmv) in CO2 equivalents2 compared to 915 ppmv for the B2 scenario (Nakićenović et al., 2000). 
In the A2 world, the human population reaches 15 billion by 2100, and reliance on fossil fuels is higher than in the B2 world, which 
projects  a  world  population  of  10.4  billion  people  by  2100.  In  addition,  environmental  protection,  resulting  in  lower  greenhouse 
emissions, is more important in the B2 scenario than in the A2 scenario (Nakićenović et al., 2000).  

 

 

 
It  is  important  to  note  that  current  global 
anthropogenic  greenhouse  gas  production 
exceeds  levels  used  in  the  business-as-usual 
A2  scenario  (IEA,  2011),  and  A2  is  now 
considered to be somewhat conservative.  

to 

global 

population, 

Scenarios  are  possible  outcomes,  not 
predictions,  since  the  amount  of  greenhouse 
gas  in  the  future  depends  on  variable  factors 
related 
human 
behaviour,  technological  development,  and 
the 
of 
ecosystems.  Even  if  we  could  accurately 
predict  the  future  amounts  of  greenhouse 
gases  in  the  atmosphere,  different  climate 
models produce varying projections.  

sink/source 

carbon 

behaviour 

 

Alvar Grasslands [Wasyl Bakowsky, MNR] 

                                                

2 A CO2 equivalent expresses the energy-trapping properties of any greenhouse gas and the length of time it remains in the atmosphere in terms 
of the equivalent amount of CO2 that would be required to produce the same effect. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   33 

 


