 

 

This  guide  was  prepared  to  help  practitioners  respond  to  and  prepare  for  climate  change,  and  is  organized  around  the  following 
objectives:  

 Introduce climate change adaptation, vulnerability, and risk; 

 Describe vulnerability and risk assessment tools and techniques that can be used to support adaptive management in a 

rapidly changing climate; and 

 Provide examples of assessments with information about how they were used to support adaptive management and decision-

making. 

How  Can the Guide Be Used?  

This guide demonstrates how a suite of tools (e.g., vulnerability assessments) can be 
used  to  inform  adaptation  efforts.  It  is  not  a  prescriptive  ‘must-do’  manual.  It  allows 
practitioners 
their 
organization’s  ability  to  address  threats  and  opportunities  resulting  from  climate 
change that are unique to their location and/or sector (e.g., a forest management unit, 
a fisheries management zone, or a provincial park).  

to  select  and  combine 

tools  and 

techniques 

to  enhance 

Given that assessments will be completed in many locations and on a variety of spatial 
scales  (e.g.,  local  to  regional,  sector  to  ecosystem-specific)  and  will  include  diverse 
expertise from various disciplines, the process is necessarily scalable. For example, a 
vulnerability  assessment  could  focus  on  a  specific  thematic  area,  such  as  water  or 
wildlife,  to  limit  the  size  of  the  assessment  team  and  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  the 
overall  process.  Likewise,  project 
to  highlight  potential 
vulnerabilities and impacts by using the information currently available in literature.  

teams  could  begin 

The  process  described  in  this  guide  provides  a  general  framework  and  examples  of 
tools  that  can  be  used  by  practitioners  from  a  variety  of  disciplines.  Practitioners  are 
encouraged to design their own approaches, based on the questions being asked and 
the context and focus of their assessment.  

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   11 

 

Observing a hawk’s nest, [Scott McPherson, MNR] 


