 

 

Some general strategies for describing uncertainty include the following:  

 Identify the most important factors (e.g., processes, variables, data, interdependencies); 

 Document ranges and distributions in the literature;  

 Describe the state of the scientific information on which the conclusions and/or estimates are based; and 

 Prepare a “traceable account” of how the estimates were constructed (Moss and Schneider, 2000).  

An adaptive planning process, including vulnerability assessment, is an iterative process that allows the inclusion of new science and 
data  that  will  reduce  uncertainty  over  time.  Even  though  uncertainty  exists,  it  should  not  limit  the  exploration  of  vulnerabilities  and 
implementation of no-regrets and priority adaptation options.  

Assessing Risk 

Risk  is  the severity of the consequences of climate change impacts and the likelihood that impacts  will occur. Risk assessment is 
based  on  people’s  perceptions  of  adverse  effect  and  involves  exploring  what  we  should  do  about  the  vulnerabilities  identified  for 
projected  future  climates.  It  can  help  to  inform  how  we  deploy  limited  resources  to  deal  with  climate  compared  to  other  priorities. 
Through ranking methods, the project team builds an understanding of where to focus adaptation action.  

In  many  cases,  risk  assessment  is  a  qualitative  exercise  involving  the  project  team,  expert  panels,  and  input  from  stakeholders, 
partners, and other specialists. A workshop or other collaborative format may be a suitable way to conduct the activities in the risk 
assessment or validate results of a risk assessment. Other tools, including quantitative assessments such as cost-benefit analysis, 
are described in Appendix 2. Worksheet 4.4 employs a qualitative approach to risk assessment. 

Worksheet 4.4: Assessing Risk  

For each indicator, consider the consequences of its vulnerability in a matrix like the example below. Other criteria can be developed 
for  the  evaluation  as  needed.  A  consequence  is  an  outcome  that  leads  to  the  general  decline  of  a  social-ecological  system  or 
species. There will be consequences in several areas, such as strategic, financial, operational, and environmental. Project teams can 
determine which potential consequences to rate and may identify other consequences (e.g., cultural consequences) not listed in the 
sample  matrix.  To  assess  risk,  first  determine  the  consequence  rating,  based  on  the  numerical  value  in  the  first  column.  Then, 
determine the likelihood of this particular climate change impact occurring.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   44 

 


