1.0 INTRODUCTION 

A Changing Climate in Ontario  

The average annual global temperature warmed by about 0.76oC over the last century (IPCC, 2007a), 
but average warming across Canada was more than double the world average (Environment Canada, 
2011). In the last 63 years, the average temperature in Canada has increased about 1.6oC, although 
there  have  been  differences  in  warming  trends  across  the  country.  For  example,  average  annual 
temperatures  increased  2.3oC  in  the  Mackenzie  region  of  the  Northwest  Territories  and  part  of 
Nunavut,  whereas  Atlantic  Canada  warmed  by  0.5°C  over  the  same  period  (Environment  Canada, 
2011). During this period, average temperatures across Ontario increased by 0.7 to 1.1oC, with higher 
temperatures occurring in the Boreal and Hudson Bay Lowlands regions (Environment Canada, 2011).  

Projections  for  Ontario  suggest  that  average  annual  air  temperature  will  increase,  but  given  the 
uncertainty of human behaviour and associated greenhouse gas emission rates and magnitudes, it is 
not known by precisely how much. Generally, the average global temperature is projected to warm 1.1 
to 6.4oC1 during the next century, with land areas warming more than the oceans and higher latitudes 
warming  more  than  lower  latitudes  (IPCC,  2007a).  The  additional  heat  in  the  atmosphere  will  likely 
increase  variability  in  precipitation  and  wind  patterns.  For  example,  as  more  heat  is  trapped  in  the 
lower atmosphere by additional greenhouse gases, the frequency and size of extreme weather events 
such as ice storms, heavy rains, droughts, and wind storms are expected to increase (IPCC, 2007b).  

Based on a scenario that assumes emissions at the current rate of global output (business-as-usual), 
the  average  annual  temperature  in  Ontario  is  projected  to  rise  by  about  5.1°C  by  the  end  of  the 
century (Figure 1) (McKenney et al., 2010). Other scenarios that assume that action is taken to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions project a change of about 3.6°C. Across Ontario, precipitation is projected 
to increase; however, projections of changes in seasonal patterns of precipitation are uncertain at this 
time.  

                                                

1 The range of temperature change is due to differences in the projected warming for different greenhouse gas emission scenarios. 

 

 

 

Storm Front [Sam Brinker, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   7 

 


