 

 

Examples of Adaptation Approaches and Examples of Specific Measures in Natural Systems  
 

Reduce Threats  

 

Climate  change  will  exacerbate many  existing  vulnerabilities  in  natural  ecosystems  and  species 
and  will  contribute  significantly  to  cumulative  effects.  Existing  threats  may  be  reduced  through 
such measures as invasive species research, prevention, and education. 

Enhance Resilience  

 

An  ecosystem’s  resilience  in  changing  environmental  conditions  is  determined  by  its  biological 
and  ecological  resources,  including  diversity  of  species,  genetic  variability  within  species,  and 
condition  and  connectivity  with  other  ecosystems.  Measures  to  reduce  habitat  fragmentation 
enhance  species’  access  to  critical  habitats  (e.g.,  access  to  coldwater  refuges,  and  spawning 
areas) and can facilitate species’ ability to shift ranges as climatic conditions change. Measures 
to  maintain  genetic  and  species  diversity  in  ecosystems  can  have  a  positive  effect  on  adaptive 
capacity. 

Improve Knowledge 

 

Communities and agencies that take proactive steps to prepare for climate change will be more 
resilient  to  change.  Engage  people  and  focus  on  identifying  the  most  important  impacts  and 
investing in adaptive capacity.  

Engage People  

 

Acquiring  new  knowledge  and  experience  over  time  is  an  important  component  of  adaptive 
management. Monitor impacts of climate change and effectiveness of adaptation measures; seek 
out new data, and scientific and local knowledge and perspectives. 

Adaptation options falling into the no-regrets and low-regrets categories may be the most implementable of all options.  

No-regrets actions provide benefits regardless of the rate and magnitude of climate change and can be further justified when there is 
no cost or risk of negative impact. For example, increasing tree species diversity within a forest range could improve the resilience of 
a  forest  to  climate  change  by  reducing  the  threat  of  an  insect  outbreak  targeting  a  particular  species.  Similarly,  increasing  the 
connectivity  between  habitats  can  be  considered  a  no-regrets  adaptation  option  with  multiple  benefits,  including  greater  ability  for 
populations to shift and protection of essential ecosystem services. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   49 

 


