Engagement  techniques  range  from  participation  through  consultation  and  giving  information,  to  more  interactive  participation 
through joint action planning, to self-mobilization where stakeholders take the initiative (UNDP, 2005). Ultimately, it is important that 
stakeholders and partners understand how they are being involved in the process, how the information they provide will be used, and 
the degree of power they have in influencing decisions in the process. If stakeholders chose to abstain from the process, they may 
ask  for  regular  updates,  which  may  require  a  communication  plan  and  a  team  member  designated  to  oversee  stakeholder 
communications. 

Worksheet 1.4: Identifying Partners and Stakeholders 

 

 

team, 

identify  and 

in  how  climate  change 

As  a 
list  potential  partners  and  stakeholders. 
Stakeholders  can  be  individuals,  communities,  or  groups  that  have  an 
interest 
in  natural  resource 
management  and  who  may  be  responsible  for  formal  and  informal 
dissemination  of  knowledge  and/or 
implementation  of  policies  and 
measures.  Partners  will  play  a  more  active  role  in  the  project  such  as 
contributing  to  vulnerability  assessments  and  helping  to  identify  adaptation 
options. Questions to consider include:  

is  considered 

 How might each stakeholder and partner contribute to the planning 

process? 

 Is there anyone on the partner and stakeholder list that you do not 

already have a relationship with? 

 What information about understanding and acting on a climate 

change impact does the study team need? Who has (or has access 
to) this information? 

 In what areas does the study team have influence? Is there anyone 

who can help the team use that influence? 

 How will stakeholders use the vulnerability assessment information, 

and how will they contribute to reducing climate risk? 

 

Burntbush Lake, Cochrane, [Scott Finucan, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   25 

 


