Climate change adaptation options come in all forms, shapes, and sizes, and are specific to any one study area. There is no single 
‘correct’  procedure  for  undertaking  climate  change  adaptation.  Each  method  of  developing  adaptive  responses  has  its  inique 
strengths and its usefulness depends on the specific adaptation process and the stakeholders involved. Because of the uncertainties 
associated with some adaptation options, it is also important to build flexibility and ‘learning-by-doing’ approach into decisions.  

 

 

Generally  speaking,  options  can  include  broad  strategies, 
regional approaches, and site-specific management actions and 
tactics that seek to (1) reduce threats; (2) enhance resilience of 
species  and  systems;  (3)  engage  people;  and  (4)  improve 
knowledge.  

This  guide  introduces  a  framework  to  assist  natural  resource 
management  practitioners  to  mainstream  climate  change  into 
decision-making  and  operations,  and,  where  necessary,  to 
develop  new  policies  and  management  approaches. 
It 
describes  tools  and  techniques  for  understanding  the  potential 
vulnerabilities  and  risks  of  a  changing  climate  on  natural 
systems 
to  support  adaptive 
management.  While  many  of  the  tools  described  in  this  guide 
can be used by other sectors, it is not a tool intended for use for 
developing  municipal  or  infrastructure  related  climate  change 
action  plans.  The  guide  is  focussed  on  adaptive  planning  and 
management of social-ecological systems. 

in  Ontario  and  a  process 

Forest fire in Wawa, 2009 [Christine Rosche, MNR] 

 

Why Was This Guide Written?  

Mainstreaming climate change adaptation requires an understanding of the known and potential impacts of climate change and the 
corresponding  vulnerability  of,  and  risks  to,  ecosystems  and  the  people  who  rely  on  them  for  health  and  well-being.  In  natural 
resource  management  sectors  such  as  fisheries,  wildlife,  forests,  parks  and  water  management,  managing  for  climate  change 
includes identifying impacts on natural resources over time and exploring the consequences to and impacts on ecological and social 
systems. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   10 

 


