 

 

APPENDIX 2:  TOOLS FOR IDENTIFYING  AND EVAL UATING  ADAPTATION OP TIONS  

Policy Delphi 

In  its  broadest  sense,  a  policy  Delphi  is  an  iterative,  group-oriented,  idea-generating  strategy  that  seeks  to  identify  the  strongest 
possible  opposing  views  on  the  potential  resolutions  of  a  policy  issue.  The  approach  permits  a  diverse  group  of  experts, 
stakeholders,  and  partners  to  interact  anonymously  on  a  policy  issue  and  provides  a  structured  method  for  assembling  ideas  and 
recommendations  (Donohoe  and  Needham,  2009).  By  design,  participants  are  provided  the  freedom  to  present  and  challenge 
alternative viewpoints and to think reflectively and independently between iterations.  

A policy Delphi overcomes many of the limitations associated with workshops and focus groups, including the propensities for: 

  One or a few vocal individuals to dominate the discussion; 
  People to remain silent, possibly due to shyness or fear of censure; 
  The ‘rut effect’ (i.e., participants getting hung up on one thought and staying in that rut for the duration of the discussion); 
  The power of persuasion and the ‘bandwagon’ effect; 
  The unwillingness to abandon ‘norms’; 
  Geographic isolation; and 
  Cost. 

Because  a  policy  Delphi  is  anonymous,  it  provides  respondents  with  the  opportunity  to  present  innovative  and  sometimes 
controversial ideas to the panel without fear of repercussions. This is particularly important in the area of climate change adaptation, 
as some adaptations may require fundamental changes in the way in which agencies have traditionally planned and managed lands, 
waters, and the built environment. 

There are many possible designs to a policy Delphi. Figure 6 illustrates an approach that uses two survey iterations. The first survey 
iteration  presents  the  experts  with  climate  change  vulnerabilities  and  consequences  for  several  sectors,  and  solicits  their 
recommendations  on  possible  adaptations.  The  second  survey  iteration  focusses  on  evaluating  the  recommendations  for  their 
perceived  desirability  (or  importance)  and feasibility.  Refer  to Worksheet 5.2 for  a multi-criterion feasibility  matrix  that  can  be  used 
(and adapted) to conduct the evaluations. Tools such as Survey Monkey are available to help conduct survey processes.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   70 

 


