 

 

Monitoring 

Tracking  the  effectiveness  of  the  adaptation  action  and  the  progress  of  its  implementation  is  important  in  the  adaptation  process. 
Questions about outputs, outcomes, and impacts should be considered, including the following: 

  Has the adaptation effort generated outputs (e.g., new decision-support tools, policy changes, guidelines on “how to”, or 

reports and papers detailing process)? 

  What outcomes have been achieved (e.g., stakeholders formally participating in decision-making, and planning processes 

that integrate climate change considerations)?  

  What impacts have arisen (e.g., a flood early warning system that saved X lives)? 

  Considering indicators used to assess vulnerability, has there been ecological improvement in any of areas of study?  

  Has vulnerability been reduced or eliminated? 

Assess  whether  the  appropriate  information  has  been  collected  about  the  success  or  failure  of  the  adaptation  actions  being 
implemented. Tracking the progress that has been made towards adaptation may reveal, for example, that a given adaptation action 
is  ineffective  in  improving  the  adaptive  capacity  of  the  system.  Conversely,  an  action  may  be  very  successful  and,  with  additional 
funding, could be replicated in other locations by other agencies. The information collected as part of the project’s monitoring efforts 
can also be useful for future reviews, updates to public reports, budget requests, and policy decisions. 

For many reasons, it is important to integrate existing monitoring programs with climate change monitoring.  Existing programs can 
provide  information  to  help  to  monitor  climate  change  impacts  on  natural  resources.  These  programs  should  be  recognized  and 
supported. Conversely, there may be gaps in monitoring that that should be identified. Wherever possible, enhancing efficiencies to 
monitor  climate  change  and  a  range  of  other  objectives  (e.g.,  biodiversity  and  forest  health)  on  the  landscape  will  maximize  the 
program’s effectiveness. Seek to align monitoring efforts for indicators that have been identified as important climate change impacts 
indicators.  

Another  element  of  ongoing  monitoring  involves  re-evaluating  vulnerabilities  that  were  assessed  in  the  initial  assessment  and 
modifying or updating adaptation actions as necessary.  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   55 

 


