 

 

Lessons Learned from the Lake Simcoe Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Strategy 

A number of observations and recommendations about project design and implementation were collected by the project team: 

  Use an ensemble of climate models and scenarios when possible: Access to a number of climate change projections and 
scenarios can significantly improve the robustness of analyses and strategic planning discussions. Finding ways to consider extreme 
weather events is also important.  

  Engage stakeholders and experts early and substantively: The success of any project with outcomes that will impact the daily 

lives of people living and working in an area will, in large measure, depend on the participation of and uptake by stakeholders.  

  Scope: Given the complexity of ecosystem composition, structure, and function, and the human position in it, it is important to complete 

as extensively as possible vulnerability assessments for the suite of forces and factors that shape the ecosystem and affect human health 
and well-being. 

  Carefully select idea-generation tools to match needs and expectations: Every situation and strategic planning process is 

unique. A variety of idea-generation tools and techniques are available to support strategic thinking and option development, and many of 
these can be used in combination. For example, the Lake Simcoe process involved the use of workshops (including a global café 
approach), face-to-face meetings, email surveys, and a policy Delphi process. 

  Provide incentives to participants: The policy Delphi is an idea-generating technique that often places substantial time and 

intellectual demands on participants. Incentives could improve survey response rates. In addition, experience with the use of incentives in 
other jurisdictions suggests that they will increase respondents’ willingness to participate in future studies and follow-up activities, including 
workshops.  

 

Improve the capacity of the online survey engine: The online surveys were cost effective and efficient. However, the first-round 
survey, which used a web-based browser application, did not allow respondents to save their responses. Consequently, respondents were 
forced to complete their surveys in a single session. Given the time and intellectual demands placed on respondents, a word processor or 
Adobe® version of the software is recommended for online surveys. 

  Engage communities on an ongoing basis: Given the site-specific and dynamic nature of climate change impacts, ongoing 

planning and management strategies developed at the local level are key. 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   60 

 


