Low-regrets  actions  are  those  made  because  of  climate  change,  but  at  a  minimal  cost  or  risk  of  negative  impact.  In  other  words, 
there  is  low  regret  if  the  investment  or  change  in  management  practice  proves  redundant  or  impractical  under  future  climate 
conditions.  

Some adaptation actions have mitigation  co-benefits. These measures simultaneously reduce vulnerability to climate change and 
decrease greenhouse gas emissions or sequester carbon from the atmosphere, and therefore may be desirable options. 

 

 

Tools for Identifying Adaptation Options 

Several  approaches  are  available  to  help  identify  adaptation  options  and  support  strategic  thinking.  Idea-generation  tools 
such as a policy Delphi tool can solicit suggestions regarding adaptation options from experts, partners, and stakeholders. 
Project  teams  may  also  prepare  a  menu  of  possible  adaptation  options  in  order  to  solicit  feedback  relating  to  identified 
vulnerabilities.  

Tools and resources to identify and evaluate adaptation options are described in Appendix 2. Many of these techniques can 
be used in various combinations.  

 

Project  teams  should  carefully  select  tools  to  identify  adaptation  options  that  best  match  the  needs  and  expectations  of  the 
stakeholders and organizations responsible for implementation. Every situation and strategic planning process is unique.  

Worksheet 5.1: Developing Adaptation Options 

For the vulnerabilities and risks identified in the assessment, list possible adaptation options.  The four general categories – reduce 
threats, enhance resilience, engage people, and increase knowledge – are intended to guide the identification of adaptation options 
for each theme. To stimulate ideas, it may also be useful to consider measures relating to legislation and policy, strategic planning 
processes, and management and operations. An example of a critical risk and potential adaptation options is given below.  

Once adaptation options have been identified, the team should collate all of the options and eliminate redundancies and overlap in 
ideas before proceeding to evaluate adaptation options.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   50 

 


