 

 

The  IPCC (2007b)  defines  uncertainty  as  an  “expression  of the  degree to  which  a  value…is  unknown.  Uncertainty  can result from 
lack  of  information  or  from  disagreement  about  what  is  known  or  even  knowable.  It  may  have  many  types  of  sources,  from 
quantifiable errors in data to ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour.”  

Uncertainty  can  thus  be  described  by  quantitative  measures  (e.g.,  a  range  of  values  calculated  by  various  models)  and/or  by 
qualitative  statements  (e.g.,  reflecting  the  judgement  of  a  team  of  experts).  Regardless  of  the  method  used,  it  is  essential  that 
practitioners consistently communicate uncertainty across vulnerability assessments completed for the study.  

Depending on the level of detail in the assessment and the capacity of the team, qualitative descriptions of uncertainty are likely the 
most  applicable  here.  Qualitative  descriptions  communicate  the  relative  amount  and  quality  of  the  evidence  (i.e.,  “lacking,”  “not 
reported,” “not available,” “good quality,” “anecdotal,” and “expert opinion”) and the degree of agreement (Table 1) with other results 
in  the  literature  (i.e.,  “high  agreement  –  much  evidence,”  and  “high  agreement  –  medium  evidence”)  (IPCC,  2007b).  Avoid  vague 
and/or overly broad statements that are difficult to support or refute.  

 

Level of 
Agreement 

 

High Agreement, limited evidence  

High agreement, medium evidence 

High agreement, much evidence 

Medium agreement, limited 
evidence  

Medium agreement, medium evidence 

Medium agreement, much evidence 

Low agreement, limited evidence  

Low agreement, medium evidence 

Low agreement, much evidence 

Amount of evidence (number and quality of independent sources) 

Table 1. Qualitative terminology for uncertainty (Source: adapted from IPCC, 2007b). 

Several quantitative techniques are available to describe and communicate uncertainty. Wherever possible, experts should seek to 
describe results in terms of likelihood of occurrence and degree of confidence in being correct. The IPCC’s report (2007b) provides a 
comprehensive discussion of language for describing uncertainty and levels of confidence in climate change assessments, including 
quantitative terminology.  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   43 

 


