 

 

 

Resilience  is  a  synonym  for  some  of  the  characteristics  of  adaptive  capacity  (the  term  used  in  this  guide).  From  an  ecological 
perspective,  resilience  is  a  tendency  to  maintain  integrity  when  subject  to  disturbance  (UNDP,  2005).  A  resilient  ecosystem  can 
withstand  shocks  and  rebuild  itself  as  necessary.  The  resilience  of  an  ecosystem  in  a  changing  climate  is  determined  by  its 
components,  function,  and  structure,  and  in  particular  by  the  diversity  of  species,  the  genetic  variability  within  species,  and  the 
regional  pool  of  species  and  ecosystems.  Other  influences  include  the  size  of  the  ecosystem  (generally,  the  larger  and  the  less 
fragmented, the better), past land use patterns, and the condition of the surrounding environment. Resistance  is the capacity of an 
ecosystem to absorb disturbances and remain largely unchanged (Holling, 1973). In general, we use the term adaptive capacity to 
capture the system’s ability to prepare for or adjust to stress. 

Risk describes the likelihood (probability of occurrence) and the consequences of an adverse impact as a result of the interactions 
between  climate  change  and  society  (UNDP,  2005).  Risk  assessment  is  based  on  people’s  perceptions  of  the  adverse  effect.  It 
involves identifying and ranking risk issues and selecting the best risk-reduction strategies even when practitioners do not know what 
the future will look like because of climate change and other cumulative impacts. 

Uncertainty is an “expression of the degree to which a value…is unknown. Uncertainty can result from lack of information or from 
disagreement  about  what  is  known  or  even  knowable.  It  can  have  many  types  of  sources,  from  quantifiable  errors  in  data  to 
ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour” (IPCC, 2007b). 

Assessing how vulnerable species and ecosystems are to climate change involves uncertainty. The degree of uncertainty is partially 
based on the data, information, and expert knowledge available to assess that information. Uncertainty is also a function of the fact 
that by using climate models, we are making projections about future climate-induced change based on estimates of greenhouse gas 
emissions, and thus we are exploring what those projections could mean. We don’t know the absolute magnitude of climate change 
and its potential effects or how systems may exactly respond to change. Uncertainty should not limit vulnerability assessment and 
the  development  of  adaptation  options,  however.  The  guide  presents  a  language  for  addressing  uncertainty  and  methods  for 
incorporating uncertainty into vulnerability assessments. 

  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   16 

 


