 

 

 

STEP 1: 

 

 
SET CONTEXT AND BUILD TEAM 

 
 
 
 

The first step in mainstreaming climate change adaptation is to build the project team, engage stakeholders and partners, and define 
the study area and the environmental themes and indicators that will be the focus of the vulnerability assessment.  

Defining the Study Area, Themes, and Indicators 

People engage in climate change adaptation for many reasons. Some are issue-related, such as losses resulting from an extreme 
weather  event  or  perception  of  future  risk  (e.g.,  frequency  of  flooding  or  drought).  Other  reasons  relate  to  a  desire  to  better 
understand how climate change might affect a particular area, or concerns expressed by resource managers or the public. Identifying 
the reasons motivating the study can help to define the study area and determine the scale at which the issue is best addressed. In 
issue-driven studies, there may be less flexibility in selecting the study area and some data limitations may exist. 

Climate change  impacts occur  across multiple scales. In situations where there is flexibility  in defining the study area, the scale of 
assessment can vary:  

 Local assessments, such as a watershed, ecodistrict, forest management unit, provincial park, fisheries management zone, 

or other resource planning areas;  

 Regional assessments, such as an ecoregion or another regional boundary; and 

 Provincial and jurisdictional assessments. 

A  study  at  the  local  level  can  be  a  useful  scale for  encouraging  a range of  interested  parties to  participate.  Local studies are  also 
more feasible if there are limited resources and/or a desire to gain experience in conducting vulnerability assessments. However, it is 
important to recognize that by its very nature, climate change will require that natural resource managers think and plan within the 
context of larger landscapes, even when adaptive management decision-making may occur on a local scale.  

Geographic  scale  affects  the  usefulness  of  climatic  projections  modelled  for  the  study  area.  At  coarser,  broader  scales,  climate 
projections are more robust, even with the availability of downscaled climate models (refer to Step 3, on models and scenarios). If a 
vulnerability assessment is conducted on a smaller, local scale, it is important to describe uncertainties and avoid over-interpreting 
fine-scale projections (Glick et al., 2011). Whatever level an assessment is conducted at, it is important to consider the geographic 
range of the species being examined, and how they may shift into or out of the study area under future climate scenarios. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   19 

 


