 

 

In  2007,  the  Government  of  Ontario  released  Go  Green:  Ontario’s  Action  Plan  on  Climate  Change,  with  targets  to  reduce 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  to  mitigate  the  impacts  of  climate  change  (Government  of  Ontario,  2007).  The  target  was  to  reduce 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  to  6%  below  1990  levels  by  2014  (a  reduction  of  61  megatonnes  relative  to  business-as-usual),  15% 
below  1990  levels  by  2020  (a  reduction  of  99  megatonnes  relative  to  business-as-usual),  and  80%  below  1990  levels  by  2050 
(Government of Ontario, 2007). These progressive targets were accompanied by a commitment to support adaptation programs to 
help Ontarians prepare for climate change. The Government of Ontario appointed the Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation in 
2007 with a mandate to evaluate current government programs and recommend a path forward. 

The  Panel  released  its  report  in  November  2009  with  59  recommendations,  a  number  of  which  addressed  the  need  for  adaptive 
management supported by vulnerability analyses. For example, recommendation #21 called on the MNR to strengthen its capacity to 
develop  and  plan  adaptation  actions  designed  to  increase  the  climate  resilience  of  ecosystems  and  species  at  risk. 
Recommendations #19 and #28 suggested that Ontario complete vulnerability analyses in support of adaptive management for near-
shore  water  quality  in  the  Great  Lakes  and  in  the  Boreal,  Great  Lakes-St.  Lawrence,  and  Carolinian  forested  ecosystems  (Expert 
Panel  on  Climate  Change  Adaptation,  2009).  The  Panel’s  recommendations  provided  the  basis  for  the  province’s  Climate  Ready: 
Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan (Government of Ontario, 2011).  

This  guide  was  prepared  in  response  to  the  Expert  Panel  on  Climate  Change  Adaptation  recommendations,  the  commitments 
contained  in  Climate  Ready:  Ontario’s  Adaptation  Strategy  and  Action  Plan  and  MNR’s  strategic priorities  on climate  change. This 
guide  is  designed  to  assist  natural  resource  managers  in  their  work  to  integrate  an  adaptive  approach  to  managing  for  climate 
change into policies and programs. 

Adapting to Climate Change in Natural Reso urce Management   

Adapting to climate change involves taking action to reduce or eliminate the negative effects of climate change or to take advantage 
of the positive effects. Adaptation complements commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

Climate change adaptation may require changes to existing policies and programs, and, in some cases, development of new policies 
and management approaches. Rather than dealing with adaptation in isolation from other management decisions or other factors, it 
is  important to  integrate (or  mainstream)  climate change  adaptation  into ongoing  planning  and  decision-making. This  can  increase 
efficiency in the use of financial and human resources, and deepen our understanding of the interaction between climate change and 
the many other factors and forces that shape our world.  

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   9 

 


