 

 

Accordingly, climate scientists are recommending the use of an ensemble of models to capture the range of potential climate change. 
Numerous studies show that the best approach when using models is to use an ensemble because, although each GCM represents 
the  best  effort  of  each  modelling  team,  there  are  biases;  the  use  of  an  ensemble  (mean/median)  of  models  tends  to  converge 
towards a best estimate by reduction of strong biases in single models. In addition, ensemble results can provide some indication of 
where the different models agree and disagree (Comer, 2009). 

The  IPCC  has  recommended  that  analyses  should  use  at  least  30-year  averaging  periods  for  GCM  output  data.  Typically,  model 
output is calculated according to a number of fixed time horizons (e.g., 2011-2040, 2041-2070, and 2071-2100). 

The IPCC’s fifth assessment report — due to be published in 2014 — will introduce a new approach. The current practice of starting 
with qualitative storylines of human behaviour will be replaced with a new generation of scenarios that will start out with greenhouse 
gas emissions trajectories known in IPCC terminology as representative concentration pathways (RCPs). The report is expected to 
focus on four emissions trajectories that produce different levels of  heating at the end of the century — 8.5, 6, 4.5, and 2.6 watts per 
square metre (W m−2). IPCC chose four trajectories to avoid the common misconception that the middle scenario is the most likely 
(Inman, 2011). Given the trends in human behaviour, the range covered by the representative concentration pathways is wider than 
that  presented  by  earlier  scenarios,  reflecting  a  general  shift  in  outlook  to  more  extreme  future  emissions  trajectories  than  were 
expected a decade ago.  

Worksheet 3.1: Determining Climate Model Needs 

Projections may already have been developed and applied to Ontario and for the selected study area. The assessment team should 
select projections and associated climatic variables that have the most relevance to the environmental themes and indicators  being 
studied. To aggregate the results of multiple vulnerability assessments and determine adaptation options, project teams may seek to 
ensure that, wherever possible, experts use the same models (e.g., the Canadian Global Climate Model and an ensemble of other 
models),  scenarios,  and  time  periods  (e.g.,  2011-2040,  2041-2070,  and  2071-2100)  for  modelling  and  reporting  on  vulnerabilities. 
However, it is also important to recognize that some thematic analyses may require use of projections not used in other themes. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   35 

 


