and waterproof are best)

Clean up
Before you clean up
Flood waters can contain sewage, chemicals and debris like 
broken glass. Wear clothing that covers your skin along with 
appropriate personal protective equipment including:
• protective eyewear
• hard hat
• gloves
• rubber boots (puncture-proof 
• N-95 or equivalent masks
 
If it is safe to do so, turn off the electricity at the main breaker  
or fuse box using a dry piece of wood. If you cannot, do not 
enter the space and contact your hydro company for assistance. 
Do not use electrical appliances that are wet or may have  
been affected by flood water until a qualified electrician has 
inspected them.
Do not use anything requiring water in your home (e.g. toilets, 
showers, washing machine and sinks) until the flood water from 
your house has been removed.
Cleaning up a home that has experienced extensive water  
damage or has been flooded with sewage-contaminated waters 
may require a qualified flood damage restoration company.  
Refer to page 19 for information on how to locate one.

First steps
Take measures to prevent further damage to your home  
and belongings:
• Remove standing water. Remove standing water with pumps 

or pails, a wet/dry vacuum and rags and/or towels. If you 
experience severe water levels in your basement, contact a 
professional damage restoration company to help drain the 
water slowly to prevent structural damage.

• Make decisions about what to keep and what to throw away. 
Remove as much as you can out of the rooms that were flooded 
as quickly as possible to help prevent water damage and mould. 
Some belongings, especially those that are contaminated with 
sewage, or those that cannot be quickly dried and effectively 
cleaned, may not be salvageable. 

• Remove soaked and dirty building materials and debris, 

including wet insulation and drywall. 

• Quickly and thoroughly dry and dehumidify your home. 
Ventilating the area with outdoor air and fans will help. A 
dehumidifier will work to remove moisture from the home. 

For homes on private 
septic systems
Depending on the extent of 
flooding to your property,  
you should consider having 
your septic system inspected 
by a licensed contractor prior 
to reuse.

A

f
t
e
r
 
a
 
f
l
o
o
d

23


