The city of Mississauga provides this comprehensive guide for 
residents to increase awareness about flooding. This guide 
includes what you need to know about flood risks and how to  
prepare in order to reduce the impacts of floods to your property.
This guide provides you with information on how to respond 
during a flood event and steps you can take to clean up  
should you be impacted by a flood, including measures to 
protect your health. There is also a valuable checklist at the  
end of the booklet to help guide you through the actions you  
can take to protect your home, yourself and your family in  
the future. For further information, please visit mississauga.ca  
or call 311 (905–615–4311 outside city limits)

Flood facts

• Floods are one of the most common hazards in Canada.
• A heavy rainfall can result in flooding, particularly when the  

ground is still frozen or already saturated from previous storms.

• Severe storms can cause flash flooding with little or  

no advance warning. 

• All creeks experience flooding at one time or another. The 

potential for flood damage is high for houses and businesses 
constructed on low-lying, flood-prone lands. 

• Over the past 60 years, average temperatures and average 

rainfalls in Canada have both increased. Together these have 
led to more extreme weather, such as severe storms and floods.

If there is a potential 
for flooding or if a 
flood occurs, listen 
regularly to the  
radio or television  
or check online for 
the latest community 
information.

mississauga.ca
  @citymississauga
City of Mississauga
 

The Challenge

Canadian cities face two crises that are converging 
into a perfect storm – a rapid rise in extreme weather 
events as a result of climate change combined with a 
growing sewer and stormwater infrastructure deﬁcit.

12%RAINFALL

SINCE 1950

Extreme weather events that 
happened every 40 years in the past are now 
happening every 6 years

15x
$378BILLION

Worldwide in 2011,
natural disasters caused

Since 1983 the 
cost of claims 
payouts due to 
severe weather 
has increased by

in economic losses

$1.7 billion
2013

in insured losses
as a result of the

Alberta ﬂoods

In 2012, the Federation of Canadian 
Municipalities estimated that replacement 
costs for Canada’s sewer and stormwater 
infrastructure were almost 

$55 billion

20 more days of rain
in Canada per year

Canada ﬂood facts from The Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC)

4


