UHI health impacts
Extreme heat events (EHE), which can be deﬁ ned as periods of 
abnormally hot and often humid weather, are dangerous to some and 
can result in increased rates of heat-related mortality and morbidity. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that in the 
United States from 1979 to 2003, excessive heat exposure contributed 
to more than 8,000 premature deaths. This ﬁ gure exceeds the number 
of mortalities resulting from hurricanes, lightning, tornadoes, ﬂ oods, 
and earthquakes combined (Luber, et al., 2006).

By increasing day-time temperatures and reducing night-time cooling, 
heat islands can exacerbate the impact of EHEs. Populations who 
are vulnerable to heat, such as children, seniors, and people with 
chronic illness, are at particular risk of general discomfort, respiratory 
difﬁ culties, heat cramps, exhaustion, heat stroke, and heat-related 
mortality. UHI also affects indoor thermal characteristics (such as air 
temperature, humidity and air movement), especially in buildings where 
air conditioners and mechanical ventilation systems are not available.

Measuring and localizing UHIs
UHI effects can be measured by two methods: (1) direct measurement 
of surface and/or air temperatures using sensors at ﬁ xed or mobile 
observation sites; and (2) indirect remote measurement using satellite 
and aerial sensors that detect radiation emitted by surfaces.

Greater Toronto Area—

Surface temperature map (2008-09-03)

Source: Natural Resources Canada, Earth Sciences Sector

Contact:  Matthew Maloley, Natural Resources Canada

The surface urban heat island effect is observed as a temperature 
difference between surfaces such as roofs and tree canopies or 
open ﬁ elds and parking lots. Satellite thermal images can be used to 
determine the location of “hot spots” in the urban environment (as 

illustrated in the map above). This information could be used as a basis 
for strategic implementation of UHI mitigation measures. However, the 
localization of these “hot spots” should be combined with information 
related to building characteristics and socio-economic factors to better 
protect at-risk populations by increasing their resiliency to heat.

UHI mitigation strategies
There are two main UHI reduction strategies: ﬁ rst, to increase surface 
reﬂ ectivity, in order to reduce radiation absorption of urban surfaces 
(i.e., achieve high albedo); and second, to increase vegetation cover, 
mainly in the form of urban forests and parks, in order to maximize 
the various vegetation beneﬁ ts in controlling temperature rises.

Increasing the reﬂ ectivity of surfaces can be accomplished either 
by using lightly coloured construction materials or by covering the 
construction material surface with a white membrane. Both techniques 
have been applied mainly on roofs and paved surfaces. Currently, few 
Canadian communities have implemented policies or programs that will 
increase the use of high albedo materials in order to mitigate the UHI 
(Forkes et al., 2009).  

Increasing vegetation cover is mainly focused on planting trees around 
residential and commercial buildings. Strategically placing trees in front 
of windows and on the sunniest sides of houses can maximize energy 
savings. Trees placed on the east and west sides of buildings are most 
effective because they block the sun both in the morning and the 
afternoon. Several Canadian communities have established Tree Planting 
Programs, for example, in Hamilton, Ontario, 2,100 trees have been 
planted on city streets since 2006; in Kelowna, British Columbia, from 
600 to 1,400 trees are planted annually; and London, Ontario plans to 
have a tree in front of every home (Forkes et al., 2009). 

Also, emphasis is being placed on roof top gardens (i.e., green roofs), 
in order to achieve the same result as lighter-coloured roofs. Recently, 
the City of Toronto, Ontario adopted a bylaw to require and govern the 
construction of green roofs on all new developments above 2,000 m2 
of Gross Floor Area.

The success and the efﬁ ciency of these mitigation measures depend 
strongly on the engagement and collaboration of a variety of 
partnerships such as municipal governments, public health authorities 
and provincial and federal governments. Awareness and outreach to a 
wide range of stakeholders, including the public, is a key element in the 
reduction of UHI effects.

References:
Forkes, J., Penney, J., Dickinson, T., and Duggan, C. 2009. Urban Heat 
Island Mitigation in Canadian Communities. Draft report, Clean Air 
Partnership. 132 p.

Luber, G., Sanchez, C., and Conklin, L. 2006. Heat-Related Deaths 
– United States, 1999–2003. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. 
Vol. 55(29): 610–613.

Oke, T.R. 1987. Boundary Layer Climates. New York, Routledge.

Urban Heat Islands, www.urbanheatislands.com

For further information please contact: climatinfo@hc-sc.gc.ca


