NUMBER 1

ISSN 1920-2709

NOVEMBER 2009

Climate Change and Health
Adaptation Bulletin

The Urban Heat Island Effect: 
Causes, Health Impacts and Mitigation Strategies

What is an Urban Heat Island (UHI)?
The term “heat island” describes built-up areas that are hotter than 
nearby rural areas. The average air temperature of a city with 1 million 
people or more can be 1 to 3°C warmer than its surroundings. In the 
evening, the air temperature difference can be as high as 12°C (Oke, 
1987). 

Furthermore, the arrangement and size of buildings along narrow 
streets forms a so-called urban canyon that inhibits the release of the 
reﬂ ected radiation from urban surfaces back to space. This radiation 
becomes absorbed by the building walls. Paved roads, concrete 
sidewalks and parking lots also have a high tendency to absorb solar 
radiation and release it as heat. 

About 80% of Canadians live in cities where the urban atmosphere 
is strongly affected by the design and density of buildings and by 
man-made changes to the urban environment. Urbanization negatively 
impacts the environment by the covering of the soil surface, the 
modiﬁ cation of the physical and chemical properties of the atmosphere 
(smog), and by the production of pollution being emitted from high 
road trafﬁ c.

Heat islands can form over any built-up area, but especially occur over 
large cities where surfaces have a tendency to absorb large quantities 
of solar radiation during the day for later release at night.

What are UHI causes? 
Natural surfaces, like vegetation, absorb a relatively large proportion 
of solar energy and use it through an evaporation process (release 
of water vapour) that helps to cool the air in the neighbourhood. 
By contrast, built surfaces are largely made up of non-reﬂ ective and 
waterproof construction materials. Consequently, they tend to absorb 
a signiﬁ cant proportion of the solar radiation, which is then released 
as heat.

When natural land cover, such as parks, is decreased and replaced by 
buildings, the cooling process through evaporation is reduced. As well, 
when rural areas that surround cities are urbanized, the atmospheric 
circulation systems that carry cooler air to city centres are restricted. 
These atmospheric cooling systems are normally generated by the 
temperature differences which exist between cool rural and warm 
urban environments.

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of 
Health, 2009

Revised December 2010

Courtesy of J. Forkes, 2009

Albedo  (or  solar  reﬂ ectance) 
the  measure  of  a  material’s  ability 
to  reﬂ ect  sunlight  on  a  scale  of  0  to  1.  For  example,  a  low  albedo 
material  indicates  that  its  surface  absorbs  most  of  the  solar  radiation.

is 

Additional factors have been recognized as potential causes of the UHI 
effect, such as atmospheric pollutants that intercept, absorb and re-
radiate the solar radiation in the lower atmosphere, and the production 
of waste heat from air conditioning, industrial processes and vehicles.


