1.2 Flooding Impacts CRE Tenants

Flooding is not a new phenomenon for CRE tenants 
in Canada and it is well known that it leads to property 
damage, business interruptions and lost work hours. 
For example, following the June 2013 floods in Alberta, 
between 150,000 to 180,000 people could not access 
office buildings, located in downtown Calgary, for 
approximately two weeks. This resulted in 5.1 million 
lost work hours, equivalent to half  a billion dollars in 
GDP loss to the province.ix

More recently, the August 2018 flood in Toronto 
disrupted business in several buildings including  
City Hall, Scotia Bank Arena, Union Station, and 
Rogers Centre. x Even more concerning, two tenants 
were trapped in an elevator of  a commercial building 
and nearly drowned as the elevator was stuck at the 
basement level, full of  water.xi

As the number of  severe flood events rises, in concert 
with changing climate, tenants are beginning to ask 
building managers if  their buildings are prepared for 
extreme weather, and some owners are asking the same 
of  their third-party managers.xii

has become more expensive, or the coverage is limited/
no longer available. 

“ The industry average premium for 
homeowner insurance has risen by  
20-25% over the past five years in Canada. 
More than half  of  this increase is directly 
attributable to water damage and other 
extreme weather events. The remainder is 
due to the increase in insured values.”
–  Patrick Barbeau, Senior Vice President, Claims  

at Intact Insurance, March 2019.

This is a warning sign for CRE owners and managers– 
even when properties are insurable, premium increases, 
higher deductibles, and coverage caps may mean that 
the total amount of potential damage covered by insurance 
will decline in concert with growing flood risk.xv

1.4 Flooding Gives Rise to Lawsuits

1.3 Flooding Impacts CRE Insurance 
Rates and Availability
In February 2019, the Office of  the Superintendent of  
Financial Institutions (OSFI) noted that climate change 
in Canada poses physical, investment and liability 
risks. It stated that while the insurance industry is “well 
positioned to manage physical risks in the medium-term, 
there is growing concern about the potential longer-
term impact of  climate change. A continued increase in 
the frequency and magnitude of  weather-related claims 
can create price-setting issues for insurance products.”xiii 
OSFI stated that it wants all insurers to quantify their 
exposure and develop strategic approaches for managing 
climate risk.xiv

Already in some residential areas in Canada, where 
repeated flooding has occurred, home flood insurance 

Flood-related lawsuits involving homeowners, 
developers, local governments, Indigenous communities, 
provinces, and private businesses, are on the rise in 
Canada. CRE owners and managers are equally 
exposed to the legal risk associated with flood damages. 
For example, following a 2009 flood (caused by a 
leaking pipe) in the building complex now known as 
Brookfield Place in Toronto, Marsh Canada and other 
tenants affected by the flood, filed and settled a lawsuit 
against Centennial Plumbing and Heating Limited. 
Consequently, Centennial Plumbing sought to be 
reimbursed by Brookfield Properties Limited, responsible 
for management of  the property, claiming the damage 
was a result of  Brookfield’s negligence. While it was 
ruled that Brookfield was not liable to reimburse 
Centennial Plumbing in 2017, this case illustrates the 
potential for lawsuits to arise when flooding impacts 
commercial tenants.xvi

14

Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate
