Fiera Properties further plans to enhance flood-resilience at 
the Office Complex through implementing the following 
measures:
•  Inspect all buildings for the presence of backwater valves 
to reduce potential storm and sanitary backflow events / 
where backwater valves are missing initiate installation;

•  Ensure City of Richmond and water pumping 

trucks (McRaes Environmental) emergency contact 
information are readily available for emergency 
response teams;

•  Ensure all emergency equipment (e.g., utility hole cover 
removal tools, hoses, pumps, extra fuel, electrical cords, 
etc.) are properly stored and are ready for use;

•  Stockpile sand on site for sandbags if required for a 

flooding event; 

•  Develop emergency shut down procedures for main 
electrical service in catastrophic flooding events; and

•  Revisit tenant communications / evacuation protocols 

to exercise for flood events.

Fiera Properties: Addressing  
Flood-Resilience at an Office Complex
The City of Richmond in British Columbia is situated 
below sea level and relies on pumping stations to reduce 
and maintain seawater levels. Seasonally, the city is exposed 
to extreme high tides (i.e., “king tides”) and, at times, city 
storm drains are over capacity and storm drains located in 
low-lying areas backflow.
The Office Complex, managed by Fiera Properties, is 
comprised of 13 buildings that span 707,000 square feet, 
located on a 35-acre land parcel. Portions of the parcel 
are located in the designated flood plain. Three of these 
buildings are particularly vulnerable to flooding, as they 
have parking and service rooms (including main electrical 
services and telecommunications data rooms) located on the 
ground floor, where storm drains are below the elevation 
of the city storm drains. There is no ability to relocate or 
elevate critical equipment located in these rooms.
To address flood-resilience, Fiera Properties implemented 
the following property-level protocols across the three most 
vulnerable buildings:
•  Installed automatically-activated sump systems to reduce 

rising water levels; 

•  Installed two gas-powered pumps and secured fuel 

supplies for emergency response;

•  Set up an “incident command center”, which is 

equipped with a first aid room, emergency tools and 
supplies; 

•  Trained onsite staff and mobile security on emergency 

response procedures, including flood response; and

•  Instructed the onsite staff and mobile security to 

inspect low elevation levels for flooding during high 
precipitation events.

“

28

Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real EstateThe incident command centre is  equipped with a first aid room,  emergency tools and supplies.”
