as a direct channel to engage building occupants. 
Various messages are posted on these accounts, including 
flood warnings and emergency communication.

Instagram
@OneYorkStreet @OneYorkStreet

Twitter

Building
One York 
Street 
25 York Street @25YorkStreet
4711 Yonge
Aero Centre

@4711Yonge
@AeroCentre

@25YorkStreet 
@4711Yonge
@AeroCentre_GTA 

Menkes realized the benefits of  having a direct channel 
to communicate with building occupants during several 
events in Toronto. For example, in 2018 there was a 
daylong power outage caused by a Toronto Hydro 
equipment failure at a Menkes managed property. 
As occupants did not have access to their emails and 
company servers were down, traditional tenant email 
notifications were not getting through to the occupants. 
However, the occupants were able to follow live updates 
about the power outage on the social media channels. 
These live updates were also critical during the April 23, 
2018 North York City Centre van attack, as occupants 
needed safety information, as well as information about 
road closures and building operating schedules.

“

Infrastructure Ontario / CBRE: Weather 
Service Predictor
To make provincial buildings more resilient to extreme 
weather, automated warnings based on forecasted 
weather and Environment Canada Public Weather 
Alerts go out to any impacted buildings within the 
Infrastructure Ontario portfolio. An extreme weather 
event may be a heavy snowfall, intense rain, high winds, 
or a period of  extreme heat or cold. A set of  prescriptive 
measures appropriate to the type of  weather event 
are sent to field staff. Measures can include validating 
building systems and supplies, communicating with staff 
and tenants, or checking building access points. Sending 
these alerts to field staff in advance of  the weather event 
allows them to take precautionary measures to mitigate 
risks of  incidents impacting the building.  

Infrastructure Ontario: Computer Rooms 
Flood Protection
In its Design Guidelines (which must be followed for the 
commissioning of  any building retrofit), Infrastructure 
Ontario specifies that water detection sensors should 
be installed under the raised floor of  a computer room, 
whenever air conditioners are being installed. If  flooding 
occurs, sensors will trigger the water leak detection 
alarm. The Building Automation System (BAS) sends 
alarm notifications, by email or other means, to the 
building operators/facility managers. The building 
operators can then decide what measures need to be 
taken to ensure occupant and building equipment safety. 

Menkes: Social Media Tenant Outreach 
Strategy
As a way to engage occupants in an influential way, 
Menkes departed from traditional CRE industry 
methods, such as posters and flyers, and used social 
media to form the basis of  its outreach strategy. Using 
platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram, 
Menkes leveraged its diversified social media presence  

30

Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real EstateSending these alerts to field staff in advance of the  weather event allows them to take precautionary measures to mitigate risks of incidents  impacting the building.”
