2.1.2 Equipment and Supplies

2.1.3 Major Retrofits

1.  Critical equipment and supplies: critical 
equipment and supplies are available onsite to 
respond to flood emergencies, such as reusable 
sandbags, submersible sump pumps, portable 
generators, fuel, portable lights, extension cords, air 
dryers, air moisture sensors, dehumidifiers, protective 
clothing, two-way radios, batteries and medical 
supplies. A satellite phone is available in the event of  
internet and cell tower outage.

2.  Portable flood barriers and sandbags: for 
buildings with critical operations, portable flood 
barriers and sandbags are available to protect the 
building from overland flooding.

3.  Back-up generation: onsite back-up generation 

equipment and fuel are available and have the 
capacity to provide electrical power to at least one 
elevator, all building sump pumps, heat pumps, 
boiler, smoke evacuation fans, fire sprinkler and fire 
alarm systems, stairwell pressurization system, and 
emergency lighting equipment for 24-72 hours.

4.  Emergency lighting: battery-operated emergency 

lighting is available in critical mechanical and 
electrical rooms, as well as in emergency exit 
stairwells for building evacuations, should back-up 
generation equipment malfunction. A process is in 
place to regularly test all battery-operated lighting 
and systems.

5.  Elevator water sensors: elevators are equipped 

with water sensors that prevent them from proceeding 
to flood-inundated building levels. 

6.  Backwater valves: backwater valves have been 

installed on storm and sanitary sewer pipes.

7.  Hazardous materials storage: hazardous 

materials are protected from flooding (e.g., chemicals 
used in building operations are stored in sealed 
containers, or in inflammable cabinets located above 
expected flood levels). Where hazardous materials are 
stored, floor drains are protected from spills.

While most measures below may be cost-prohibitive to 
implement post-construction, they may be warranted for 
critical sites, or during major building retrofits:
1.  Elevating and flood-proofing critical equipment: 

heating, cooling, ventilation, and air conditioning 
(HVAC) equipment; electrical transformers, switchgear 
and service panels, as well as communication systems 
are elevated above expected flood levels. If not feasible 
to elevate, these systems are flood-proofed (e.g., with 
equipment elevated off the ground and drains at the 
lowest points on the floor). 

2.  Protecting server rooms: server rooms are located 
on higher floors, preferably on a raised platform, with 
a sump pump installed at the lowest point. Water 
sensors are installed for leak detection.

3.  Protecting high-voltage and 

telecommunication pull rooms: high-voltage 
and telecommunication pull rooms are waterproofed 
and equipped with drainage.

4.  Isolating electrical circuits: for multi-level 

parkades, electrical circuits have been isolated for 
each parking level.

5.  Electrical panel upgrades: electrical panels are 
equipped with WIFI enabled breakers to allow for 
remote shut off.

It is also important to note how site design 
considerations can be critical for property-level flood-
resilience. For example, a major issue for CRE properties 
during flash flood events is overland water entering 
underground parking lots through intake and exhaust 
vents. Accordingly, when designing a new site, it is 
critical to elevate parking garage intakes and exhaust 
vents above grade and cover them with a canopy, where 
possible. Similarly, landscape design features such as 
berms, swales, rain gardens and permeable pavements 
can provide a range of  benefits, including flood 
attenuation, biodiversity improvements and aesthetic 
benefits. The SITES framework and certification system 
can guide landscape architects, designers, engineers, 
planners, developers and others to align land development 

20

Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate
