Table 1: Key Flood-Resilience Measures for Commercial Real Estate (Office Towers), Canada

Major Retrofits*
MR1. Elevating and flood-proofing 
critical equipment: heating, cooling, 
ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) 
equipment; electrical transformers, 
switchgear and service panels, as well as 
communication systems are elevated above 
expected flood levels. If  not feasible to 
elevate, these systems are flood-proofed (e.g., 
with equipment elevated off the ground and 
drains at the lowest points on the floor). 

MR2. Protecting server rooms: 
server rooms are located on higher floors, 
preferably on a raised platform, with a sump 
pump installed at the lowest point. Water 
sensors are installed for leak detection.

MR3. Protecting high-voltage and 
telecommunication pull rooms:  
high-voltage and telecommunication pull 
rooms are waterproofed and equipped  
with drainage.

MR4. Isolating electrical circuits: for 
multi-level parkades, electrical circuits have 
been isolated for each parking level.

MR5. Electrical panel upgrades: 
electrical panels are equipped with WIFI 
enabled breakers to allow for remote shut off.

Plans and Procedures
PP1. Emergency plans: emergency 
preparedness and response plans are in place 
and include flood event procedures.

PP2. Practice drills: building operations 
staff are trained on flood event procedures. 
Annually, practice drills are performed with 
tenants and procedures are updated as required. 

PP3. Emergency funds: dedicated funds are 
available for emergency operations, including 
flood events. Designated staff have access to 
both credit cards and sufficient amounts of  
cash to be used for emergency operations.

PP4. Tenant communication channels: 
tenant and stakeholder communication 
channels have been established for 
emergency situations, including flood events. 
Tenant contact details are regularly updated.

PP5. Emergency operations centres: 
designated space is available for building 
operations staff to use as emergency operations 
centres. This space is equipped with water, 
non-perishable food supplies and emergency 
kits and is located above expected flood levels.

PP6. Emergency response supply 
contracts: standing orders are in place with 
fuel suppliers, restoration and landscaping 
companies to provide goods and services at 
pre-arranged prices, under set terms and 
conditions, as required for flood events.

PP7. Emergency contact information: 
contact information of  risk management 
personnel, insurance adjusters and insurance 
brokers is maintained and current.

PP8. Insurance documentation: 
documentation to access business 
interruption insurance (e.g., financial 
statements, lease agreements and inventory 
counts) is regularly updated, backed-up 
electronically and stored offsite.

Equipment & Supplies
ES1. Critical equipment and supplies: 
critical equipment and supplies are available 
onsite to respond to flood emergencies, (e.g., 
sandbags, sump pumps, portable generators, 
fuel, portable lights, extension cords, 
dehumidifiers, protective clothing, etc.).

ES2. Portable flood barriers and 
sandbags: for buildings with critical 
operations (e.g., buildings housing data 
centers), portable flood barriers and 
sandbags are available to protect the building 
from overland flooding.

ES3. Back-up generation: onsite back-up 
generation equipment and fuel are available 
and have the capacity to provide electrical 
power to at least one elevator, all building 
sump pumps, heat pumps, boiler, smoke 
evacuation fans, fire sprinkler and fire alarm 
systems, stairwell pressurization systems, and 
emergency lighting equipment for 24-72 hours.

ES4. Emergency lighting: battery-
operated emergency lighting is available in 
critical mechanical and electrical rooms, 
as well as in emergency exit stairwells 
for building evacuations, should back-
up generation equipment malfunction. 
A process is in place to regularly test all 
battery-operated lighting and systems.

ES5. Elevator water sensors: elevators are 
equipped with water sensors that prevent them 
from proceeding to flood-inundated levels. 

ES6. Backwater valves: backwater valves 
have been installed on storm and sanitary 
sewer pipes.

ES7. Hazardous materials storage: 
hazardous materials are protected from 
flooding (e.g., chemicals used in building 
operations are stored in sealed containers, 
or in inflammable cabinets located above 
expected flood levels). Where hazardous 
materials are stored, floor drains are 
protected from spills.

*  These retrofits may be cost-prohibitive to implement post-construction, but they may be warranted for critical sites.

9

Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate
