 

Anticipatory or proactive adaptation: adaptations implemented before a climate change impact, in order to reduce or prevent 
an adverse effect.  
Reactive adaptation: adaptations implemented post a climate change impact, in order to reduce its adverse effect. 
Note: Since initial impacts of climate change may have already been observed in some sectors but more severe impacts are 
anticipated in future, many adaptations may be thought of as a combination of reactive and anticipatory. 
Private adaptation: adaptations that are initiated and implemented by individuals, households or private companies.  Private 
adaptation is usually in the actor’s rational self-interest. 
Public adaptation: adaptations that are initiated and implemented by governments.  Public adaptation is usually directed at 
collective needs.  
Autonomous or spontaneous adaptation: Adaptation that does not constitute a conscious response to climatic stimuli but is 
triggered in ecological changes in natural systems and by market or welfare changes in human systems.   
Planned adaptation: Adaptations that are the result of deliberate policy decision, based on an awareness that conditions have 
changed or are about to change, and that actions are required to return to, maintain, or achieve a desired state. 
 
 

(cid:131)  Typically, an adaptation or risk reduction 

strategy will comprise a portfolio of 
measures.  Together, these measures 
should offer a cost-effective means for 
reducing unacceptable risks to 
acceptable levels. 

(2)  Evaluate the adaptation or risk control 
options in terms of effectiveness, cost, 
residual risks and stakeholder acceptance. 
(cid:131)  Estimate the effectiveness of the 

(cid:131) 

proposed options using historical data 
and professional judgement.    
Identify and assess residual risk 
scenarios generated by the control 
option, which may result in other 
beneficial to adverse effects.  

(cid:131)  Communicate with stakeholders on 
potential control options in order to 
gauge their acceptance of risk controls 
and perceptions of residual risks. 
(cid:131)  Evaluate the risk control options in 

terms of: 
(cid:224)  Effectiveness in reducing losses or 
impacts or changing probabilities. 

(cid:224)  Implementation costs. 
(cid:224)  The needs, issues and concerns of 

affected stakeholders 

(cid:224)  The impact on other stakeholder 

interests. 

(3)  Develop the implementation plan for the 

adaptation or risk control measures: 
(cid:131)  Select the complement of adaptation or 
risk control options that will ensure that 
risks are reduced to acceptable levels in 
ways that optimize cost, efficiency, 
stakeholder and other considerations. 

 
 

 

22

 
 
(cid:131)  Consider structural measures such as , 
better roads or water systems and non-
structural measures such as public 
warning systems business continuity 
plans, land use planning measures and 
public education and awareness. 
(cid:131)  Determine the costs and benefits 

associated with the adaptation plan. 

(cid:131)  Determine how to finance the 

implementation and begin to try to 
secure financing. 

(cid:131)  Some criteria that could be useful in 
making these decisions are shown in 
the box below: 

(4)  Develop a risk communications plan related 

to residual risks 
(cid:131) 

In some instances, it may be prudent for 
municipalities to encourage private 
adaptations to further reduce residual 
risks.  For example, municipalities can 
encourage residents to keep valuables 
out of basements that may flood during 
a heavy precipitation event or use public 
transit to reduce smog.  The municipality 
can influence total losses from these 
types of events and also limit its own 
liability exposure. 

(5)  Update the risk information library 
Expected results and outputs 
•  Feasible risk control options identified 
•  Adaptation plan completed based on priority 

risks/hazards identified in earlier steps. 

•  Strategies for financing implementation of 

adaptation measures  

•  Risks and residual risks accepted by 

stakeholders.  


