another port city would benefit from the shift in 
traffic. 
The impact of lower water levels on the second 
community would be relatively minor and its 
shoreline is fairly steep and would still 
accommodate recreational boating and marinas.   
How each community perceives the risk and 
what kinds of actions will be needed on the part 
of decision-makers will depend upon the value 
placed on the impact of the changed water 
levels.  For the first community, huge amounts of 
resources will be needed to deepen the main 
shipping channel and the harbour facilities 
themselves.  This in turn may be very 
threatening to the marine ecosystems in the 
area.  For the second community, very little 
financial or environmental costs are anticipated. 
Even though both communities face the same 
risk of lowered water levels the first sees this as 
a major challenge which threatens the viability 
and economic well-being of its residents.  The 
second views it as a minor inconvenience.  Even 
though the probability associated with lowered 
water levels is the same, and the consequence 
of the potential loss is very different.   
The acceptability of the risk and how it can vary 
from one community to the next is not the same 
because the value placed on the potential loss 
can differ completely.  This is because the 
needs, issues, and concerns differ widely.  
Decision-makers often overlook or ignore these 
differences in perceived value and, as a result, 
many decisions create controversy. 
Risk Communications – How to Talk to 
People about Risks: 
General:  Risk communication goes beyond 
simple messages providing information.  It is 
based on a dialogue that allows stakeholders to 
participate in the decision-making process.   
Some reasons why providing information 
through simple public relations releases or one-
way public education are not useful strategies 
include: 
(a)  They will not reduce the conflict that will 

probably develop concerning a risk and what 
to do about it, 

(b)  Because people do not have the same 

ability to understand and relate to a 
particular risk, these strategies do not 
ensure that decisions will be easily 

 

understood and supported by stakeholders, 
and 

(c)  Providing people with scientific information 
alone will not enable them or the decision-
maker to resolve important risk issues. 
Not to communicate with stakeholders or to 
delay communicating about risk is not effective 
an effective strategy and may be very costly in 
the long term.  The reasons are that 
stakeholders resent risks that are imposed on 
them and risk decisions made without their 
input.  Most people believe that they have a right 
to be involved in the decisions that affect them 
and that the decision-making process should be 
accessible.  Involving stakeholders builds 
acceptance and can bring out constructive 
ideas.  Effectively communicating about risks is 
important.   
Effective Risk Communication:  Effective risk 
communication is the responsibility of the 
decision maker, not the stakeholder.  The most 
important benefits of an effective risk dialogue 
strategy are that it leads to shared 
understanding, shared goals and better 
decisions.  It builds trust and encourages buy-in 
by reducing misperceptions and improving the 
understanding of the science and technical 
aspects of the risk. 
On the other hand, ineffective risk 
communications may lead to some or all of the 
following: 
• 
•  Unnecessary, costly and possibly bitter and 

Irreplaceable loss of credibility,  

protracted debates and conflicts with 
stakeholders,  

•  Difficult and expensive approval processes 

for projects, 

•  Diversion of management attention from 

important problems to less important 
problems, 

•  Non-supportive and critical co-workers and 

employees, and  

•  Unnecessary human suffering due to high 

levels of anxiety and fear. 

Credibility:  Credibility, being seen by 
stakeholders as trustworthy and competent, is a 
key goal.  The characteristics of credibility 
include candour, commitment, competence, 
dedication, empathy, honesty, resolve, respect, 
and understanding.  Credible messages must be 
based on known facts and with previous 

 

35


