What to do and how to do it? 
(1)  Develop risk scenarios based on the 

hazards and vulnerabilities identified in 
Step 1. 
(cid:131)  Develop scenarios based on a 

sequence of events caused by the 
climate-related hazard that might result 
in adverse effects.   

(cid:131)  Each risk scenarios will be developed or 
expanded to show the types of losses or 
impacts that could occur as a result of 
exposure to the hazard.  Losses could 
include: 
(cid:224)  Health losses due to illness, 
(cid:224)  Injury or death,  
(cid:224)  Property losses,  
(cid:224)  Economic losses and  
(cid:224)  Environmental or ecosystem losses or 

impairment. 

A “fault tree” or “event tree” or similar 
type of analysis mechanism could be 
useful in developing the risk scenarios. 
(cid:131)  The risk scenarios will form the basis for 

more detailed risk estimations and 
evaluations in Steps 3 and 4. 

(2)  Collect data and identify the project baseline 

(cid:131)  Review existing information on current 
vulnerability and climate-related risks, 
based on previous studies and 
experiences and expert opinion.  

(cid:131)  Describe risk controls currently in place 
to manage the specific climate-related 
risks being considered and describe 
their effectiveness and any gaps. 

(cid:131)  Develop a project and risk baseline that 
summarizes the current level of risk with 
respect to recent historical and current 
climate variability.   

(cid:131)  Risks related to climate change will be 

compared later against current or 
baseline risks in order to evaluate the 
need for and benefit of additional risk 
controls. 

(3)  Assign initial estimates of frequency and 

severity to the risk scenarios.  Useful 
information may be found in historical 
records and by consulting with subject 
matter experts to help develop these initial 
estimates. 

 

(4)  Continue the stakeholder analysis 

(cid:131)  Now that there is more information on 
the potential risk issues, identify any 
additional stakeholders that should be 
involved.   

(cid:131)  Refine the analysis of stakeholders’ 

needs, interests and concerns.  

(cid:131)  Engage key stakeholders in the risk 

management process, if you have not 
done so already. 

(cid:131)  Compile a database of all stakeholders 

that includes their contact information 
and the results of your stakeholder 
analysis.  Update the database 
throughout the process. 

(5)  Outline the risk communication plan and 

initiate risk communications with 
stakeholders 

(6)  Update the risk information library: 

(cid:131)  Organize all information collected 
throughout the risk management 
process in a risk information library.  
The library will be the central repository 
for all information, assumptions, 
concerns, decisions and changes made 
throughout the process. 

(cid:131)  The library should include: 

(cid:224)  Baseline data and information on the 

hazards or trends; 

(cid:224)  Roles and responsibilities of the risk 

management team; 

(cid:224)  Identification of decision-makers, and 

scope of decisions to be made; 

(cid:224)  Complete descriptions of the risk 

scenarios; 

(cid:224)  All stakeholder information, including 

minutes of stakeholder meetings or 
other records of stakeholder 
communications; 

(cid:224)  Record of all decisions and 

assumptions 

(cid:131)  Record the source of the information 
and the date it was collected, and any 
weaknesses in the data 
Expected results and outputs 
•  Risk scenarios are developed and a 

preliminary analysis is completed for each, 
showing potential losses 

•  Baseline information has been collected, or 
plans in place to collect additional baseline 
information 

 

11


