comfortable with the data, assumptions and 
outcomes of the risk estimation process. 

Checklist 
Risk estimation 
 
 
 

1.  Are you satisfied with the quality of your data? 
2.  Have you analyzed and assigned appropriate 

levels of frequency to each risk scenario? 

 

 

 

 

3.  Have you calculated the expected loss or other 

consequences from each risk scenario? 
4.  Are you comfortable that stakeholders’ 

perceptions have been assessed for each of 
the risk scenarios?  Have stakeholders 
endorsed your analysis? 

5.  Has the process been carefully documented 

and the risk information library updated with all 
relevant information? 

Example: 
FLASH FLOODS IN URBAN/SUBURBAN AREAS and RELATED SOURCE WATER QUALITY 
PROTECTION 
Risk scenarios and impacts. 
Climate Factors: 

Risk Scenarios -  

Stakeholders 

(Hazards) 
1.  Trend towards 
greater short duration 
(<24 hr) heavy rains, 
especially in Spring 
and early Summer  
(See Annex 1) 
 

Aspects of Hazards and Risks to Community 

The following hazards and risks from this change in climate 
were identified. 
a)  Greater possibility and frequency of flooding beyond 
previously designated flood plains – exacerbated by 
upstream development in watersheds:  Public/private 
property loss increases, greater threat to life. 
(especially children/elderly) 

b)  Capacity of culverts and storm sewer systems more 

frequently exceeded:  road damage, bridge washouts, 
underpass and basement flooding, increased repair 
bills and insurance costs 

c)  Water pollution incidents from increased erosion, with 

attached pollutants to eroded particles and polluted 
runoff (chemicals, E-coli) as well as pollution from 
storm sewer overflows, into sanitary systems, and 
overflow of hazardous waste sites.  All lead to 
compromise of potable water availability. 

d)  Power and telephone lines downed more frequently 
requiring repair, replacement: reduced social contact 
and business. 

e)  Flooding of work places:  temporary or perhaps 

permanent loss of livelihood. 

f)  Persons displaced to public or private shelters more 

frequently – if public shelters adequate. 

g)  More frequent loss of crops and livestock and greater 

soil losses from erosion in agricultural lands near 
streams. 

h)  More rapid silting of downstream river beds, reservoirs 

i) 

and deltas, compromising fish habitat and reducing 
channel capacity 
Land slides more frequent on unstable slopes with 
insufficient vegetation or protection – identify 
hazardous slopes. 

 

Conservation authorities – near-
flood plain property owners, public 
and private – emergency managers 
– media. 

Transportation department – traffic 
police – public works dept., 
insurance – building owners 
susceptible to sewer backup – 
media  
Municipal water dept. and water 
treatment facilities, drinking water 
and water recreation warnings – 
media – general public 

Electricity and telephone suppliers – 
media – public 

Business recovery planners – 
unemployment insurance managers 
Hotels, B&B’s, etc. – municipal 
building operators. 
Farmers in affected areas 

Conservation authority – municipal 
works departments – fish and 
wildlife associations 
Property owner (private/public) in 
anticipated hazardous lands – 
municipal works and heavy 
equipment operators 
 

2.  More rapid snow 
and ice melt in spring 
combined with 
heavier rains 

As above, but greater threat of ice jams and ponding of 
water upstream of bridges and other obstructions. 

 

 

16


