 

most models suggest increasing evaporation 
losses especially from the large Upper Lakes 
(Superior-Huron-Michigan) and little precipitation 
change, at least one (Hadley Centre 2) 2 
suggests considerably more precipitation over 
the basin (although the Hadley Centre 3 model 
results are drier and close to other model 
outcomes).  Thus, the majority of models 
indicate a significant lowering of lake levels 
(Mortsch et al., 2000).  For the Canadian model, 
these declines would be by 2050, 0.3m for Lake 
Superior, 1m for Huron, 0.8m for Erie and 0.5m 
for Ontario.  These declines would result in a 
loss of 1.3m water depth in Montreal Harbour on 
the St. Lawrence.  A drop in Harbour water 
levels of only 30cm in the 1988-91 period 
resulted in a 15% reduction in tonnage handled.  
Recently experienced falls in lake levels (except 
on Lake Ontario), but with levels still slightly 
above long term record lows, indicate the 
concerns that continuing lower levels and flows 
would bring.  Commercial shipping would be 
hampered not only in Montreal harbour.  For a 
2.5cm lowering of Lakes Michigan-Huron a 
cargo ship must reduce loads by 90 to 115 
tonnes worth some $25,000US per trip.  
Hydropower production at Niagara and on the 
St. Lawrence would be reduced, losses were 
19% and 26% of production respectively in the 
1960s low water period.  Dredging of channels 
would be costly and would stir up contaminated 
sediments.  On the other hand, shore property 
owners would inherit more land – e.g. a 1.6m 
water level decline on shallow Lake St. Clair 
would displace the shoreline by 1 to 6 km. 
(Mortsch et al. 2000, Mortsch 1998). 
Groundwater and Tributary Water Supplies: 
With warmer summers, both water demand from 
groundwater and tributary rivers to the Great 
Lakes system, like the Grand and Ottawa, are 
increasing for both consumptive and recreational 
uses.  Trends to date in streamflow and water 
levels have been mixed with some streams 
showing declines in low flows and others, small 
increases.  Groundwater provides 50% of Great 
Lakes tributary streamflow in Ontario, and 90% 
of rural residents use ground water for domestic 
purposes.  Projections to 2050 with the 
Canadian GCM output suggest a 19% drop in 
                                                      
2  The Hadley Centre was established by the UK 
and well endowed to become one of the world’s 
leading climate change modelling and climate 
studies institutes. 

 

28

groundwater levels and their contribution of base 
flow or minimum flows to streams. (Piggott 
2005). 
More Intense Rains: 
There is increasing evidence of increases in 
heavier short duration (24 hour or less) rain 
events in southern Ontario, since 1970 
(Adamowski 2003, Stone 2001). The Canadian 
climate model, and other models, have been 
used to project future trends in high intensity 
rains. (Kharin and Zweirs 2000)  Table 2 
summarizes the average trends in the amount of 
the annual maximum rain events. This suggests 
that the approximately 5% per decade increase 
in 24 hour amounts observed over the past three 
decades may continue in future decades. 
Recent extreme rain intensities in North Toronto 
19 August 2005, Peterborough, July 2004, and 
northern Grand River basin June 13-14, 2004, 
suggest there may be even more rapid trends 
towards increasing magnitude of heavy rain 
events in isolated storms. 
Such high intensity events have important 
implication for drainage design, storm water 
management systems, soil erosion and polluted 
runoff from croplands and animal wastes. The 
Soil and Water Conservation Society (2003), 
has used data from runoff plots and small 
watersheds, with a range of soil types, slopes 
and vegetation, to estimate impacts on erosion 
rates and runoff of increases in rain intensities. 
To illustrate a 10% increase in rain due to 
intensity changes resulted in an average 24% 
increase in erosion and 25% increase in runoff.   
Urban Air Pollution: 
Smog episodes will be longer and more intense 
in this region.  An estimated 1900 premature 
deaths and many hospital emissions per year 
occur at present in Ontario from smog and air 
pollution. More intense and prolonged heat 
waves in future will make this an even more 
serious public health issue, when both air 
pollution and high heat stress affect vulnerable 
populations of asthmatics and the elderly.  
Remedial actions are urgent. These can be 
approached by various adaptation measures.  In 
addition, by reducing dependency on fossil fuels, 
both local air pollutants and contributions to 
greenhouse gas forcing of climate can be 
reduced at the same time. 


