 

•  Risk information library updated. 
Decision 
•  End if there are no feasible adaptation 

options. 

•  Go back if: 

(cid:131)  Adequate data are not available for 
evaluating the cost-effectiveness of 
potential risk controls. 

(cid:131)  Key stakeholders have not been 

consulted. 

(cid:131)  Assumptions and uncertainties 

associated with estimates are not 
acceptable to stakeholders, or 

(cid:131)  New risks will be introduced if the 

proposed control options are 
implemented. 

•  Proceed to the Next Step if: 

(cid:131)  Feasible adaptation or risk control 

options are defined and can be 
implemented. 

(cid:131)  Proposed actions are feasible from a 

cost and effectiveness perspective and 
are acceptable to stakeholders, and 

(cid:131)  Residual risks are acceptable to 

stakeholders. 

Checklist 
Adaptation and risk control 
Have you: 
 

1. 

Identified and evaluated feasible adaptation 
or risk control options, in terms of costs, 
effectiveness, stakeholder acceptance and 
other criteria? 

2.  Selected the complement of adaptation or 
risk control options that best reduce risks to 
acceptable levels? 

3.  Determined the costs and benefits of the risk 
control measures, and a means for financing 
them? 

4.  Assessed and addressed any outstanding 

stakeholder concerns? 

 

 

 

 

 

5.  Developed a risk communication plan for the 

proposed adaptation or risk control 
measures and for the residual risks? 

6.  Ensured that the risk information library is 

updated? 

 
Example  
(This example was developed based on a health 
risk related to worsening urban smog.) 

 

23

The risk management team concluded that the 
health risks are unacceptable from the combined 
effects of warmer summers, especially night-
time temperatures that are rising more rapidly 
than day-time highs, thus providing little relief to 
sufferers in heat waves and increasingly 
frequent smog events.  
The team identified many feasible adaptation 
measures or risk control options that could be 
implemented in the near-term and over the 
longer-term. The team evaluated the options 
and recommended the following portfolio of 
controls for implementation: 
Immediate: 
•  Policy measures (e.g. incentives to promote 

public transit and reduce vehicle use) and 
operational changes (e.g. cancel non-
essential municipal operations) to help 
reduce the severity of smog events;   

•  Public education and outreach to ensure 

that vulnerable populations are informed of 
the health risks and appropriate responses; 
and 

•  Ensure that hospitals and clinics are 

equipped to cope with large admission 
events.   

•  Business continuity plans for key municipal 

organizations are important adaptation 
measures in this situation. 

Over a longer period: 
•  Plan new land uses and developments to 
promote the “compact urban form” and the 
use of public transit;  

•  Retrofit programs for public transportation 

systems; 

•  Develop short-term emission limitation 

actions; and  

•  Advocate for stronger responses to urban air 
pollution and greenhouse gas emissions by 
higher levels of government and 
international agreements. 

The team concluded that these responses 
balanced the need to reduce the frequency or 
severity of the events, but also to limit the health 
effects from events that do occur.  The near-
term measures were determined to be low-cost, 
voluntary and publicly acceptable measures that 
will result in an immediate reduction in health 
impacts and health care costs.  The land-use 
and development planning recommendation is in 


