Risk information library – a collection of all 
information developed through the risk 
management process. This includes information 
on the risks, decisions, stakeholder views, 
meetings and other information that may be of 
value. 
Risk management – the systematic application 
of management policies, procedures, and 
practices to the tasks of analysing, evaluating, 
controlling, and communicating about risk 
issues. 
Risk perception – the significance assigned to 
risks by stakeholders. This perception is derived 
from the stakeholders' expressed needs, issues, 
and concerns. 
Risk scenario – a defined sequence of events 
with an associated frequency and 
consequences. 
Stakeholder – any individual, group, or 
organisation able to affect, be affected by, or 
believe it might be affected by, a decision or 
activity.  The decision-makers are also 
stakeholders. 
Stakeholder analysis – Identification of 
individuals or groups who are likely to have an 
interest in the risk management issue including 
a consideration of what their needs issues and 
concerns would be and how the stakeholder 
should be included in the process. 
TAR – Third Assessment Report of the IPCC 
UNFCCC – United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (1992) 
Vulnerability – the degree to which a system is 
susceptible to, or unable to cope with, adverse 
effects of climate change, including climate 
variability and extremes.  Vulnerability is the 
function of the character, magnitude, and rate of 
climate variation to which a system is exposed, 
its sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity. (Climate 
Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation and 
Vulnerability. IPCC TAR, 2001) 

Loss – an injury or damage to health, property, 
the environment, or something else of value. 
Organization – a company, corporation, firm, 
enterprise, or institution, or part thereof, whether 
incorporated or not, public or private, that has its 
own functions and administration. 
Residual risk – the risk remaining after all risk 
control strategies have been applied. 
Risk – the chance of injury or loss as defined as 
a measure of the probability and severity of an 
adverse effect to health, property, the 
environment, or other things of value. 
Risk analysis – the systematic use of 
information to identify hazards and to estimate 
the chance for, and severity of, injury or loss to 
individuals or populations, property, the 
environment, or other things of value. 
Risk assessment – the overall process of risk 
analysis and risk evaluation. 
Risk communication – any two-way 
communication between stakeholders about the 
existence, nature, form, severity, or acceptability 
of risks. 
Risk control option – an action intended to 
reduce the frequency and/or severity of injury or 
loss, including a decision not to pursue the 
activity. 
Risk control strategy – a program which may 
include the application of several risk control 
options. 
Risk estimation – the activity of estimating the 
frequency or probability and consequence of risk 
scenarios, including a consideration of the 
uncertainty of the estimates. 
Risk evaluation – the process by which risks 
are examined in terms of costs and benefits, and 
evaluated in terms of acceptability of risk 
considering the needs, issues, and concerns of 
stakeholders. 

 

 

 

39


