 

Annex 2:  Introducing Adaptation to Climate Change to Local 
Authorities 
 
1.  The municipal institutional 

context 

Municipal and conservation authority staffs are 
accustomed to dealing with climate-related 
issues in the course of their planning and 
management activities.  For example, they 
manage water supplies, design drainage 
systems and flood protection, design and 
implement heat and smog alert systems, and 
control mosquitoes and other disease vectors.   
But dealing with climate change is new and may 
be unfamiliar. Because it is a relatively new 
subject, the implications of climate change are 
not well understood across departments in many 
municipalities.  As yet, there are few staff 
appointments explicitly responsible for adapting 
to climate change.  Most municipal strategic or 
long-range plans do not address adaptation to 
climate change and it can be difficult to get it on 
the municipal agenda.   
In Ontario the provincial government has 
provided and a number of laws and policies 
which, although they may not reference climate 
change and adaptation directly, make strong 
provisions for dealing with risks to municipal 
infrastructure and the health, safety and 
environmental protection of their residents to 
create a strong and justifiable case for 
adaptation planning in a number of key areas.  
The same principles apply in general to the 
Conservation Authorities. 
Similarly the “duty of care” incumbent upon 
municipalities could add weight to the argument 
that a municipality might be held liable for failing 
to consider the implications of climate change 
where such failure could increase the risk to its 
citizens.   
Another prominent problem facing municipalities 
is that it is extremely difficult to attend to issues 
that do not have an immediate impact on 
municipal operations.  Sometimes, in order to 
pursue a new initiative, such as a climate 
change risk management initiative, municipal 
staff have to establish that it should have a 
priority over or at least equal to an existing 
responsibility.  This would require a strong 
business case and a business plan for approval 

 

31

by senior management.  This in itself may create 
a work issue for staff.   
2.  Policy and operational 

responsibilities 

In Ontario there is however a strong policy 
foundation to manage risks associated with 
climate change: 
•  The Ontario Municipal Act (2001) assigns 

broad authority and accountability to 
municipalities in ten spheres of local 
jurisdiction, including four that are directly 
affected by and related to climate change:   
(cid:131)  Public utilities, 
(cid:131)  Culture, parks, recreation and heritage, 
(cid:131)  Structures, and 
(cid:131)  Economic development services.   
•  The Provincial Policy Statement (2005) 

provides the policy foundation for 
development that supports and integrates 
the principles of strong communities, a clean 
and healthy environment and economic 
growth.  The statements quoted below 
provide a strong rationale for incorporating 
climate change adaptation strategies into 
long-term or strategic development plans 
related to them: 
(cid:131) 

“A coordinated, integrated and 
comprehensive approach should be 
used when dealing with planning 
matters within municipalities…” (p. 7) 
“Planning for sewage and water 
services shall…ensure that these 
systems are provided in a manner that 
1) can be sustained by the water 
resources upon which such services 
rely; … and 3) protects human health 
and the natural environment.” (p. 10) 
“Long-term economic prosperity should 
be supported by … planning so that 
major facilities and sensitive land uses 
are appropriately designed…to prevent 
adverse effects…and to minimize risk to 
public health and safety.” (p. 13) 
“Planning authorities shall support … 
improved air quality through land use 
and development patterns which 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 


