•  Smog episode with high ozone and 

particulate concentrations. 

•  Possible degradation of water quality.  
•  High possibility of violent thunderstorms and 

strong winds. 

Risk Issues: 
•  Extreme rainfall could cause local flooding, 
washouts, possibly overwhelm the sewage 
treatment plant, surface runoff could 
significantly degrade the quality of water 
intake into the water treatment plant. 

•  Possible electrical power outage. 
•  Additional health problems including 

additional heat stress cases, possible illness 
due to lowered air and water quality would 
have to be handled by the public health 
system that is already under extreme 
pressure. 

•  Potential wind damage. 
Project Team.  The project team would likely be 
headed by a staff member of the emergency 
management group and would include 
representatives of the key affected municipal 
departments such as: public works, public 
health, social services, utilities and 
transportation.  The team could also have 
representatives from other groups such as; an 
elected representative, conservation authority, 
land use planning, environmental planning, 
emergency services (police, fire, ambulance), 
school boards, corporate communications, 
clerical staff and others.  The team leader would 
identify a contact within the municipal 
government for legal advice should that be 
required during the process. 
The team would refresh its understanding of the 
risk management process and ensure that all 
members have appropriate reference material 
about the process. 
Initial Stakeholder Identification and Probable 
Issues Concerns and Needs.   Elderly and very 
young persons with compromised health 
conditions, emergency services, energy sector, 
public works, utilities (including telecom 
providers, electrical suppliers, water and 
wastewater treatment services), roads and 
transportation departments. food distributors, 
social services, NGOs, schools and the 
business sectors. 
Existing Capacity 
•  Staff of five 

 

•  Office space 
• 
IT resources 
Needed Resources 
•  Disseminate information to peers and within 

organization 

•  Newsletter, briefing sessions 
•  Brainstorming sessions 
•  Key stakeholder group briefings and 

question and answer sessions 

•  Corporate communications to develop 

communication strategy and identify means 
to get key messages out. 

Documentation 
This would include for storage in risk information 
library. 

•  Terms of reference for project 
•  List of project team members and 

alternatives, their coordinates and other 
useful information 

•  Lists of hazards and vulnerabilities and 

copies of key documents about them. 

•  Records of any meetings held. 
• 

Initial list of stakeholders including 
contact information and notes on 
probable concerns and issues. 

•  Copies of other documents used or 

created. 

 
DECISION:  GO TO NEXT STEP 
(End of example for Step 1) 
 

STEP 2: Preliminary Analysis 
 
Purpose 
•  To define the climate-related hazard and the 

potential risks that may cause harm, in 
terms of injury, damage to property, the 
environment or monetary losses to the 
community. 

•  To identify possible outcomes from the risk 

situation. 

•  To conduct a quick overview of the process 

to help determine the complexity of the 
project, the probable time-frame for 
completing the work and a sense for 
whether the project team and resources 
assigned are sufficient. 

 

10


