 

In general, there are relatively few staff in any 
given municipality that are well-versed on the 
climate change issue, so it can be difficult to 
mobilize and maintain support for an adaptation 
initiative.  Workshop participants emphasized 
the importance of engaging and educating 
council, staff and the general public, and of 
demonstrating the links between adaptation and 
existing responsibilities. 
A risk management process should generally be 
initiated (and subsequently delivered) through 
existing interdepartmental networks.  Staff could 
look to external partners, such as their 
conservation authority partner or a local non-
governmental organization, to help compile the 
information required for a winning business plan 
and establish the initiative as a legitimate 
priority.  Staff might also refer to information 
from this Guide, especially from Annex I which 
summarizes observed and projected climate 
changes and risk issues for Ontario, as they 
prepare a business plan.  The business plan 
should link risk issues to established corporate 
goals, community values, significant aspects 
identified in a municipality’s Environmental 
Management System (if there is one) and any 
other plans or established priorities.  
Environmental psychologists have observed a 
“crisis effect”, which indicates that attention to a 
crisis is greatest during and immediately 
following a crisis event, but drops to very low 
levels between crisis events.  The phenomenon, 
which seems common across society, creates 
windows of opportunity for advancing risk 
management objectives.   For example, 
following the summer 2005 heavy rain events 
that afflicted several southern Ontario 
communities and caused an estimated $400 
million in damages, the City of Hamilton city 
council appointed an expert panel to examine 
how to prevent or reduce damaging floods.

Climate change impacts across many areas, 
and successful adaptation requires a 
coordinated, multi-dimensional response that 
can not likely be implemented by a single 
department.  Some municipalities have 
established the important role of “bridge-builder”.  
Bridge-builders3 build networks across 
departments and external organizations in order 
to draw together the stakeholders and expertise 
to tackle various issues.  They are critically 
important people in efforts to initiate and sustain 
successful adaptation to climate change. 
Governance conflicts may arise in two-tiered 
municipalities.  Responsibilities may lie with the 
upper-tier government, but potential impacts 
may occur at the lower-tier level.  Effective 
working relationships, shared objectives and a 
conscious effort to streamline governance and 
avoid duplicated efforts are necessary in order 
to avoid conflicts and inefficiencies.  In the case 
of emergency management, additional issues In 
the case of emergency management, additional 
issues may arise when local emergencies 
escalate into regional emergencies. 
4.  The challenge of getting started 
Ontario municipalities commonly share the 
following attributes that hinder efforts to initiate 
climate change risk management initiatives: 
•  Few or no surplus people or other resources 

for pursuing the climate change issue; 

•  Limited understanding of climate change 

across relevant departments; and 

•  Tendency to attend to crises during or 
immediately after a crisis event, but not 
between events. 

Many municipal staff are fully occupied with 
existing responsibilities so it can be very difficult 
to attend to new issues.  In order to pursue a 
new initiative, such as a climate change risk 
management initiative, they need to establish it 
as a priority over, and thereby displace an 
existing responsibility.  To do so, staff would 
typically need to prepare and present a strong 
business case and business plan for approval by 
a senior management team.  However, with little 
or no time to dedicate to preparing a business 
plan, doing so can be a challenge.  It is a classic 
chicken and egg problem.   
                                                      
3 Bridge-builders’ role titles may vary across 
municipalities.  Two municipal participants, a Director 
of environmental policy and a Manager, Sustainability 
Projects, self-identified as bridge-builders.  

 

33


