statements.  They should be framed in 
stakeholder terms, not self-serving language or 
jargon, and be consistent with the messages of 
others.  Credibility is very difficult to establish, 
easy to lose and almost impossible to regain 
once lost.  For this reason some specialised 
training in risk communications is recommended 
prior to initiating the risk management process. 
Stakeholders:   It can be extremely important to 
include even minor stakeholders in the process 
if these stakeholders believe that the outcome of 
the decision is important to them.  These "minor" 
players may be much more influential than the 
risk management team anticipates.  Even a 
small group of stakeholders may effectively 
mobilize public opinion and halt or delay an 
activity they feel presents an unacceptable risk.   

For example, a local environmental 
group rallied to stop greenhouse gas 
collection project being built because 
they believed the facility could worsen 
the community’s air pollution problem.  
Even though the risk was very small 
from a technical point of view the 
environmental group believed that it was 
still unacceptable.  Because the 
company sponsoring the project failed to 
address these specific concerns and 
even though all the other key 
stakeholders supported the project, this 
small group effectively mobilized public 
opinion against it.  The company, after 
spending a large amount of time, effort, 
and money, was forced to withdraw its 
permit request.   

It is important that stakeholders with the 
potential to stop a project be identified as early 
in the process as possible. 
Regardless of whether stakeholders might 
actually be affected by an activity or decision, 
they must be included as legitimate stakeholders 
if they believe themselves to be affected. These 
stakeholders may be able to mobilize public 
opinion against a proposed project regardless of 
the scientific risk.  They may also choose to 
leave the decision process if they receive 
enough credible information to understand that 
the activity really does not affect them. 

For example, in the greenhouse gas 
collection project described above, if the 
company had analysed the 
environmental groups’ concerns it would 

 

have found that their information was 
based on a number of misconceptions 
related to some technical and social 
aspects of the activity.  Through a 
dialogue process, the concerns of the 
environmental group were addressed, 
and the misconceptions about the 
technical issues were corrected. As a 
result the group’s concerns were 
alleviated and the project went ahead.  

This stresses the need for an effective 
communication process to facilitate this transfer 
of information between the decision-maker and 
other stakeholders. 
It is important that the risk management team 
clearly decides what the stakeholders’ needs, 
issues and concerns are before proceeding with 
a stakeholder dialogue.  There are numerous 
examples of decision-makers addressing the 
wrong issue.  

For example, again in the greenhouse 
gas collection project when the 
company carefully analysed the 
environmental groups’ concerns they 
believed that the key issue for the group 
would be emissions from the project.  
However, through a careful dialogue 
with the group the company also found 
out that a secondary issue was related 
to transportation.  The group thought 
that the new GHG collection facility, 
because it was the first the region, 
would result in a dramatic increase 
tourist traffic that would create a risk for 
their children.  Once this and the 
emissions issues were addressed, the 
stakeholders were satisfied. 

Trust:  Stakeholders often believe that the 
process of communicating with them about an 
issue is as important as the eventual resolution 
of the issue.  It is through the dialogue process 
that the risk management team has the 
opportunity to gain stakeholders' trust.  If the risk 
management team fails to communicate to the 
satisfaction of the stakeholders, trust in the 
process could be quickly lost.  
Research in the area of stakeholder perception 
has shown that "trust" is a key determinant of 
stakeholders' acceptance of risk. That is, if 
stakeholders trust those who are charged with 
managing the risk, they are more accepting of 
higher levels of risk. Where this trust is absent, 

 

36


