 

Example 
FLASH FLOODS IN URBAN/SUBURBAN 
AREAS AND RELATED SOURCE WATER 
QUALITY PROTECTION (example continued 
from Step 3) 
Data and information needs for estimation.  Key 
needs are: 
•  Current flood plain maps and period of data 

upon which they were based and culverts 
design size 

•  Designated hazardous lands 
•  Changes in heavy rain frequency and 

severity to date and projected for 3 to 4 
decades (see Annex 1 for estimates) 

•  Determination of frequency of threshold rain 

intensities for producing peak floods and 
overflows, now and projected for 4 decades 
•  Review very recent 2003 to 2006 incidents 
of extreme rainfalls in southern Ontario and 
assess ability of water treatment facility to 
cope with greater suspended sediment and 
accompanying chemical and pathogen 
pollution. 

•  Obtain weather radar date to augment 

station rainfall date (from Meteorological 
Service Canada) 

•  Determine seasonality of changes in intense 

• 

rains 
Inventory of properties at risk and values 
now and within 4 decades and projected 
economic losses and numbers of people 
displaced 

•  Determine current rates of siltation and 

project to future 

•  Assess frequency and severity in past 

decade of degraded water quality due to 
flood flows, and projected for 4 decades 
•  Estimates of costs to extend flood plain 

designations, and increase culvert sizes and 
storm drainage capacities 

This information when collected and analyzed 
would determine frequency and severity of 
events. 
Based on information available to team and 
trends of frequency and intensity, the following 
Risk Evaluation table was developed as shown 
below (note:  See the frequency and 
consequence tables in the example in the 
previous step.  Only the flooding beyond the 
designated floodplains and the exceeding 
culvert and drainage system risks were 
illustrated there.  For this example the remainder 

 

20

of the risks were also included to illustrate how 
the risks could be ranked.) 
These ratings combine the completed tables 3-1 
and 3-2 in the previous section on step 3.  
Consequences assessment or “severity of 
impacts” was based upon a subjective review of 
the Social, Economic and Environmental 
Factors, discussed in Step 2.  It is considered 
that additional loss of life is unlikely unless 
systems in place fail. (e.g. Walkerton water 
supplies or flood warnings) 
Decision 
A dialogue with stakeholders, after completing 
these analyses was considered to be needed 
before moving to Step 5 – Risk Controls and 
Adaptative Decisions.  However some cost 
effective potentially “win-win” adaptation 
measures could be suggested with present 
information. 
These include: 
1.  Update flood-plain mapping 
2.  Ensure fail-safe potable water treatment and 

improve water quality advisories 

3.  Strengthen flood warning systems 
4.  Revise design standards for new drainage 

and storm management facilities 

5.  Re-visit operation plans for upstream dams 
6.  Put in place water intake and well-head 
protection measures for water supplies 
Improve public and stakeholder education 
programs. 

7. 

The team reviewed the check-list for Step 4 and 
concluded: 
1.  They were not satisfied that they had all of 

the data needed for identifying potential 
adaptation measures. 

2.  With available data, levels of frequency and 

consequences could only be roughly 
estimated. 

3.  Levels of risk have been identified 
qualitatively but not quantitatively. 

4.  Stakeholder consultations were not done 

and are urgent. 

5.  Relevant available information was 

recorded. 

DECISION:  REPEAT STEP 4 AND OBTAIN 
BETTER DATA. 
 


