•  Baseline should address the circumstance 

or the time – in this case, temperature 
escalation has already taken place and the 
next emergency will now be added to 
response exposure 
Stakeholder Database.   
• 

Internal Stakeholders (key stakeholders are 
represented on the risk management team, 
others are linked through a risk 
communications dialogue.  These groups 
are particularly important when risk controls 
are considered) 
(cid:131)  Emergency services 
(cid:131)  Water utilities 
(cid:131)  Electrical utilities 
(cid:131)  Telecommunications 
(cid:131)  Hospitals and other health services 
(cid:131)  Public health 
(cid:131)  Roads and transportation 
(cid:131)  Land use planning 
(cid:131)  Social services 
(cid:131)  Others 

•  External Stakeholders (these include 

residents, community groups and others 
who may be or may feel that they are 
impacted by the risk scenarios) 
(cid:131)  Vulnerable individuals including the 

elderly and health impaired  

(cid:131)  Business and industrial groups,  
(cid:131)  Religious groups 
(cid:131)  Schools and youth groups 
(cid:131) 
(cid:131)  Others 

Insurance industry 

Stakeholder Analysis 
•  All information regarding needs, etc. or 

stakeholders – are they cooperative? 
Supportive? what are their attitudes? what 
are the special needs of each particular 
group? any who can help? resources?  In 
addition, an analysis should be done of how 
to best contact and engage each 
stakeholder group, develop a database of 
contact information and keep this 
information current. 

Risk Information Library.  Make and keep 
separate copies of all key information about the 
risk scenarios, baseline data on each risk, 
stakeholder information and communications 
plans. 
DECISION:  GO TO NEXT STEP 

 

13

 

(End of example for Step 2) 

STEP 3: Risk Estimation 
 
Purpose 
•  To identify the frequencies and 

consequences associated with each of the 
risk scenarios1.   
 

What to do and how to do it? 
(1)  Select methods for estimating frequency and 

severity: 
(cid:131)  Consider using historical records to 

determine trends of climate events and 
impacts, technical data and projections 
from the IPCC or from provincial or 
federal governments, and  

(cid:131)  Expert opinions.   

(2)  Estimate the frequency or likelihood of 

possible outcomes** 
(cid:131)  For familiar hazard and risk issues, 

estimates can typically be derived from 
historical data.  Look for data and 
information in research reports, 
insurance company records.  Look also 
at data and information from similar risk 
situations in other regions or countries.   
(cid:131)  Use sensitivity-type analyses, technical 

projections, expert judgment or other 
practicable and credible methods to put 
some boundaries or estimate of 
uncertainty on the projection of the 
frequency of the outcomes. 

(cid:131)  A simple four or five tier comparative 
rating system (such as a scale from 
“occurs very often” to “occurs almost 
never”) is useful for assessing the 
relative frequency of risk scenarios.  For 
climate change assessments, risks 
should be estimated for current 
conditions and say 2020, or for major 
projects, 2050. 

 

                                                      
1 Further information about the technical aspects 
of risk estimation can be found in CSA Standard 
CAN/CSA-Q634.   


