 

1.  Introduction 

 

Global climate change is widely recognized as 
one of the world’s greatest environmental, social 
and economic threats.  In Canada, climate 
changes observed over the past 35 to 40 years 
account in part for the exponential rise in 
economic losses from extreme weather events, 
premature weathering of infrastructure, stresses 
on water supplies, worsening air quality and 
related health and economic impacts, among 
other effects on Canadians’ quality of life and 
economy.   
Efforts to adapt to and manage climate-related 
risks are not keeping pace with the challenges.  
Unfortunately, Canadians are becoming more 
vulnerable to impacts related to climate 
variability and change, due in part to increasing 
urbanisation, a growing and aging population 
and deteriorating public infrastructures.  These 
changes put more people and property at risk 
and the climate will almost certainly continue to 
warm and become increasingly variable over the 
coming decades. 
Municipalities share in many of the 
responsibilities for managing risks from a 
changing climate.   Most Canadians live in 
municipalities, and municipalities have primary 
responsibility for, or can significantly influence, 
many of the factors that determine Canadians’ 
vulnerabilities to climate-related risks. 
The Ontario Municipal Act (2001), the Provincial 
Policy Statement (2005), the Emergency 
Management Act (2003) and the Conservation 
Authorities Act all require in one way or another 
that municipalities and Conservation Authorities 
in Ontario take action to prevent, mitigate or 
respond to threats to human health and safety, 
public property and the environment.  More 
detail on these requirements and why 
municipalities and Conservation Authorities 
need this Guide – including how to respond to 
various pieces of provincial and federal 
legislation and directions can be found at Annex 
2. 
More and more, municipal officials are 
responding to the need to begin implementing 
adaptive strategies by raising their 
understanding of climate change and promoting 
adaptation responses.  Unfortunately, few tools 
exist to help them in the process. This Guide is 

 

1

intended to help meet this need and to assist 
municipal planners, health officials, emergency 
management staffs and conservation authorities 
make optimal choices to adapt to a changing 
and more variable climate. 

1.1.  About the Guide 
This Guide presents a risk-based approach that 
can be used to facilitate municipalities’ efforts to 
adapt to climate change through both longer-
term planning and short-term responses.   It is 
envisioned to be used in three principal ways to 
assist municipal staff and risk management 
teams in planning and implementing adaptation 
strategies: 
•  As a reference manual for users to 

incorporate risk management into ongoing 
municipal planning and management 
activities, particularly those related to 
climate adaptation.  It can also guide 
comprehensive strategic planning initiatives 
focussed on climate adaptation for all 
municipal operations. 

•  To illustrate successful examples and 

methods for managing climate-related risks 
to help build support for adaptation efforts.   

•  As a training facilitation tool for municipal 

staff. 

The Guide is intended primarily for Ontario 
municipalities and Conservation Authorities 
which share responsibilities for planning and 
managing important climate-sensitive systems in 
Ontario.  It was developed to reflect their priority 
issues and processes.  However, while 
examples of use of the Guide are drawn from 
the Ontario situation, the techniques outlined 
can be used in other regions of Canada. 
The Guide clearly shows through its descriptive 
text and the illustrative examples that using the 
risk management process can be a very simple, 
quick and logical process to help users 
determine optimum solutions to complex issues 
involving risk, such as climate adaptation.  It can 
also be used for larger, more scientifically 
oriented risk management projects. 
It is hoped that the Guide will be also be useful 
for regions and institutions to help them 


