documentation of each of the major elements of 
the process helps to ensure accountability and 
consistency during implementation.  It provides 
a record for future reference.  This is especially 
important for managing risks from climate 
change.  There are still uncertainties about 
precisely how the climate will change and its 
implications for Ontario communities, so risk 
managers will want to revisit the decision 
process as new information becomes available. 
Depending on the complexity of the risk issue 
being analysed, the process can be completed 
in several days or weeks.  A small risk team 
consisting of two or three people with moderate 
resources can undertake it.  More complex risk 
problems may require a larger team and more 
time.  A useful technique for getting started is to 
complete a simple “first cut” process using 
readily available data and a small risk 
management team.  This will help the team 
explore the issues and possible outcomes 
rapidly and inexpensively.  The results can be 
used to develop a business case for a more 
comprehensive and rigorous project and the 
documentation will have all the necessary logic 
and cost-benefit information to make a 
compelling argument for action. 

3.2  Guiding principles 
The risk management process is built upon 
several important principles:  
 
•  Stakeholder engagement 

Key stakeholders should be identified and 
involved during the entire process.  The 
stakeholder team may be modified 
throughout the process as appropriate to 
particular issues being addressed. 
 

•  Communication 

The risk management team and 
stakeholders should develop an open and 
trustful dialogue that continues throughout 
the decision-making process, in order to: 
(cid:131)  Acquire relevant information; 
(cid:131)  Build public awareness of the particular 

risk and gain support for the process; 

 

(cid:131)  Facilitate consultation; 
(cid:131)  Evaluate stakeholder acceptance of 

risks; and 

(cid:131)  Serve as a part of the monitoring and 

review mechanism. 

In all communication activities it is important 
to remember the languages used by 
stakeholder groups. 
 

•  Promotion of sustainable development  

The outputs of the risk management process 
should be integrated into local development 
planning and should support local 
sustainable development goals. 

 
•  Documentation  

The process should be carefully and 
thoroughly documented and records 
appropriately stored in a “risk information 
library” so that it can easily be retrieved in 
the future.  This will help to: 
(cid:131)  Ensure consistency in execution 
(cid:131)  Promote accountability and 

transparency 

(cid:131)  Develop records for future reference. 

 

•  Use of existing tools, human and 

technical resources  
The risk management team should make 
maximum use of existing resources, such as 
data sets, local knowledge and technical 
expertise, technical methods and previously 
documented experiences.   
 

•  Public Education and Awareness 
Public education and awareness is 
fundamental for successfully implementing 
the risk management process and ensuring 
broad stakeholder support of its results. 
Public education and awareness should 
cover both the potential implications of 
climate change and the risk management 
process itself. 

 

 

7


