 

implementation that can be made available 
to other vulnerable sectors and other 
regions. 

Checklist 
Implementation and Monitoring 
Have you 
 

1.  Developed a feasible implementation 

(4)  Continue to communicate with stakeholders. 

(cid:131)  At this stage, communications might 
include ongoing public education and 
outreach, media communications, or 
information sharing with other 
municipalities and sectors on your 
experience with the risk management 
process. Consideration should be given 
to ensuring that the residual risks are 
understood and communicated and that 
they will continue to be acceptable to 
the key stakeholder groups. 

(cid:131)  Record all communications in the risk 

information library.   

(5)  Review and reiterate the process, as 

needed: 
(cid:131)  Consider repeating the risk 

(cid:131) 

management process if it involves 
complex issues that are not fully 
understood.   
In the second iteration, include new 
information as it becomes available and 
improve the analytical methods for 
drawing results and conclusions. 

Expected results  
•  Comprehensive implementation plans that 

include: 
(cid:131)  Costs and milestones. 
(cid:131)  A database of experts and expertise that 

can contribute to the adaptation 
response and risk controls.  

(cid:131)  A database of ongoing activities that 

could facilitate the implementation of the 
plans. 

(cid:131)  Mechanisms to enhance information 

exchange across sectors and between 
nearby municipalities or watersheds. 
(cid:131)  Mechanisms for training and capacity 

building in the risk management process 
and on climate change impacts. 

(cid:131)  Mechanisms for the required public 

education and outreach. 

(cid:131)  Mechanisms for reporting on progress 

and evaluating results. 

(cid:131)  An evaluation and monitoring process 

plan. 

•  Factors that may influence implementation 

identified and addressed. 
Implementation initiated 

• 
•  Risk information library updated.   Include 

documentation of the methodology for 

 

25

 

 

 

 
 

 

2. 

plan? 
Identified synergies with ongoing activities 
(e.g. national, regional or local initiatives)? 

3.  Procured adequate resources to 

implement the plan? 

4.  Established an effective monitoring and 

review program? 

5.  Obtained approval to implement the plan? 
6.  Developed a communication strategy to 

support implementation? 

7.  Ensured that the risk information library is 

updated? 

 
Example 
This is the final result of the risk problem in the 
example in Step 1 and Step 2: could an already 
overburdened municipal system effectively and 
efficiently deal with an extreme weather event 
triggered by a week-long heat wave and 
stagnant air that could result in multiple 
emergencies and if not what would be the likely 
outcomes? 
The strategy was to develop a Feasible 
Implementation Plan. Include a HIRA (hazard 
identification and risk assessment) for each risk 
in the risk scenario.  The implementation plan 
focuses on taking the cheapest, fastest actions 
that could significantly reduce the strain on 
municipal services and lessen the impacts on 
the community. 
The plan identifies synergies with on-going 
municipal activities.  Infrastructure development 
programs and programs offering special 
financial assistance from senior governments 
were selected. 
The plan with support from key stakeholders 
was submitted for approval.  When approved 
resources will be in-place for the Implementation 
Plan.  The plan also contains effective 
measurement and monitoring activities to verify 
whether the objectives are being achieved.  
Stakeholder groups, or peer reviewers, to 
ensure independence and validity of information, 
can conduct monitoring. 


