long-range plans do not address adaptation to 
climate change.  It can be difficult to get this 
issue on the municipal agenda.   
In Ontario, the provincial government has a 
number of laws and policies which, although 
they may not reference climate change and 
adaptation directly, include strong provisions for 
dealing with risks to municipal infrastructure and 
the health, safety and environmental protection 
of their residents.  This creates a strong and 
justifiable case for adaptation planning in a 
number of key areas.  The same principles apply 
in general to the Conservation Authorities. 
Another prominent problem facing municipalities 
is that, because of pressures on municipal staff, 
it is extremely difficult for them to attend to 
issues that do not have an immediate impact on 
municipal operations.  Sometimes, in order to 
pursue a new initiative, such as a climate 
change risk management initiative, staff of 
municipalities may have to establish that it 
should have a priority over or at least equal to 
an existing responsibility.  This could require a 
 

 

strong business case and a business plan for 
approval by senior management.  This in itself 
may create a work issue for staff.   
Whether the project is a large one, such as 
writing a strategic adaptation plan for the 
municipality or more focussed on particular 
adaptation issues or hazards, it is most 
important that the project has, and continues to 
have throughout its course the support of the 
Municipal Council and the senior administrative 
official and the assignment of adequate 
resources to do the needed work. 
Annex 2 contains more information about 
legislation and policies that will support or 
require climate change adaptation strategies 
and plans for municipalities and conservation 
authorities.  It also provides additional 
information about how to deal with the issues of 
“getting started” and introducing risk 
management and climate change adaptation 
into municipal plans and operations. 

 

5


