 

Annex 3:  Risk communications and Perceptions 
 
Introduction:   
An individual or a work team that will be making 
decisions about risk should understand the risk 
in terms of the needs, issues, and concerns of 
the affected stakeholders.  There will also be a 
requirement to communicate with a broad 
variety of individuals, organisations, informal 
groups, the news media and governments about 
risk.  This Annex provides some insights into the 
difficulties of understanding perceptions about 
risk and some thoughts about how to effectively 
communicate about risks.   
Risk Perception - How Different People Value 
Things Differently: 
The value associated with something that may 
be lost or is at risk differs from one individual to 
another.  It can also differ for the same 
individual, depending on his or her 
circumstances at the time.  Consider individual 
responses to extremely hot weather.  A worker 
in an air conditioned building, who travels to 
work from an air conditioned apartment complex 
in air conditioned public transit may not feel 
much stress or discomfort.  On the other hand, 
an outside worker who lives in an uncooled 
apartment and drives to work in a car without air 
conditioning would find the heat very stressful.  
The two individuals perceive the value of air 
conditioning quite differently because of their 
differing needs and priorities at the time.  The 
inside worker would find the risk of losing his air-
conditioned environment much more disturbing 
than the outside worker 
This sense of value may also vary a lot 
depending on the time or other transient factors. 
For example, the inside worker’s valuation of his 
air-conditioned environment may be 
substantially lower in the cool early morning than 
in the heat of the afternoon.  If the air 
conditioning is too cold, it may not be wanted at 
all.  In fact over air conditioning may generate a  
negative value if the person gets sick from being 
too cool. 
Now consider the risk of losing the air-
conditioning completely.  If the weather is very 
hot, the inside worker may find any risk of losing 
the air-conditioning unacceptable.  If, on the 
other hand, the weather is very cool, he or she 
may be indifferent to losing the air-conditioning.   

 

34

The acceptability of the risk depends on the 
value or utility placed on the item at risk (in the 
example above, air-conditioning), which 
depends on the needs of that individual, at that 
specific time. 
Not all considerations of utility are time-
sensitive.  For example, if we value the 
environment, we probably always will value the 
environment.  If we are concerned about a 
changing climate, we will probably always be 
concerned about the changing climate and how 
to adapt to it.  The terms “needs”, “issues”, and 
“concerns” are often used to refer to those 
factors that affect our perceptions of risk. 
Different people can value the same loss 
differently because the loss may affect their 
overall satisfaction, or their needs, issues, and 
concerns, differently.  
The issue of perceived value has been often 
overlooked in dealing with risk situations when 
the risk is based on the simple equation: 

Risk = Probability x Consequence 

Many think that this equation is inadequate as a 
practical definition of risk when the perception or 
acceptability of risk is included and that a more 
appropriate expression of risk would be: 

Risk = Probability x Consequence x 

Perception 

Consider another example related to the 
perception or acceptability of risk of lowered 
water levels in a lake by two communities with 
different concerns and perceptions.  One 
community derives much of its income and 
employment from commercial marine traffic in its 
harbour.  Another community, also situated on 
the lakeshore, values the lake for its scenery 
and for light recreational use. 
As a result of a changing climate, both 
communities are told that lake levels are likely to 
be between 1 and 1.5 metres lower by 2050.  
The first community will face disastrous 
employment and economic losses because the 
main shipping channel for which it is the main 
port will be too shallow for the heavy marine 
traffic that now uses it.  An alternate channel 
with greater depth will still be navigable and 


