 

line with the requirements established by the 
Provincial Policy Statement of Ontario, (2005).   
The risk management team thought that the 
advocacy role was especially important for the 
municipality.  Because much of the precursors to 
smog originate from outside of the municipality, 
regional and international air emission 
reductions can significantly improve local air 
quality. Also, the team thought that by assuming 
a strong advocacy role, the municipality would 
build credibility among its residents and be more 
successful in implementing the other measures.  
The team did not identify any risk financing 
issues.  However, there are major direct costs 
associated with health effects, but these are 
reflected in health care costs and budgets which 
were not included in the analysis.   
The team was unable to quantify the residual 
risk with precision.  They recommended that the 
municipality implement the options identified 
above, monitor the effects of these measures, 
and revisit the risk management process in two 
years to decide if additional risk control 
measures are required. 
(End of example for Step 5) 

STEP 6: Implementation and 
Monitoring 
 
Purpose 
•  To develop and implement the adaptation 

plan. 

•  To monitor and evaluate the effectiveness 

and costs of the adaptation responses. 

•  To decide to continue or terminate the risk 

management process. 

What to do and how to do it? 
(1)  Develop the implementation plan 

(cid:131)  Develop implementation plans including 
priorities for action for each adaptation 
measure.   

(cid:131)  Plans should be linked to existing 

municipal programs, where appropriate. 
Review any relevant non-climate-related 
social, economic or environmental 
action plans, and consider linking the 
risk control efforts as closely to these as 
possible.  For example, there may be a 

 

24

program to strengthen existing initiatives 
to protect public health in smog 
episodes.  Your risk control or 
adaptation measures could be linked to 
this program. 

(cid:131)  Decide the timing for the implementation 
of adaptation or risk control measures.  
Some risk issues may not surface for 
years, or it may not be feasible to 
address them immediately.  In these 
cases, it may be prudent to defer 
implementation of some components 
until a future date.  

(cid:131)  Establish a review date and record it in 

the risk information library. 

(cid:131)  Before submitting the implementation 
plan for approval, review any similar 
climate change risk management 
initiatives, for example, from 
neighbouring municipalities, and 
compare your results to theirs. 

(cid:131)  Look for opportunities to collaborate 

across boundaries.  Unfortunately, 
climate change impacts will not be 
related to political boundaries, but 
adaptation responses will.  Exploit any 
collaborative potential to improve the 
effectiveness of adaptation responses.   

(cid:131)  As part of the implementation plan 

identify all special expertise or external 
assistance that may be required. 
(2)  Develop and establish the monitoring 

process  
(cid:131)  Monitor all relevant aspects of the 

adaptation measures or risk controls by 
measuring environmental or 
performance indicators, stakeholder 
reactions, costs and benefits, or other 
appropriate indicators.  Review the risk 
information library for any suggested 
monitoring strategies or measurement 
criteria suggested to-date.  Some may 
have been suggested during Steps 2, 3 
or 4, or during the various stakeholder 
communications.  
If appropriate, the planning team should 
be or should establish a monitoring and 
review team to continue this function for 
as long as needed. 

(cid:131) 

(3)  Submit the plan for approval and when 

approved begin the implementation of the 
plan. 


