 

Annex 4:  Terms Used in this Guide 
 

The following definitions apply to the terms used 
in this Guidebook.  The definitions are drawn 
from the Canadian standard “Risk Management: 
Guidelines for Decision-Makers” (CAN/CSA-
Q850-97) unless otherwise specified.   
Adaptation – Adjustment in natural or human 
systems to a new or changing environment.  
Adaptation to climate change refers to 
adjustment in natural or human systems in 
response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or 
their effects, which moderates harm or exploits 
beneficial opportunities.  (Climate Change 2001: 
Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. IPCC, 
TAR, 2001) 
Adaptation benefits – the avoided damage 
costs or the accrued benefits following the 
adoption and implementation of adaptation 
measures. (IPCC TAR, 2001) 
Adaptation costs – costs of planning, preparing 
for, facilitating, and implementing adaptation 
measures, including transaction costs. (IPCC 
TAR, 2001) 
Adaptive capacity – the ability of a system to 
adjust to climate change (including climate 
variability and extremes) to moderate potential 
damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or 
cope with the consequences.  (IPCC TAR, 2001) 
Adverse effects – one or more of: 
• 

Impairment of the quality of the natural 
environment for any use that can be made 
of it; 
Injury or damage to property or plant or 
animal life; 

• 

•  Harm or material discomfort to any person; 
•  An adverse effect on the health of any 

person; 
Impairment of the safety of any person; 

• 
•  Rendering any property or plant or animal 

life unfit for human use; 

•  Loss of enjoyment of normal use of property; 

• 

and 
Interference with normal conduct of 
business. 

(Environmental Protection Act) 

 

38

Climate change – a change of climate that is 
attributed directly or indirectly to human activity 
that alters the composition of the global 
atmosphere and which is in addition to natural 
climate variability observed over comparable 
time periods. (UNFCCC) 
Climate scenario – projection of future climatic 
conditions 
Climate variability – climate variability refers to 
fluctuations in climate over a shorter term - the 
departures from long-term averages or trends, 
over seasons or a few years, such as those 
caused by the El Niño Southern Oscillation 
phenomenon. (UNFCCC) 
Consequences – Risk is often expressed as the 
product of the consequences flowing from an 
event and the frequency of the event.  In this 
manual, we use the term “impacts” for 
consistency with the terminology of climate 
change. 
Dialogue – a process for two-way 
communication that fosters shared 
understanding. It is supported by information. 
Hazard – a source of potential harm, or a 
situation with a potential for causing harm, in 
terms of human injury; damage to health, 
property, the environment, and other things of 
value; or some combination of these. 
Hazard identification – the process of 
recognizing that a hazard exists and defining its 
characteristics. 
IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change.  A large (several thousand) group of 
qualified experts which reviews and assesses 
periodically, all climate change research 
published in many countries. 
Impact – Something that logically or naturally 
follows from an action or condition related to 
climate change or climate variability. 
Kyoto Protocol – an agreement (1997) under 
the UNFCCC by most countries of the world, by 
which most developed countries will begin to 
limit their greenhouse gas emissions by 2008 to 
2012. 


