 

Annex 1: Summary of Climate Change Impacts in Ontario and Canada 
 
Many factors have influenced major changes in 
the climate system over the centuries.  The 
natural ones include changes in the earth’s orbit 
and its albedo (or reflectivity), changes in the 
sun’s energy, and in volcanic emissions from 
which suspended particles cause cooling 
episodes.   
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change reviewed many research papers which 
examined the relative importance of these 
natural climate forcing factors, relative to forcing 
by the rising greenhouse gas concentrations 
driven by human activities.  
Fluctuations in global mean temperatures 
responded mainly to the natural factors up until 
about 1950.  From 1970 on, the rapidly rising 
global mean temperatures can only be explained 
by the increasing greenhouse gas 
concentrations.  Greenhouse gases will also 
dominate future climate trends, so trends from 
1970 can be considered to be a good indicator 
of climatic trends for the coming decades.  
(IPCC 2001) 
Carbon dioxide, CO2 is the most important 
greenhouse gas and once emitted stays in the 
climate system for a century or more, and 
becomes well mixed in the atmosphere, no 
matter where it is emitted.  Pre-industrial 
concentrations were about 280 ppmv.  The 
levels in the atmosphere in 2005, are at 380 
ppmv, and if emissions continue on a “Business 
as Usual” course, will be about 740 ppmv or 
moving towards 3 times pre-industrial 
concentrations by late in this century.  In worst 
case scenarios, we could reach 1000 ppmv, and 
in the best case, with effective global emission 
controls, this century would end at 560 ppmv, or 
double pre-industrial concentrations by 2100.  
Most studies of impacts are based on a CO2 
doubling, a very hopeful scenario.  The difficulty 
in turning around our fossil fuel based 
economies means that it will be necessary to 
adapt to significant climate change in coming 
decades – as well as reduce emissions as much 
as possible. 
Projections of future climate are made by Global 
Climate Models which model mathematically, 
the interactions between the atmosphere and 

oceans, and between the air and land surfaces.  
Their projections take into account both the 
warming effects of the greenhouse gases, and 
the much smaller cooling due to increases in 
sulphate aerosols from industrial emissions.   
Table 1 gives information on the changes 
affecting Canada observed to the end of 2000, 
and the projected changes into the present 
century.  The latter are based mainly on the 
outputs of the Canadian Global Climate Model – 
an Atmosphere-Oceans General Circulation 
Model.  This model has predicted reasonably 
well the changes that have occurred in Canada 
to date. (Boer et al. 1998)  In these model 
outputs, it is assumed that atmospheric 
greenhouse gas concentrations will continue to 
increase at recent or slightly increased rates, 
due to continued global increases in emissions 
primarily from burning of fossil fuels.  In a few 
cases in Table 1, the consensus projections of 
the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
2001 Report are cited instead of Canadian 
model outputs. 
SOUTHERN ONTARIO AND GREAT LAKES-
ST. LAWRENCE BASIN 
In this industrialized and heavily populated 
region, mean temperatures to date have risen by 
about 0.60C and are expected to continue to rise 
by another 2-30C by 2050.  Models give 
conflicting signals as to whether annual 
precipitation will increase slightly or decline, so a 
hypothesis of little future change in total might 
be assumed, but with more of the precipitation in 
rain and less in snow.  Under most models, 
evaporation losses are expected to more than 
offset any changes in precipitation.  Water 
issues, including levels of the Great Lakes and 
pollution problems are major climate change 
concerns, but health issues with more prolonged 
neat waves and smog episodes in and near 
urban areas, flash floods and drainage design, 
agriculture, and recreational impacts are also of 
significant concern. 
Great Lakes – St. Lawrence System: 
The extent of impacts on Great Lakes levels and 
flows of a changing climate remains a subject of 
some disagreement among scientists.  While 

 

27


