Checklist 
Step 1: Getting started 
Have you: 
 

 

 

 

 

communications with the various 
stakeholders.   

(cid:131)  Recognize that the stakeholder group 
may evolve throughout the process.  
(5)  Develop a risk communication plan and 

initiate a dialogue with stakeholders 
(cid:131)  Key questions to consider include: Who 

is responsible for the communication 
process?  Who are the key audiences? 
How will the impact of the 
communications be evaluated? Should 
some on-going, formal structure be 
considered for communicating with 
stakeholders such as a stakeholders’ 
panel? 

(cid:131)  Annex 3 provides additional information 

to help with risk communications. 

(6)  Start the risk information library. 

(cid:131)  The risk information library contains 
copies of all the information collected 
throughout the risk management 
process, including information on the 
risks, data that are used to analyse the 
risks, a record of decisions taken, 
stakeholder views, records of meetings 
and any other information that may be 
obtained during the risk management 
process. 

(cid:131)  Keeping these careful records will 

provide the means to trace the logic 
behind any decisions made.  Also it will 
make it easy for the team to review the 
process, should any additional 
information become available. 

Expected results and outputs 
•  Risk issues and potential management 

implications are defined. 
•  Project team established. 
•  Terms of reference and budget for project 

team developed and approved. 

•  Modalities for communication established. 
•  Stakeholders identified and preliminary 

analysis of their needs, concerns and 
probable issues completed. 

•  Collection of documentation begun for the 

risk information library. 

 
 
 

 

 

9

1.  Defined the hazards and 

vulnerabilities, and their potential 
management implications? 

2.  Established a project team, project 

3. 

4. 

workplan and team members’ 
responsibilities? 
Identified the resources required to 
undertake the project, and any 
existing capacity that is available to 
the project team? 
Identified the stakeholders and 
begun to define their probable 
issues, needs and concerns? 

5.  Developed a plan for 

communicating with stakeholders?  

6.  Started a risk information library? 

 
 
Example: 
EXTREME STORM FOLLOWING A LONG 
HEAT-WAVE: 
Climate estimates for the future indicate that 
there will be more extreme weather events and 
longer spells of very hot weather.  One event 
that could become more frequent is an extreme 
weather event triggered by a week-long heat 
wave and stagnated air mass that could result in 
multiple emergencies including, a large number 
of people suffering from heat stress, extremely 
heavy precipitation resulting in local flooding and 
overtaxed drainage systems, wind damages and 
electrical power outages.  The Municipal Council 
has asked the emergency coordinator whether 
the municipality could cope especially since staff 
of municipal and health agencies are already 
overburdened. 
The overall risk problem is, could the already 
overburdened municipal system effectively and 
efficiently deal with such a scenario and if not 
what would be the likely outcomes?  What 
actions should be recommended to avoid or 
reduce the negative outcomes? 
Actual and potential hazards identified:   
•  Short duration <24 hr. high intensity rains 

more frequent and severe – increasing 
~5%/decade with the largest increases in 
Spring – more erosion and flash floods.   

•  Very high temperatures in the upper 30’s in 

the daytime and, also high at night. 


