 

promote compact urban form and the 
use of public transit; focus travel-
intensive land uses on sites which are 
well served by public transit or design 
these to facilitate the establishment of 
public transit in the future; improve the 
mix of employment and housing uses to 
shorten commute journeys; …” (p.14) 
“Planning authorities shall protect, 
improve or restore the quality and 
quantity of water by minimizing potential 
negative impacts, including cross-
jurisdictional impacts; … and ensuring 
storm water management practices that 
minimize storm water volumes and 
contaminant loads …:” (p. 16) 
“Development shall be directed away 
from areas of natural or human-made 
hazards where there is an unacceptable 
risk to public health or safety or of 
property damage.” (p.22) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

•  The Emergency Management Act (2003) 

requires all Ontario municipalities to develop 
comprehensive, risk-based emergency 
management programs based on 
prevention, preparedness, response and 
recovery.  Municipalities are required to 
establish their “enhanced”-level program 
which identifies specific areas that would 
have to include the vulnerabilities to climate 
change: 
(cid:131)  Development of a Hazard Analysis and 

Risk Assessment (HIRA) analysis of 
their municipality 

(cid:131)  Development of a prevention/mitigation 

strategy for identified high risks; 
(cid:131)  Publication of a recovery plan for 

identified high risks; 

(cid:131)  Development of a response strategy for 

identified hazards; 
Implementation of guidelines for risk-
based land use planning; and  
Implementation of a detailed risk-based 
public education program 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

•  Under the Conservation Authorities Act  
None of these policies or operational 
requirements explicitly prescribe the authority to 
pursue adaptation to climate change, but they 
certainly demand consideration of climate 
change as it relates to these specific aspects of 
municipal administration.  In fact, it would be 
difficult to satisfy these requirements without 

 

32

accounting for possible climatic changes.  
Adaptation, then, is emerging as a critical 
dimension of existing municipal functions.   
Conservation Authorities are responsible for 
flood plain mapping, flood warning systems, 
source water protection, including reducing 
erosion and runoff from vulnerable lands. 
In Canada, municipalities can be held liable in 
negligence for “operational” decisions, but not 
for “policy” decisions.  Where a municipality has 
a duty of care to its citizens it might be held 
liable for failing to consider the implications of 
climate change.  For example, in planning for 
sewage and water services so that the systems 
protect human health and the natural 
environment a municipality might be considered 
negligent if it failed to consider increasing rain 
intensities and frequency that could overwhelm 
sewage services creating unacceptable risks to 
human health and the environment.  As more 
and more municipalities include the implications 
of climate change in their plans and operations, 
the precedent will be more firmly established. 
 
3.  Internal policies and 

administration  

Municipalities conduct their business within a 
hierarchy of official plans and related plans (e.g. 
environmental strategic plan, growth 
management plan, etc.), all of which are 
referenced to each other.  It is within this context 
that municipal functions are institutionalized and 
may arise when local emergencies escalate into 
regional emergencies sustained over time.  
Given the uncertainties related to climate 
change and its implications for municipalities, a 
one-time risk management initiative is nearly 
certain not to produce “successful adaptation to 
climate change”.  Over time, municipalities will 
need to stay abreast of new knowledge about 
the changing climate and account for it in their 
infrastructure developments, storm water 
management policies, public education activities 
and other relevant management activities.  
Thus, to be most successful, “climate change 
risk management” needs to be institutionalized 
into municipal decision-making, via inclusion in 
the official plan or related plans. 
Like many organizations, municipalities are 
typically structured in functional departments 
which tend to spawn “silos” of activity.  Silos can 
significantly hinder adaptation to climate change.  


