 

understand risk management techniques and 
how they can be applied to climate change risks.  
Chapter 2 provides insights into the changes in 
climate in Ontario for which Ontario 
municipalities will have to make adaptation 
decisions.  It offers some suggestions to help 
officials integrate a risk-based approach into the 
planning process.   
Chapter (cid:31)3 is an overview of the risk 
management process, and explains why it is 
useful.  During the1990’s a team of Canadian 
risk management experts developed a National 
Standard for risk-based decision-making. The 
benefits of having a nationally consistent 
process are beginning to be realised. 
Chapter 4 explains each step in the process in 
detail and includes: 

•  A description of the purpose of each step; 
•  An explanation of what to do and how to do 

it; 

•  A description of the expected output; 
•  A description of the decision to be made at 

the end of each step; 

•  An example showing how the step could be 

used; and 

•  A checklist of the major tasks at each step in 

the process. 

The examples are based on the experiences of 
municipal and conservation authority 
participants discussed in a two-day workshop on 
climate change risk management held in June 
2005 in Halton Region.  

1.2.  Risk management, adaptation 

and vulnerability reduction 

Climate change literature refers to “adaptation”, 
“adaptive capacity” and “vulnerability”: 

•  Adaptation to climate change refers to 

adjustments in natural or human systems 
that moderate harm or exploit beneficial 
opportunities arising out of actual or 
expected climatic changes  

•  Adaptive capacity is ability of a system, 

region or community to adapt. 

•  Vulnerability refers to how susceptible 

systems are to adverse effects of climate 
change or climate variability including socio-
economic aspects.  

 

2

Adaptation to climate change, which includes 
efforts to enhance adaptive capacity, is typically 
aimed at reducing vulnerability to its adverse 
effects. 
Risk management offers a framework for 
identifying, understanding and prioritising 
climate change risks and for selecting optimal 
adaptation responses to reduce risks to 
acceptable levels. 
 
1.3.  Why risk management? 
Adaptation to climate change is characterized by 
uncertainty, complexity and risk.   It can involve 
multiple decision-makers and other stakeholders 
with conflicting values and competing interests.  
As will be explained in the next section, 
projections of future climate and other important 
variables are uncertain, outcomes are debatable 
and there may be numerous adaptation options 
from which the optimal are to be selected.  
Adaptation decisions are generally evaluated as 
better or worse, not right or wrong.  
For every given climate impact there is a 
spectrum of responses in time, complexity, cost 
and jurisdiction.  For example to deal with 
increasingly frequent and severe extreme rainfall 
events short term responses might range from 
better warnings, increased maintenance of 
storm sewers, reduction of storage levels in 
dams and reservoirs.  Longer-term responses 
might include replacement sewer pipes, re-
routing major arteries, reduction of asphalt and 
concrete surfaces.  Multi- jurisdictional 
responses could involve the construction of 
water diversion channels, dyking, construction of 
dams or reservoirs etc.  As will be discussed 
below, the risk management process will help 
lead planners to the optimal solution or solutions 
as well as assisting in determining the range of 
possible responses.   
In most municipalities, where current issues tend 
to be in the forefront, adapting to an uncertain 
future climate is not a problem that is often 
addressed.  Identifying the best adaptation 
response can seem like an overwhelming 
challenge, and decision-makers may deny or 
defer important actions.  The adaptation issue 
may be addressed by some municipalities as a 
strategic issue as some have done for their 
approach to the environment.  Others will deal 
with the issue pragmatically addressing current 
climate related issues, such as smog-related 


