 

Steps in the Risk Management Process 

What to do and how to do it? 
(1)  Establish the project team and its terms of 
reference, and develop the work plan and 
the key milestones. 
(cid:131)  Select team members with the 

necessary expertise to deal with the risk 
issues being considered.  

(cid:131)  Ensure that there are representatives 

from the organizations that will be 
responsible for implementing the risk 
controls identified at the end of the 
process.  Support and clerical staff may 
be needed to handle the administrative 
and documentation matters.  Others, 
such as members of the legal group 
may be involved at times or review or 
advise on certain aspects of the work. 
(cid:131)  Team members may change over the 

course of the project in order to have the 
expertise needed for each phase of the 
decision process.  

(cid:131)  The team leader should ensure that all 
members of the team know their roles 
and responsibilities with respect to the 
project and are familiar with the risk 
management process. 

(2)  Identify the resources required. 

(cid:131)  Determine the internal capacity that is 

available for the project, including 
available data, tools (e.g. GIS), human 
and financial resources. 
Identify the external resources needed 
and prepare the justification to obtain 
them. 

(cid:131) 

(3)  Assign project team responsibilities, allocate 

resources and set schedules. 

(4)  Identify stakeholders and begin the 

stakeholder analysis 
(cid:131) 

Identify any individuals or groups that 
can affect or may be affected by 
decisions or actions emanating from the 
risk management process. The 
stakeholder group can be quite large. 
(cid:131)  Consider the stakeholders’ interests, 

concerns, rights and likely issues.   
Begin to think about how different 
stakeholders might perceive various risk 
issues differently and how this might 
affect the decision process and 

4. 
STEP 1: Getting Started 
 
Purpose 
•  This step comprises the initial administrative 

process; 
Identifies the specific problem or hazard and 
the associated risks; 
Identifies the stakeholders and the project 
team especially those with the relevant 
expertise; 

• 

• 

•  Lists the responsibilities of each member of 
the project team and the resources needed 
to complete the risk management 
framework; and   

•  Drafts the workplan and estimates the 

schedule. 

In some cases, there may be reluctance to 
commit busy staff to a risk management 
process.  However, the increasing evidence of 
warming trends, intense smog events, extremely 
heavy rains and floods, is convincing most 
senior managers of the need to include these 
risks in their planning.   
The time required by the team to undertake the 
full process need not be a very long, perhaps a 
concentrated week or several days per week for 
a month or longer depending in part on the 
extent of stakeholder consultations.  However, 
as Step 2 suggests, a quick preliminary run 
through the risk management process is usually 
very helpful in scoping out the issue to see how 
simple or complex it is, determining the 
resources needed and helping to identify who 
should be involved in the team.  If the issue is 
very large and complex a Steering Committee to 
oversee the process supported by sub-groups 
on particular technical aspects may be justified.  
The example at Annex 4 is illustrates the 
scoping approach. 
In either case a dedicated team leader is 
essential from the outset. The team leader is 
usually a municipal planner or a senior member 
of the lead department involved.  It is also very 
important to have and maintain the support of 
the Municipal Council and/or the senior 
administrative official. 
 

 

8


