 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
Floodplains 
 
A  floodplain  is  defined  as  the  land  submerged  by  a  one  hundred  year  or  larger  flood.  The  floodplain  is 
divided into two key areas: the floodway and flood fringe. The floodway is designated as a high risk flood 
hazard and flood fringe is designated as a chance of flood occurrences (see Figure 4-1). 
 

         June 2010 

  

 

 

 

 
Figure 4-2:  Illustration of floodplain and flood fringe (Environment Canada website, Floods, 
3 Feb. 2009) 

 
Generally provincial and municipal land use policies direct new buildings and land uses to areas that are not 
at a high risk of flooding. In lower risk areas, development needs to be of a design and with an appropriate 
level of protection to ensure that the risk of damage from flooding is minimized. Any development within a 
flood risk area should not impede water flows or exacerbate flood risk elsewhere.  
 
It  is  the  prime  responsibility  of  the  property  owner  to  avoid  development  in  areas  of  flood  risk  and,  in 
instances  where  development  already  exists  or  is  permitted,  to  undertake  appropriate  flood  proofing. 
Provincial  regulations  and  municipal  zoning  by-laws  and  all  other  agencies  with  development  control 
authority are responsible for strictly controlling development in line with land use policies and for ensuring 
that  all  owners  and  users  of  property  are  aware  of  the  risks  of  developing  in  an  area  that  is  subject  to 
flooding. These regulations vary with each location and generally depend on the flood risk.  
 
The ICLR flood requirements are, in general, follows the provincial and municipal guidelines and policies: 
 

1. 

flood  proofing  means  structural  and/or  non-structural  measures  incorporated  in  the  design  of  a 
building or structure which reduce or eliminate the risk of flood damage by ensuring that the ground 
floor  elevation  is  higher  than  the  projected  flood  level  and  that  the  building  can  be  exited  without 
hindrance in the event of a flood. 

 

 

 Page 37


