 

 

  

SEVERE WINTER WEATHER CRITERIA 

 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
7 
 
Severe Winter Weather criteria specifically addresses the potential for damage from ice dams in areas prone 
to snowfall accumulations greater than 12 inches (300mm). Most localities in Canada are subject to Severe 
Winter  Weather  Conditions.  The  National  Building  of  Canada  (NBCC)  provides  design  weather  data  for 
selected  locations  including  temperature,  snow  and  rain  fall,  wind  speed,  etc.  In  addition  to  the  NBCC, 
homebuilder must consult with local authorities for applicable municipal codes and their requirements. The 
Designed … for safer living® criteria for Severe Weather is based on the requirements of the NBCC and 
homebuilder must met these minimum criteria.  
 
Mandatory Requirements: 
 

         June 2010 

1.  Unless already included because of other risks, an additional moisture barrier shall be applied to the 

roof deck along the eaves of the roof to prevent intrusion caused by ice dams. 

2.  All drains on flat roofs shall have heating strips (heat trace) installed around them in such a way that 

it prevents blockage of the drains by ice or ice dams. 

3.  No heat source shall be installed in un-conditioned attic space. 
4.  No un-insulated recessed lights shall be installed. 
5.  All  attic  doors  between  conditioned  and  un-conditioned  space  shall  be  treated  as  exterior  doors, 

properly insulated, sealed and weather-stripped or gasketed. 

6.  All  hidden  attic  penetrations  (stack  vents,  partition  walls,  electrical  chases,  etc.)  shall  be  properly 

sealed and insulated. 

7.  Frozen Pipes:   

a)  Option 1: Require sufficient insulation on all exterior piping and on all piping in exterior walls, 

crawl spaces, attics, and basement ceilings.   

b)  Option 2: Prohibit pipes in external walls and unheated spaces.   

 
Designed … for safer living® homes located in areas within the freezing weather criteria boundary shall 
include the following requirements in addition to those of other perils:  
 
Roof Requirements  
 
An additional moisture barrier shall be applied along the eaves of the roof to prevent water intrusion caused 
by  ice  dams.  This  shall  consist  of  a  self-adhering  polymer  modified  bitumen  membrane  meeting  ASTM 
D1970. The moisture barrier must extend from the eave’s edge to at least 24” (600mm) past the exterior wall 
line.  Where  roof  valleys  exist,  the  additional  moisture  barrier  shall  extend  up  the  entire  length  of  the  roof 
valley and be a minimum of 36” (900mm) in width. This additional ice dam protection is not necessary in 
cases where a self-adhering polymer modified bitumen membrane is applied over the entire surface of the 
roof deck.  
 
Attic Requirements  
 
Specifically, severe winter weather attic requirements are: 
 

1.  No heat sources shall be installed in unconditioned attic space (i.e., ductwork, etc).  
2.  No un-insulated recessed lights.  
3.  All  attic  access  doors  located  in  conditioned  spaces  shall  be  treated  as  exterior  doors,  properly 

insulated, sealed and weather-stripped or gasketed.  

4.  All  hidden  attic  penetrations  (stack  vents,  partition  walls,  electrical  chases,  etc)  shall  be  properly 

sealed and insulated.  

 

 

 

 Page 35


