 

 

  

         June 2010 

 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Buildings are engineered for dead and live loads of the building materials and contents. A design develops 
alignments, so that the weight is effectively transferred down through the structure to a solid foundation on 
stable soil.  This is called a LOAD PATH and effective design of its many routes is critical to seismic 
performance.  This results in the development of seismic force resisting systems (SFRS), which help protect 
the home from excessive damage during strong ground motion.  Care must be taken to achieve the “sweet 
spot” between a structure, which is too flexible and prone to out-of-plane damage and one, which is too stiff 
and places undue stress on connection points.             
 
The House You Want AND Seismic Performance 
Interesting and unusual design does not preclude improved seismic performance.  Large window openings, 
asymmetrical floor plans, cantilevered overhangs, unusual weight loading and excessively open interior 
spaces present engineering challenges and may increase costs, but can all be accommodated in a 
Designed ... for safer living® home.  Sophisticated software can automate the enhanced engineering 
process and keep costs under control.   
 
Safety Inside The Home – Protection of Contents 
The nonstructural elements in a home may slide, topple and hammer on other objects during the strong 
ground acceleration of an earthquake. Further, excessive structural drift can cause piping system breakage.  
Anything not fastened to the structure will attempt to stay where it is through inertia, while the moving house 
runs into it.  This scenario can result in flooding, fire, impact damage to other contents and injury to 
occupants.   
 
The Designed ... for safer living® program utilizes the Building Code and the Canadian Standards 
Association’s (CSA) S832-06 Standard for Seismic Risk Reduction of Operational and Functional 
Components (OFC) of Buildings to generate the details necessary to secure the equipment that is built 
into the home at the time of delivery to the owner.  At the time the home is furnished, the homeowners are 
encouraged to have their possessions restrained in order to complete the safety system. 
 

 

 

 Page 10


