 

 

  

         June 2010 

BASEMENT FLOODING CRITERIA 

 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
 
3 
 
Basement Flooding caused by Urban Flooding 
 
During heavy rainfall or snowmelt events, almost any home can be vulnerable to flooding including those 
located outside of the floodplain (see Flood Region Criteria section).  Basement flooding generally has three 
causes:  Overland flooding, infiltration flooding and sewer backup.   
  Overland flooding can occur during extreme rainfall or snowmelt events, where stormwater flows onto 
private  property.    This  water  can  enter  homes  through  basement  windows,  doors,  vents  and  other 
openings including reverse sloped driveways.   
Infiltration  flooding  occurs  when  the  soil  around  the  home’s  foundation  becomes  saturated  with 
groundwater, or when the groundwater level exceeds the height of the basement floor.  Groundwater 
can then infiltrate into the basement through cracks in foundation walls and basement floors. 

  Sewer backup originates from the municipal stormwater or sanitary sewer system and can occur when 
underground sewer systems surcharge due to high water volumes in the system.  When underground 
sewer systems surcharge, sewage can backup into home sewer connections, which can result in water 
and sewage backing up into the home through plumbing fixtures or backing up into the foundation drain 
causing possible structural damage to the home.   

 
To reduce the risk of sewer backup, ensure that the home is isolated from the municipal sewer system, to 
the extent possible.  This may include: 

 

-  Severance of sanitary sewer connections, to the extent possible, including: 

o 

Installation  of  an  open-port,  mainline  sanitary  sewer  backwater  valve  on  the  main 
sanitary  sewer  lateral.    The  installation  must  meet  manufacturer’s  and  municipal 
guidance  for  such  devices,  including  proper  placement  of  the  valve  on  the  sanitary 
lateral. Installation of the backwater valve must also meet national, provincial and local 
building  code  requirements.    Installation  of  a  backwater  valve  will  require  proper 
disconnection of weeping tiles and eavestrough downspouts from the home’s sanitary 
sewer connection. Inspect and confirm that the backwater valve is in good working order 
on an annual basis; 

-  Severance of storm sewer connections, to the extent possible.  This includes: 

o  Drainage  of  weeping  tiles  into  a  sump  pit,  and  then  using  a  sump  pump  to  pump 
foundation drain discharge to the surface of the lot.  This practice must meet municipal 
guidelines for pumping foundation drainage to the surface of the lot, where appropriate, 
including proper extensions to keep discharges away from the foundation. Inspect and 
clean pump and pit on annual basis, and; 
o  Disconnection of eavestrough downspouts, including proper extensions and splash pads 

extended away from the foundation walls.  

 
To reduce the risk of overland flooding and infiltration flooding, the following actions may be taken: 

-  Proper lot grading: 

o  The lot must be graded to meet municipal lot grading guidelines including placement of 
appropriate swales; 
o 
Installation of window wells for windows close to ground level where appropriate, and 
installation of covers on the window wells; 
o  Proper backfilling, including capping backfill area with a soil that has a low porosity, for 

example, clay; 

-  Disconnection  of  eavestrough  downspouts,  including  proper  extensions  and  splash  pads 
extended  away  from  the  foundation  walls.    Water  may  also  be  directed  into  a  rain  barrel, 
provided that proper overflow extensions are provided with the rain barrel and the rain barrel is 
installed based on manufacturer’s instructions; 

-  Do not install reverse sloped driveways, and; 

 

 

 Page 4


