 

 

  

 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
6  WILDFIRE REGION CRITERIA 
 
The Wildland/Urban Interface is an area where structures and other improved property meets or intermingles 
with  wild  land  or  vegetative  fuels.  Wildfires  are  a  natural  hazard  in  any  forested  and  grassland  region  in 
Canada. The regions with the highest wildfire occurrence are British Columbia, and the Boreal forest zones 
of Ontario, Quebec, the Prairie Provinces, and the Yukon and Northwest Territories. 
 
Site Evaluation  
 
An Inspector working on behalf of Municipality or the Designed … for safer living® Program will identify 
the wildfire hazard level for the site by examining the following items:  
 

         June 2010 

  Ingress and egress into subdivision.  
  Road widths.  
  Road condition.  
  Road terminus.  
  Surrounding vegetation (fuel).  
  Topography/slope of surrounding area.  
  History of fire occurrence due to lightning, railroads, burning debris, arson, etc.  
  Building setback.  
  Fire protection systems (fire hydrants).  
  Utilities including gas and electric.  

 
Each factor is assigned a point value and the cumulative value of the points determines whether the site is in 
a low, moderate, high, or extreme wildfire hazard setting. Note that if the hazard level is determined to be 
Low, then none of the wildfire criteria are applicable. For a risk assessment checklist, visit www.ibhs.org.  
 
Some  local  governments  have  developed  Wild  Fire  Hazard  Maps  with  generally  4  separate  ratings:  Low, 
Moderate, High, Very High. In addition, some municipalities produce Interface Fuels treatment Strategy Map.  
 
Wildfire Protection Criteria Common to Extreme, High and Moderate Wildfire Hazard Levels  
 
The  following  items  are  applicable  to  all  very  high,  high,  and  moderate  Wildfire  Hazard  Areas.  These 
requirements must be augmented by the hazard specific requirements that follow this section and the builder 
must comply with the municipal guidelines and requirements applicable to the site where the house is to be 
constructed.    
 

1.  A  non-combustible  street  number  at  least  four  inches  high,  reflectorized,  on  a  contrasting 

background, at each driveway entrance, visible from both directions of travel.  

2.  Firewood storage and LP gas containers must be at least 50’ (15m) away from any part of the home 

structure, and have at least 15’ (5m) of survivable space around them.  

3.  Non-combustible, corrosion-resistant screening with a mesh size no greater than ¼” (6mm) covering 
the attic and sub-floor vents. Vent openings shall not exceed 144 square inches (1 m2) at each vent. 

4.  Spark arrestors in all chimneys (Figure 5.1)  

 Page 31

 

 

 


