 

 

  

         June 2010 

 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
 
The Engineering Design Process 
The NBCC specifies where earthquake measures are required in homes with seismic hazard charts (see 
Appendix A).  A Designed ... for safer living® home complies with those requirements.  However, because 
Part 4 of the Code is used, soil types and special site conditions such as sloping terrain are also taken into 
account during the design process.  Local zoning regulations often ignore difficult site conditions, which can 
then be dealt with during the design process.  
 
During the design engineering process, seismic force calculations may be  generated at various locations in 
the home, for various building components, based on the procedure found in Part 4 of the Code and 
supporting appendices.     
 
With the Designed ... for safer living® home, the builder has the support of an experienced engineer when 
needed throughout the construction process.  This can speed the building schedule and eliminate costly 
delays and changes.  Because the engineer is involved from the beginning, design changes can quickly be 
accommodated.  From a marketing point of view, the engineered, Designed ... for safer living® home 
assures quality control during construction and a certified product on completion.  
 
Flexible Quality Design 
Because each Designed ... for safer living® home is built under Part 4 of the Code, virtually any desired 
design can be analysed and the necessary details added, in order to meet the requirements of the program.  
Occasional economic tradeoffs may be required, although most can be eliminated through innovative design 
and engineering.  
 
As the Designed ... for safer living® home runs ahead of current general construction practice, it should 
appeal to buyers, as it is more likely to hold its value.  
 
 
Seismic Forces and Building Response 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 Page 8


