 

  

         June 2010 

 

SEISMIC CRITERIA 

 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
4 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction  
Homes are engineered for the loads placed on them by building materials and environmental forces. The 
seismic forces are rarely experienced, but can be a threat to structural integrity and the survival of the 
equipment and contents in the home.  Seismic forces act on all building components, unlike wind loads that 
primarily impact on the external envelop. Nevertheless, many design details relating to inter-storey 
connections and foundation anchoring, enhance a building’s capacity to resist earthquake and wind load, 
and these are covered in Section 3 on Wind Criteria and not repeated here.  The seismic criteria of the 
Designed … for safer living® program are selected to produce a home, which resists and sometimes 
dissipates seismic forces in order to minimize damage to the building structure and systems.  
 
Advanced Engineering Design 
Most single family and small multi-family dwellings are built under Part 9 of the provincial version of the 
National Building Code of Canada (NBCC).  Seismic criteria are incorporated into the various structural 
requirements.  However, for homes with more complex shapes or structural elements, which may affect 
building performance under seismic loading, the builder is directed from Part 9 to Part 4 of the Code. 
 
It is in Part 4, that seismic force calculations for more complex structures are located.  While the Designed 
... for safer living® home may not always require significant additional structural strengthening following 
Part 4 analysis, it provides the basis for producing a higher performance home.  
 
Part 4 lateral force calculations include an Importance Factor (IE) multiplier, which for a standard home is 1.0.  
Designed ... for safer living® homes have an increased Importance Factor of 1.2, which compares with the 
Code designations of 1.3 for schools and 1.5 for hospitals and other strategic facilities.  These higher 
classifications produce a building, which is designed to have reduced risk of damage and the ability to 
remain occupied during period following most earthquakes. Some building elements may be strengthened, 
connectors somewhat more numerous and anchors with occasionally deeper embedments. The use of Part 
4 allows for a wide variety of home designs, while producing enhanced seismic performance.  
 

 

 

 Page 6


