 

 

  

         June 2010 

INTRODUCTION 

 
Designed … for safer living® 
Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
Home Builder’s Guide 
                         
 
1 
 
Thank you for your interest in the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction’s Designed … for safer living® 
homebuilding  program.  The  program  specifies  construction  and  design  guidelines  to  enable  homes  to 
increase  their  resistance  to  natural,  catastrophe-level  perils  most  likely  to  occur  in  the  area.  In  addition, 
Designed … for safer living® criteria exist for mitigation of damage caused by non-catastrophe-level perils, 
such as fire inside the home, burglary, water loss, and electrical surge.  A builder is permitted to advertise a 
house as a Designed … for safer living® home following satisfactory completion of construction, product 
verification,  plus  other  documentation  as  specified  by  the  program  guidelines.  Final  designation  as  a 
Designed … for safer living® home is issued by an authorized, independent inspector.   
 
Briefly, the natural, catastrophe-level perils addressed by the Designed … for safer living® program are: 
  
Severe  Wind:  Practically  every  part  of  Canada  is  subject  to  some  type  of  severe  wind  hazard  that  can 
readily exceed minimum requirements of even the best building codes.  Types of severe winds include:  
  

  Hurricanes: Catastrophic hurricanes can produce winds in excess of 150 mph (240 km/h). They 
are  also  responsible  for  a  large  portion  of  the  cost  per  year  damages  to  buildings  due  to  wind. 
Hurricanes  have  also  resulted  in  deaths  and  injuries  to  residents  in  some  coastal  areas.  On  the 
immediate coast, storm surge accounts for much of the damage. The Designed … for safer living® 
program offers simple, yet effective solutions to reduce a building’s vulnerability to both catastrophic 
and common hurricanes. 

 

 

 

 

  Tornadoes: Tornadoes can occur in specific part of the country but are most common in areas of the 
country  where  design  level  wind  speeds  in  the  building  code  are  at  the  lowest  levels.    In  Canada, 
during an average year, approximately 80 tornadoes occur and, on average, cause two deaths and 20 
injuries, plus tens of millions of dollars in property damage. These are the reported numbers, many 
more  tornadoes  strike  unpopulated  areas  and  go  undetected.  Many  buildings  would  have  survived 
with only moderate improvements as featured in the Designed … for safer living® program.   

  Severe  Thunderstorms:  Summer  thunderstorms  are  a  fairly  common  occurrence  in  most  areas  of 
Canada.  Thunderstorms not only spawn tornadoes, but can also produce damaging winds of 112 mph 
(180  km/h)  gust  or  more.  Downbursts,  which  are  also  associated  with  thunderstorms,  can  produce 
tornado-like  damage.  Hail  is  also  a  hazard  associated  with  thunderstorms  and  causes  significant 
damage  to  the  exteriors  of  thousands  of  buildings  each  year.  The  Designed  …  for  safer  living® 
program provides improved resistance to these hazards associated with severe thunderstorms.  

  
Earthquakes: Unlike wind, earthquakes come with no warning. There is little opportunity to take cover or 
vacate an unsafe building. In places like the West Coast, design level earthquakes may occur several times 
in  a  lifetime.  In  other  parts  of  the  country,  moderate  earthquakes  occur  with  less  frequency,  but  have 
happened  in  the  not  so  distant  past  in  several  regions.  Earthquakes  are  often  the  cause  of  significant 
damage  and  injury  because  it  is  “unexpected”.  Earthquake  hazard  zones  in  Canada  are  shown  in a  map 
attached  to  Appendix  ‘A’  of  the  Guideline.  The  Designed  …  for  safer  living®  program  addresses  this 
significant and sometimes uncertain hazard with easily implemented solutions. 
  
Floods: Buildings built in the inland or coastal 100-yr flood plain are in serious jeopardy of complete loss in 
the  event  of  a  flood.  For  this  reason,  significant  measures  are  necessary  to  protect  buildings  from  this 
potential  hazard.  Therefore,  the  Designed  …  for  safer  living®  program  only  applies  to  buildings  that 
comply with the strictest condition in the floodfringe zone when building is permitted in these areas.  
 
Wildfires: Every year, and even more so in recent years, wildfires have threatened and destroyed hundreds 
of buildings and lives. While some wildfires are naturally ignited from lightening or other causes, many are 
 Page 1


