ADAPTING ENGINEERING PRACTICES TO CLIMATE CHANGE 

Figure 7: Engineers Canada PIEVC Protocol 
Process. (Source: Engineers Canada)

While engineers have long considered climate 
parameters in engineering design work, this 
has usually meant looking back at historic 
trends. Given the current rate of climate 
change, this is no longer a reliable approach.  
Provincial Professional Engineering Associations 
are responding by adding new professional 
requirements to ensure that potential climate 
change impacts are taken into account in the 
design process for the service life expected 
of the infrastructure.  This is a cultural change 
for agencies responsible for infrastructure, 
consultants carrying out engineering design 
work and clients commissioning the work.  It is 
expected that future engineering work related 
to new infrastructure design and rehabilitation 
will reflect such action and progress. 

The Public Infrastructure Engineering 
Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Engineering 
Protocol, led by Engineers Canada, was 
developed as a 5-step process to analyze 
the engineering vulnerability of individual 
infrastructure systems based on current climate 
and future climate projections. Since 2012, the 
Protocol has been applied to a wide variety 
of infrastructure types, including roads and 
airports.   

For more information, see http://pievc.ca/

CONCLUSION

The research conducted for this report suggests that a changing climate and extreme weather are 
affecting all modes of transportation in every region of Canada, and that many climate risks are 
increasing. The adaptive efforts being undertaken to date speak to the willingness of Canada’s 
governments, agencies, and private sector to confront the risks to transportation safety, efficiency 
and reliability posed by a changing climate. At the same time, gaps and barriers remain, including 
limitations in localized climate projections, and resource and capacity constraints, particularly in 
Canada’s North. Advancements in science and technology, along with training, tools and guidance 
for practitioners, have the potential to help the sector respond to these challenges. Coordination 
across jurisdictional boundaries, and with industry and researchers, will be important to advance 
adaptation solutions and enhance the resilience of the sector in the face of these growing risks.

 
CHAPTER 2: SYNTHESIS 

25
25

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
