10.0 CONCLUSION

This chapter has demonstrated the vulnerability of British Columbia’s transportation system to extreme 
weather and the changing climate, described practices to reduce these risks, and identified potential 
areas for additional work.  The province’s transportation network is critical for the effective movement 
of people and goods through airports, ports, rail, and roads – both within the province and between 
North America and Asia. However, many of British Columbia’s transportation corridors, which traverse 
mountainous terrain and coastlines, are vulnerable to disruption and even failure resulting from 
climate events. 

This chapter also indicates that infrastructure operators in British Columbia are primarily responding 
to failures, rather than anticipating and preparing for change. As a result, infrastructure impacts 
could be more severe than if proactive adaptive measures had been taken.  Along with more 
robust data collection tools for climate and weather variables, and effective guidelines for data 
modeling and interpretation, proactive approaches (i.e. vulnerability assessments, infrastructure 
design requirements) could offer transportation decision-makers a stronger foundation for adaptive 
decisions. Sharing studies of climate vulnerability among operators and modes may improve learning 
and could benefit the transportation system as a whole.

The British Columbia Ministry of Transportation has assessed the vulnerability of several of the 
province’s highways to climate change, and is one of the first jurisdictions to require that road 
infrastructure design work for the ministry consider climate change implications.  This is an important 
indicator that adaptation efforts in British Columbia’s transportation sector are advancing, though 
more work remains to be done. 

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

100
100

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
