WEATHER-RELATED SERVICE DISRUPTIONS

Weather-related delays and cancellations in air transportation services can be very disruptive to 
individuals and the Canadian economy, as they can have ripple effects across the national airport 
system. Causes include thunderstorms, fog, snow, and icing.  In mountainous regions of the British 
Columbia interior weather-related fog and visibility issues can be problematic.  Varying topography 
can result in very different weather conditions in close proximity.  For example, the West Kootenay 
Regional Airport in Castlegar experiences frequent flight delays due to low ceilings and the 
surrounding mountains while the Trail Regional Airport, roughly 40 km south of Castlegar, offers better 
weather conditions and greater reliability in scheduled flights.  Navigation technologies can play 
an important role in reducing weather-related delays. For example, the Northwest Regional Airport 
in Terrace, in the Coastal Mountains, often experiences weather conditions very similar to the West 
Kootenay Regional Airport, but has far fewer weather related cancellations. This can be attributed 
to Instrument Landing Systems (ILS) employed at the Terrace Airport that are not installed at West 
Kootenay. These systems can cost well in excess of $1 million to install, and are often considered 
uneconomic for smaller airports. 

Changes in parameters affecting airport operations, and that can result in flight delays and 
cancellations, include extreme weather, storm surge and sea level rise over time. Fortunately airports 
in British Columbia can handle most snowstorm events, with the occasional service delay.  Having 
appropriate snow removal equipment and staff can help to manage this type of event.  

Visibility issues are more problematic. While Vancouver International Airport has an advanced ILS 
(enabling landing and departures in visibility conditions as low as 600 feet), not every airport in 
British Columbia is equipped with ILS. While other management options such as Required Navigation 
Performance may be available, they often require ongoing cooperation between regional airports 
and air carriers. The main approach to visibility issues is flight cancellation or diversion to alternative 
airports.  This can inconvenience passengers, and over the long-term, potentially compromising 
regional growth. 

IMPACTS ON PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE SYSTEMS

Coastal airports may be exposed to the hazards of storm surge and sea level rise (see Box). For 
example, the low elevation of Vancouver International Airport’s physical infrastructure could 
potentially be affected by storm surge and sea level rises over time.  This airport is a major regional, 
national, and international hub, and disruption of service could have wide-ranging impacts on 
air mode reliability in British Columbia and elsewhere.  The airport is located on Sea Island, close 
to sea level, and is also in the Fraser River floodplain where there is flooding potential from heavy 
precipitation affecting river flow, plus Pacific Ocean storm surge and changing conditions from 
sea level rise.  A dyke system, approximately 15 km long, currently protects Sea Island.  The Airport 
Authority has an ongoing program to manage the dykes and regularly assesses flood risk, while 
working in collaboration with federal, provincial, and local governments to define appropriate dyke 
elevations (Marion Town, Vancouver Airport Authority, personal communication, 2015). Other relevant 
measures at Vancouver Airport include ensuring the airport has an in-to-wind runway in virtually all 
wind conditions; and investments in pavement snow and ice control and de-icing, to ensure aircraft 
can safety operate in severe weather conditions.

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

94
94

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
