9.0 INFORMATION AND KNOWLEDGE GAPS THAT CONSTRAIN DECISION-MAKING

This assessment has identified the following gaps in knowledge and information to advance 
adaptation decision-making related to transportation systems in British Columbia. 

•  Extreme Precipitation Events. Extreme precipitation events are the primary climate-related 

concern for road and rail transportation systems in British Columbia.  Work is ongoing to 
characterize the future nature, frequency and intensity of such events. This work could be 
expanded with a focus on ensuring that decision makers have sufficient information and tools 
to inform system design, operation and maintenance for future extreme weather and climate 
conditions.  Additionally, further work to characterize conditions that affect marine transportation 
and to project future precipitation event frequency and intensity would be useful.

•  Sea Level Rise Impacts on Coastal Infrastructure Systems.  Sea level rise and storm surge pose 
risks to coastal infrastructure in British Columbia, particularly to Vancouver International Airport, 
Sandspit Airport and Port Metro Vancouver.  The Province of British Columbia has an active 
program to assess these risks and provide guidance to decision makers regarding adapting to sea 
level rise. Risk assessments will continue to be a key tool in ensuring that the owners and operators 
of critical coastal infrastructure facilities in British Columbia have the appropriate information to 
build, adjust and maintain infrastructure that is adaptable to sea level rise. 

•  Marine Wind Events. High winds can lead to sailing cancellations and delays within the marine 
transportation system.  Climate change projections of high wind event frequency and intensity 
are not reliable.  More work in this area would provide decision makers with a better foundation to 
plan and implement operational changes to adapt to changes in high wind event frequency and 
intensity.

•  Visibility Issues in the Interior. Visibility can have significant impacts on road and airport operations 

in the British Columbia interior. While these issues are being managed, the causes of low visibility 
(fog) in the interior, and particularly the likely future changes in conditions that lead to these 
events, are not well understood.  More knowledge about these weather effects could aid decision 
makers in implementing new systems and procedures to adapt to anticipated changes.

Climate change adaptation in all transportation marine modes in British Columbia has generally 
been reactive, with issues being addressed only after impacts have been observed.  However, recent 
vulnerability assessments have examined longer-term climate change issues for some infrastructure.  
These studies of climate change and its effects on infrastructure will allow operators to better 
anticipate issues, and encourage the development of contingencies to adapt facilities, assets and 
operations to the risks posed by a changing climate.  Given the contribution of rail, air and marine 
sectors to the provincial and national economies, additional climate change vulnerability assessments 
in all modes could be beneficial.

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

99
99

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
