Trends of warming temperatures and increasingly-severe storm events are projected to continue in 
the future. Although northern governments and practitioners have begun planning and adapting 
to climate change, additional practices and resilience-building strategies are needed to ensure the 
reliability and longevity of transportation infrastructure and systems in northern Canada. 

This chapter assesses the many challenges and opportunities for transportation, associated with 
climate change in Canada’s three northern territories – the Yukon, the Northwest Territories, and 
Nunavut. The chapter provides a regional overview of the territories’ distinct geography and 
transportation networks; discusses observed and projected changes in the northern climate; provides 
examples of associated impacts on transportation; describes adaptation practices to mitigate these 
impacts; and identifies gaps in knowledge and research that remain to be addressed regarding 
future climate risks and opportunities. This synthesis of information aims to enhance understanding of 
climate risks and adaptation practices within the transportation sector, and inform decision-making.

1.1 REGIONAL OVERVIEW

Canada’s North is characterized by its vast size; diverse and rugged landscape; harsh climate; frozen 
ground (i.e. permafrost); and seasonally frozen waterways and marine waters. The landscape of the 
North includes long coastlines, Canada’s highest mountain range (the Saint Elias in the Yukon), densely 
forested areas (across much of the Yukon and large parts of the Northwest Territories) and tundra 
(across all of Nunavut, large parts of the Northwest Territories, and the extreme north of the Yukon).   

While the capital cities of the three territories all have populations in excess of 7,000 people, the 
region’s many other communities generally feature small populations situated vast distances 
from one another, with many only reachable by air or water (see Table 1). These characteristics 
present challenges for transportation infrastructure and operations – and for economic and social 
development more broadly – in the North.  

Table 1: Territorial North Demographic Overview (2014 population estimates). (Source: Statistics 
Canada, 2012a, b, c and Statistics Canada 2014).

Indicator

Population
Area (km2)
Population Density/km2
Number of Communities

Yukon

36,510
474,713

0.1
19

Northwest 
Territories

43,623

1,143,793

0.04
33

Nunavut

36,585

1,877,788

0.02
25

Total 

116,718
3,496,294

0.03
77

The economies of the territories are predominantly resource-based – mining and oil and gas production 
are the region’s primary economic drivers. Mining activity and oil production in the Yukon and 
Northwest Territories are highly dependent upon road transport and systems for supplies and exports. This 
includes a number of key winter roads that support resource-development projects, particularly in the 
Northwest Territories (for example, the Tibbitt to Contwoyto Winter Road – see Case study 1). In contrast, 
economic activities in Nunavut are especially reliant upon sea-based transportation, as there are no 
roads connecting communities and moving goods by air is costly. In the future, marine transportation is 
expected to play an increased role in the economies of the territories. 

The North also has a vibrant social economy, with a diverse mix of people and cultures. In 2011, 52 
per cent of the population of the Northwest Territories, 86 per cent of Nunavut, and 17 per cent of 
the Yukon identified as Aboriginal (Statistics Canada, 2011). Many traditional ways of life for First 
Nations (e.g., hunting, fishing, trapping) require ease of movement across land, including accessible 
routes across snow and ice. Inuit, who have traditionally used sea ice as a “highway” to resources, 

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

30
30

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
