KEY FINDINGS

• 

The Canadian North has experienced some of the most significant warming on the planet. From 
1948 to 2014, the Arctic Tundra region warmed by 2˚C, while the Arctic Mountains and Fjords 
region of Nunavut experienced a temperature increase of 1.6˚C. The greatest warming (2.6°C) 
occurred in the Mackenzie District. These changes have considerable impacts on the people, 
land, ecosystems, and infrastructure. 

•  Permafrost degradation poses both immediate and future risks to northern transportation 

infrastructure. Warming temperatures have increased the vulnerability of roads, railways, and 
airport taxiways and runways to risks associated with ground settlement, slope instability, and 
buckling. Continued warming will further degrade permafrost, with implications for transportation 
safety, system efficiency, community services, and maintenance budgets in the North.

•  Changes to the regional climate have reduced the operating windows and load capacities of 
some winter roads in recent years, in some cases resulting in costly adjustments. Winter roads 
serve as a key seasonal component of some territories’ transportation infrastructure (particularly in 
the Northwest Territories) and are critical for community re-supply. While operating windows have 
always been variable from year to year, recent increases in surface temperature have shortened 
the operating season for some winter roads. This has resulted in the need for alternative, and often 
more costly, methods of shipping, such as air transportation.  

• 

The climatic changes that are opening up northern marine waters to exploration and shipping are 
also making these activities more difficult. Increasing temperatures have led to a rapid decrease 
in sea ice extent, and reduced volumes of multi-year sea ice.  While these changes are slowly 
opening up waterways to new navigational routes, the increased mobility of summer sea ice, 
as well as increased coastal erosion and storm surge flooding, present ongoing difficulties for 
shipping, exploration, and associated coastal infrastructure. 

•  While many adaptation techniques can be used to maintain roads, rail, and airport taxiways 
and runways on permafrost rich soil, some can be cost-prohibitive. Several practices rely on 
the availability of specialized equipment and materials, which can be expensive to transport to 
northern locations.

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Canada’s North is experiencing some of the most significant warming trends anywhere on the 
planet (Bush et al., 2014).  Changing temperatures, precipitation patterns and storm frequency are 
affecting northern ecosystems, livelihoods, and infrastructure, including transportation. In addition to 
withstanding harsh weather conditions, much of Canada’s northern infrastructure was designed and 
built to be operated within a range of site-specific environmental and climate conditions that are 
changing and will continue to change in coming years (National Round Table on the Environment 
and the Economy, 2009). In particular, the changing temperatures of the North are affecting the 
structural integrity of buildings, roads (both all-weather and seasonal), airport runways, rail and marine 
infrastructure, navigable waterways, and other infrastructure. In the most extreme circumstances, 
changes have contributed to infrastructure failure (Government of Nunavut et al., 2011). Changing 
temperatures are also affecting the length of winter road seasons, in some cases resulting in the need 
for alternative, more costly, shipping methods to reach remote communities (Government of Nunavut 
et al., 2011). Resulting disruptions to transportation operations can also affect community re-supply 
and food security. On the water, changing sea ice patterns have affected traditional food harvesting 
practices and marine shipping (Government of Nunavut et al., 2011).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

29
29

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
