7.0 MARINE TRANSPORTATION IN ONTARIO

7.1 PAST IMPACTS

There are several instances of extreme weather and climate affecting marine operations in Ontario. 
For example, during the Great Lakes Storm of 1913 (November 7-13), two converging storm fronts 
created snow squalls and winds of approximately 145 km/h, sinking 34 ships and killing 270 people 
(Environment Canada, 2013a). The damage, which most affected Lakes Huron, Erie and Ontario, 
was estimated at $5 million ($119.3 million in 2015 dollars) (Brown, 2002). The nature of Great Lakes 
navigation during this period increased the risk of ships capsizing, as boats were constructed with 
the narrow width of the St. Lawrence Seaway and the shallow depth of many Great Lakes tributaries 
in mind (Catton, 1984). The storm catalyzed boat-hatch and other safety requirements, and ship-
to-shore communication technology has since improved significantly, helping to prevent casualties 
during high-intensity events (Catton, 1984). 

Low water levels in the Great Lakes have also negatively affected shippers in the past. In 1964, lower-
than-normal water levels damaged harbor infrastructure, requiring $843 million in repairs (in 1988 
dollars, or $1.49 billion in 2015 dollars) (Shlozberg et al., 2014). 

7.2 FUTURE RISKS

Throughout the 21st century, the Great Lakes will likely experience significant annual warming, greater 
evaporation, a longer ice-free season, and changing precipitation patterns. These changes will 
likely affect water levels (see Section 3). For shippers, fluctuating water levels in recent years have 
affected vessel draft capacities and annual shipping volumes throughout the Great Lakes system. 
A continuation of this trend would reduce the loads ships can carry (or produce greater variation in 
seasonal shipping capacity), increase costs, lead to more frequent shipping-schedule disruptions, 
and reduce shoreline access (Boyle et al., 2013; Shlozberg et al, 2014). Economic losses would be 
significant. Recent analysis suggests the regional economy would suffer impacts of approximately 
$1.18 billion by 2030 and $1.92 billion by 2050 as a result of reduced shipping productivity in low-water 
conditions (Shlozberg et al, 2014). While low water levels are not unprecedented – the 1960s also 
featured below-average levels in many lakes (Dorling and Hanniman, 2016) – the potential for far-
reaching economic impacts make this a key concern for Ontario’s economy. 

Fluctuations in water levels also affect infrastructure stability, requiring additional dredging of harbour 
navigational channels and interior facility slips. Such measures carry significant environmental 
implications. Low water levels can also cause infrastructure decay, as wooden structural elements 
become increasingly exposed to oxygen (Clark, 2012). Ontario has experienced these issues: low water 
levels in 2013 caused problems at docks in Tobermory and South Baymouth on Georgian Bay, when 
ferries sat too low for the fenders (designed to prevent vessels from damaging wharves). Ferry services 
could not begin as scheduled until these fenders were modified (The Manitoulin Expositor, 2013). 

Other risks to marine transportation identified in the literature include flash-flooding of inland 
waterways as a result of extreme precipitation and overland flow from ice-jams (Andrey and Mills, 
2003). High winds during storms also make ship handling more difficult, and ice build-up on structures 
from more freezing rain and extreme weather events may increase ice-scour damage on dock 
structures and visual navigational aids during winter (OFCM, 2002). 

Practitioners also suggest that “seasonal shift” of the navigable period is another important issue 
for shippers in the Great Lakes and St. Lawrence Seaway, pushing traditional construction and 
maintenance schedules out of alignment with operational demands. For instance, extended or year-
round shipping in the Great Lakes would shorten or eliminate the “lay-up” period for operators in the 
Great Lakes, when fleet maintenance and preparation typically occurs.

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

170
170

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
