…

project manager – a team leader experienced with environmental management systems, risk assessment, 
and a comprehensive understanding of the organizational structure – was also crucial. 

A number of lessons were learned:

•  Practitioners suggest the CCRAT would have been more effective if interdependencies and “synergistic 
risks” between the public and private sectors (such as energy, communication, insurance and finance) 
were identified prior to its undertaking. Engagement and collaboration with these sectors reduces the 
risk of economic disruption to the community and enables opportunities for more adaptive and resilient 
infrastructure. 

•  Another potential shortcoming was that “residual risk” (the degree of risk that remains once an 

adaptation has been implemented) was not assessed for each proposed adaptation action as part of 
this phase. Residual-risk analysis and cost-benefit analysis can be useful and important mechanisms to 
assist municipal managers in prioritizing adaptation actions. 

•  Practitioners also identified challenges in effectively communicating the severity of climate change to 

the public. The Royal Academy of Engineering (2011) notes the importance of consulting users of the 
assets and services regarding potential new service levels in addition to the amount tax payers would 
agree to pay for a particular level of service. A significant challenge for both industry and politicians 
is how to best communicate to the public the limits of resilience and the need to modify demand for 
infrastructure.   

Overall, the CCRAT has helped Toronto set clearer organizational goals on the issue of climate adaptation, 
and allows TSD to manage its assets and services in accordance with City Council’s priorities of customer-
service excellence and cost reduction in a transparent and fully-accountable manner. Critically, many 
of the adaptations CCRAT identified do not require major increases in capital or operating budgets. For 
instance, enhancing inventory databases, adopting environmental management systems, providing 
training, and improving coordination to reflect “best-management” principles and increase both adaptive 
capacity and organizational efficiency, involve little or no extra cost for the municipality. This is an example 
of “low-regret” adaptation. Focus is now shifting to ambitious, long-term actions which require additional 
investment. The summer of 2014 saw a high level of council support for these actions (such as a new culvert 
management system, approved for $350,000 to inventory all culverts less than 3m (in width) in the city’s 
road network. In sum, the City of Toronto considers the CCRAT useful for both private and public sectors to 
assess their vulnerabilities to climate change and develop an adaptation path to resiliency. 

Written with input from Nazzareno Capano (Transportation Services Division, City of Toronto) and Vesna 
Stevanovic-Briatico (Transportation Services Division, City of Toronto).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

297
297

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
