Table 3: Example of internal and external collaboration in adaptive planning for climate change and 
urban transportation at the City of Toronto.

Partnership

Toronto and Region 
Conservation Authority 
(TRCA)

Consultation with City 
of Toronto Energy 
and Environment 
Office; Toronto Transit 
Commission and 
Engineering and 
Construction Services; 
and other agencies, 
boards, commissions, 
and divisions 
Toronto Transit 
Commission (TTC)

Flood Warning System:  

Coordinated action

• 

• 

TRCA provides flood warnings to TSD’s Road Emergency Services 
Communications Unit (RESCU) for the Don Valley Parkway expressway 
and Bayview Extension. This real time monitoring, using cameras and 
communication protocol, helps TSD implement road closures and manage 
traffic. 
TSD meets regularly with TRCA staff to review flood-response protocols 
and real time response to events, and to establish a more comprehensive 
response to flooding.

Environmental assessment: 

• 

TRCA is undertaking an in-house environmental assessment and collaborating 
with TSD to identify risks and possible mitigation actions to enhance current 
control measures for flooding along the Don Valley parkway and Bayview 
Avenue (Don Valley Corridor).

Climate Change Risk Assessment (CCRA)  (See Case study 1):  

• 

• 

This tool identifies and assesses risks due to climate change, including the 
effect of climate change on the delivery of services, management of 
infrastructure and protection of the natural environment. 
The CCRA enables service and infrastructure providers to identify and 
prioritize key climate change impacts and risks, and assess benefits of various 
risk mitigation or adaptive actions. 

Examples of some collaborative initiatives include:

a)  TSD developed a harmonized process for implementing concrete bus bays 
and stops; asphalt pavement surfaces at bus stops generally exhibit severe 
distortion (e.g., rutting) due to bus loads and extreme heat conditions;  
Installation of concrete bus pads on the roadway as part of resurfacing 
projects. These are typically applied only in situations where the existing 
asphalt surface is shoving or rutting moderately (>25mm) or more;

b) 

c)  TSD identified and prioritized 100 traffic signal locations for the installation of 

uninterruptable power supply (UPS) devices, including signals at railroads, 
major intersections and expressway ramp terminals. A pilot program was 
initiated to outfit 12 high-priority locations. 

d)  A second-phase review is underway to identify UPS needs for critical 

intersections located on emergency routes; and 

e)  TSD established contracted services for mobile diesel and gas trucks; third 

party fuel cards are available when supply of fuel is affected during extreme 
weather events. 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

303
303

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
