4.0 ROAD SYSTEMS

4.1 HISTORIC CLIMATE IMPACTS

British Columbia highways have exhibited clear vulnerability to extreme rain events that have caused 
road washouts, mudslide blockages and bridge closures.  Heavy precipitation can cause flooding in 
rivers and creeks and may also trigger debris flows that can block roads, and clog culverts leading 
to road washouts.  Debris can also accumulate at bridge structures, potentially leading to bridge 
failures.  In some instances, these events can isolate communities from their principle lines of supply.

Three events, which all resulted in washouts of road infrastructure systems, are highlighted here to 
illustrate the climate sensitivities of British Columbia’s highway infrastructure.  The locations of these 
events have subsequently been the focus of detailed vulnerability assessments by the British Columbia 
Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure (see Section 4.2).

BELLA COOLA - SEPTEMBER 2010 

On September 25th and 26th, 2010 an intense frontal system stalled over the Central British Columbia 
coast, bringing heavy rainfall exceeding the 1-in-200 year rainfall of 200 mm (TranBC, 2016). The 
rainfall resulted in washouts and rock falls which, along with flooding, closed Highway 20 between 
Tatla Lake and Bella Coola (Figure 8). The route was impassable at 12 locations, as 12.5 kilometres 
of Highway were damaged, underwater or simply gone.  The impact of the road closure on local 
communities was made worse by other consequences of the storm as residents depended on diesel 
to generate electricity for heat, water and other vital services. Highway access to Tatla Lake and Bella 
Coola was not fully restored for 17 days and resulted in transportation repair costs of $45 million.

Figure 8: Bella Coola: Highway 20 Flood Impacts – Sallompt Road bridge approach washout. 
(Source: British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure)

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

80
80

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
