4.3.1.2 Winter roads

Practices to maintain the integrity of winter roads include the pre-emptive removal of snow, as 
well as the construction and maintenance of snow caches (stockpiles of snow used as supporting 
material for degraded segments of winter roads). Snow removal allows freezing fronts to penetrate 
the ground faster, removing heat from the ground and promoting ice formation, while snow caches 
constructed near difficult land crossings allow overland sections to be rebuilt quickly (Deton’Cho-
Stantec, 2013). To improve drainage, flattening side slopes on winter roads allows for the gentle 
removal of water away from the infrastructure (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). Operational practices 
include spraying winter roads and bridges with water to thicken ice and delay closure. Towards the 
end of the operating season, some operators also restrict hauling to nighttime, when the ice sheet is 
stronger (Rawlings et al., 2009).

Several organizations have produced guiding documents to assist practitioners in the construction 
and maintenance of winter roads, including the Transportation Association of Canada (2011), the 
Government of the Northwest Territories (2015b and 2015c), the Canadian Standards Association 
Group (CSA, 2010), and the Standards Council of Canada’s Northern Infrastructure Standardization 
Initiative (2015). These guidelines discuss general ice safety, ice behaviour under loading, ice-cover 
management, and end-of-season management (among others). Methods to deal with ice cracking 
are also covered in detail to ensure the safety of crossing frozen bodies of water; these risks to roads 
can be mitigated over the long term by establishing permanent crossings, including bridges over 
“choke points” (points of congestion created by the layout of a network) (Rawlings et al., 2009). 
For example, the Deh Cho Bridge, which crosses a 1 km-wide section of the Mackenzie River, is 
designed to eliminate seasonal disruptions to road transportation when ice bridges and ferry services 
become unavailable (Office of the Auditor General of Canada, 2011). For winter roads traversing 
ice, temporary culvert crossings may also be converted to permanent culverts, including systems to 
handle higher flows (e.g., stacked culvert systems) (Deton Cho-Stantec, 2013). Additionally, alternate 
routes can be considered when segments of roadway become unreliable (Deton Cho-Stantec, 2013) 
(e.g., increasing the use of barge transportation, or constructing more expensive all-weather roads) 
(Furgal and Prowse, 2008).

4.3.2 INFRASTRUCTURE PLANNING/SITING 

The location of infrastructure is an important consideration for decision-makers, engineers, and 
planners in northern Canada. Critical baseline information includes data regarding local climate, 
permafrost conditions/sensitivity, and terrain constraints. Permafrost mapping and geotechnical 
monitoring, including assessments of soil type and ground ice content, are also conducted to avoid 
construction on overly sensitive ground (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). 
Improvements to permafrost databases and analysis of permafrost conditions could further support 
territorial governments in planning and decision-making, to permit greater understanding of methods 
to maintain transportation infrastructure on permafrost (Environment Yukon, 2009). Databases of this 
nature are maintained by the Geological Survey of Canada. 

Many of the guidance documents discussed previously are also useful when identifying optimal 
locations for both all-season and winter roads. Additionally, land-use guidelines applicable to road 
construction have been developed. These encourage proponents to consider northern Canada’s 
unique topography (i.e. pingos4 and permafrost), drainage, and vegetation, along with the social 
and economic impacts of proposed roadways, during project planning and design (Aboriginal Affairs 
and Northern Development Canada, 2010). 

4 

 Referring to hills of rock and soil with ice cores that occur in permafrost-rich areas of the Arctic.

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

45
45

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
