PERMAFROST

Thawing permafrost is a significant issue in Canada’s north, where infrastructure is built on soils 
underlain by permafrost (Prowse et al., 2009; Transportation Association of Canada, 2010) (see 
Chapter 3).

Temperature variations may also change the nature of transportation hazards in winter. For example, 
areas traditionally challenged by snowfall may face increased freezing rain and black ice.

2.3 CLIMATE RISKS TO URBAN TRANSPORTATION

Roadways, rail transit systems, and active transportation networks are vulnerable to climate risks 
and extreme weather in two key ways. First, operations can be disrupted by extreme weather 
events and obstructed rights-of-way, as described in Section 2.1. Second, infrastructure is structurally 
and physically vulnerable to the increasing range of some climate variables (i.e. temperature 
and precipitation) expected under future conditions. Infrastructure may be exposed to weather 
extremes unaccounted for in original engineering designs, which assumed that past climate extremes 
accurately represent future conditions (see Box). Severe weather and shifting “average” conditions 
can therefore shorten infrastructure life spans, reduce performance, and increase maintenance and 
operating costs (McLeod and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014). The following sections provide an overview 
of climate impacts to urban transportation systems summarized in Table 1.

REGULATORY VULNERABILITIES:  CODES, STANDARDS, AND RELATED INSTRUMENTS (CSRI)

The failure to sufficiently consider changing climate conditions in the development and application 
of engineering and land-use standards might be termed “regulatory vulnerability.” A survey of case 
studies which used the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Engineering 
Protocol5 considered the role codes, standards and related instruments (CSRI) play with respect to 
resilient infrastructure (Engineers Canada, 2012). The survey found that some jurisdictions apply national 
codes directly; some modify national codes; and others develop location-specific codes to reflect local 
geography and risk-tolerance preferences. The report concluded that adopting a “climate adjustment 
factor” into CSRI at the national level may not revolutionize local practices, but the authors suggest 
that frequent updates based on climate model projections would assist practitioners in adapting their 
CSRI. Other inputs to CSRI, including professional judgment and management direction based on local 
conditions; accepted practices of the era; maintenance, operability, and procurement considerations; 
and other social, environmental, and economic factors, were considered robust in Canada (Engineers 
Canada, 2012).

5 

  The PIEVC Engineering Protocol, led by Engineers Canada, was developed as a 5-step process to analyze the 
engineering vulnerability of individual infrastructure systems based on current climate and future climate projections. 
Further information can be found at http://pievc.ca/. 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

280
280

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
