 

4
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 4: CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION AT PORT 
SAINT JOHN

Port Saint John is Atlantic Canada’s largest port by tonnage. It connects global markets to central Canada 
by rail and road, and serves regionally-important industries such as potash, petroleum, and tourism (i.e. 
the cruise industry). Climate-related impacts and disruptions to the port’s operations negatively affect 
the regional and national economy, as well as the Port’s profitability. Port operators have identified a 
number of risks to infrastructure and operations related to extreme, variable and/or changing climatic 
conditions. Spring flooding has been particularly problematic. 

Sea-level rise and storm surges pose increasing risks to port infrastructure, designed for a 100-year lifespan. 
In late 2015-early 2016, Port Saint John experienced an unusually high number of strong wind events, 
producing storm surges in the inner harbour. During one particularly strong event on October 29, 2015 
(the peak of which coincided with an extra high tide), infrastructure sustained approximately $20,000 in 
damages (Chris Hall, Port Saint John, personal communication, 2016).

Several actions, implemented and planned by the Port as part of its modernization efforts, are expected to 
make the port more resilient to variable and changing climatic conditions, and more reliable for shippers 
and mariners. For example, the “SmartAtlantic” inshore weather buoy was recently launched, along with a 
wave forecasting tool. Figure 15 provides an example of the forecasting output from Saint John Harbour’s 
SmartAtlantic buoy. This data accurately predicted the storm-surge event on October 29, 2015.

Figure 15: SmartAtlantic buoy output for Saint John Harbour (October 29, 2015). (Source: Chris Hall, Port Saint John) 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

…

245
245

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
