6.2 FUTURE RISKS

Rising air temperatures will continue to affect permafrost conditions, presenting a risk to the integrity of 
both gravel and paved runways. Increased precipitation may lead to reduced traction and visibility. 
These changes will increasingly affect the planning, design, and maintenance of airports in the North.  

Finally, weather extremes associated with increasing and varying wind speeds, are expected to affect 
airports. For example, high winds contribute to severe blizzards and snowstorms that limit visibility and 
have the potential to slow down airport operations. These issues are summarized in Table 4.

6.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

Methods to address permafrost degradation affecting paved runway and taxiway issues are similar 
to those for all-weather roads given the similarities between these types of infrastructure (see Case 
study 3). Generally, airports in the North are reacting to these changes in the absence of long-term 
strategic planning.

Airports that have gravel runways can correct for ground settlement resulting from permafrost thaw 
by adding material to the runway/taxiway. Gravel is easier to resurface/grind up and replace in 
comparison to pavement (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). Gravel runways can also be reconstructed 
without having to transport heavy specialized equipment to the location. 

In cases of heavy precipitation, grooving on paved runways and taxiways can improve traction and 
drainage. This method has been applied at Norman Wells Airport in the Northwest Territories in order 
to increase drainage and improve surface friction (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). The cost of grooving 
varies depending on the type of runway material (e.g., concrete or asphalt), the type and size of 
aggregate (e.g., limestone, gravel, etc.), the age and condition of the runway surface, the size of 
the project, and local factor costs (e.g., fuel costs, support equipment, mobilization costs) (Best et 
al., 2014). While runway grooving has been shown to enhance water drainage, improve friction, and 
reduce sanding requirements, this technique is relatively costly (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). In the 
event that grooving and/or sanding are not sufficient to increase traction and improve drainage, 
heavy machinery has been employed to remove pooling water.

Airports have been increasingly applying sand to surfaces in order to counter the effects of standing 
water and freezing rain. Sand requirements have been growing – for instance, Norman Wells Airport 
increased its use of sand from 10 to 15 tonnes per year prior to 2000 to over 150 tonnes per year in 
2012 (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

Airports attempt to mitigate the impacts of high snowfall on permafrost (thermal insulation) by 
removing snow as quickly as possible. In order for airplanes to operate during periods of heavy 
snowfall, airport personnel continuously clear runways and taxiways to allow airplanes to take off and 
land safely. 

De-icing agents are used commonly at northern airports to address aircraft wing contamination 
(e.g., by ice, snow, or freezing rain) (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). De-icing agents can also be used 
to clear contaminants from runways and taxiways. These products contain glycol, and it has been 
suggested that runoff from these compounds may result in warmer ground temperatures and other 
environmental impacts. There have been calls for the development of a glycol management strategy 
as the volume of glycol used at northern airports increases (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

52
52

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
