Bridge infrastructure is also vulnerable to extreme heat. Bridges are designed to withstand some 
expansion and contraction through the use of flexible materials embedded between fixed points.  
However, as temperatures increase, the limits of these expansion joints can be exceeded, displacing 
material or cracking deck materials, especially at the interface with fixed points. This cracking can 
lead to substantial bridge deterioration, resulting in closures and lengthy detours (Cohen et al., 2005). 
In addition, both extreme heat and cold may result in malfunctioning traffic control signals (McLeod 
and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014). 

As seasonal temperature patterns shift, the frequency of freeze-thaw cycling is likely to increase 
throughout Canada, and the timing and onset of freeze-thaw events are likely to change, with 
implications for road infrastructure (Transportation Research Board, 2008). During periods of thaw, 
moisture seeps into small cracks, freezes and expands when cold returns, and melts (causing 
pavement weakness) during the next thaw (United States Federal Highway Administration, 2015). As 
a result, pavement is more likely to experience shearing (cracking) and rutting, reducing the strength 
and stability of roadways (Transportation Research Board, 2008; United States Federal Highway 
Administration, 2015). In northern climates, freeze-thaw cycling and temperature increases also 
contribute to further permafrost degradation, which poses risks to the stability of urban roads and their 
embankments (Woudsma et al., 2007; Transportation Association of Canada, 2010).

CHANGING WATER LEVELS

Bridge scour, which refers to the removal of supportive sand and rock sediment around bridges 
constructed over waterways (Transportation Research Board, 2008), has affected many Canadian 
jurisdictions during high-water events (Environment Canada, 2014). Similarly, flooding and storm surges 
pose erosion risks to coastal highways – this is particularly problematic in Atlantic Canada and British 
Columbia (AMEC Inc., 2011). Vancouver was recently named the 15th most-vulnerable city in the world 
to sea level rise, with likely impacts to road infrastructure by 2100 (at which point 1.1m of sea level rise 
is anticipated).  These impacts include inundation, erosion, and washing-out of low-lying downtown 
streets (Mills, 2016).

WIND

Data suggest the intensity of wind gusts (on average and during extreme events) is likely to increase 
over the 21st century in Canada (Cheng et al., 2008), although with considerable regional variability 
(Cheng et al., 2014). Fallen debris (i.e. power lines, trees, and branches) from high winds can obstruct 
roadways, sidewalks, and cycling pathways (City of Montreal, 2015), while blowing snow disrupts 
visibility in winter months (Andrey et al., 2013). Strong winds may also temporarily close bridges – for 
instance, the Burlington Skyway near Hamilton, Ontario is closed when winds reach or exceed 85km/h 
(Craggs, 2014). 

WILDFIRE

Changing patterns of temperature and precipitation affect the frequency and severity of wildfires, 
particularly in Canada’s drier, western regions (i.e., the Prairies and British Columbia). Recent research 
suggests that the frequency of wildfires will rise over the 21st century, and that fire management 
agencies in both coastal and temperate areas may need to adapt their planning and response 
capacities to deal with potential changes in fire regimes (Wang et al., 2015). This has implications for 
transportation, particularly for emergency response planning. For example, during the catastrophic 
2011 wildfires in Slave Lake, Alberta, emergency personnel successfully coordinated the evacuation 
of residents by road, despite the availability of only a handful of exit routes out of the town (which 
quickly became congested) and thick smoke. This success was attributed to planning and coordination 
amongst municipal departments and emergency personnel prior to the crisis (KPMG, 2012).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

282
282

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
