Figure 7: Spring Creek Triple Box Culvert at 
Pearson Airport. (Source: Toronto Pearson - Spring 
Creek Culvert, 2010 - Photo taken by Morrison 
Hershfield Limited and provided courtesy of the 
Greater Toronto Airport Authority)

…

In Stage 4, the engineering analysis, staff calculated 
the relationship between current and future climate 
stress levels and the capacity of stormwater 
infrastructure. Seven vulnerable interactions were 
identified, related primarily to heavy, extreme-
heavy, and prolonged rainfall events (see GTAA, 
2014b for definitions of these events).

Stage 5 identified recommended actions. These 
included reviewing existing GTAA emergency plans 
for rain, snow, ice, and high winds; emergency 
planning for low-probability, high-impact events 
(e.g., hurricanes and tornadoes); ensuring regular 
inspection and maintenance of stormwater facilities 
(despite a generally positive prognosis); and revisiting 
climate data frequently (i.e. new IPCC scenarios). 

Since most assessed facilities were open ponds or 
very large structures, the analysis concluded that 
slight temperature and precipitation increases 
by mid-century (seasonally, annually, and in the 
frequency and intensity of extremes) will not likely 
produce serious and specific infrastructure impacts.

The PIEVC application suggests that under higher-temperature future conditions, there is a lower 
likelihood of extreme cold events. However, the probability of high-intensity rainfall events will be greater. 
During the process, staff became familiar with both extremes – July 2013 brought extreme rain, while 
December 2013 and January 2014 brought heavy snowfall, significant ice accumulation, and cold 
temperatures to the region.

GTAA staff suggested that the PIEVC process was useful in identifying both threats and opportunities for 
airport operations. As a bond-issuing entity, the GTAA has a responsibility to make investors aware of issues 
that might affect investment decisions, including climate risks. Challenges the GTAA faced when applying 
the PIEVC protocol included:

•  Maintaining consistency and continuity in staff responsible for carrying out the assessment; 

• 

• 

Time- and cost-overruns of approximately 30 percent due to reorganization. 

Ensuring organization-wide buy-in. 

Staff suggested that while baseline climate data were somewhat outdated (only historical data for the 
period 1971-2000 was available; climate normals from 1981-2010 had not yet been released), there was a 
consensus that more recent data would have shifted trends included in the vulnerability assessment only 
incrementally.

Overall, the GTAA’s PIEVC assessment has raised awareness and understanding of climate risks among 
operators and shareholders alike. Since the project assessed only $90 million of Pearson’s $6-7 billion in 
assets, the organization is now developing a streamlined process based on the PIEVC model to apply to 
other infrastructure more rapidly, at a lower cost, and at an appropriate level of detail.

Written in collaboration with Derek Gray (Greater Toronto Airports Authority).

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

169
169

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
