Results of these two assessments identified a common vulnerability - the impact of extreme rainfall, 
such as high-intensity, short-duration (HISD) rainfall events, on highway drainage infrastructure 
(see Box). This risk was more pronounced on the Coquihalla Highway study location, where the 
increasing future intensity and frequency of atmospheric river events was identified as a very 
significant vulnerability.  A similar pattern of risk was identified for the Yellowhead Highway (British 
Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure, 2014c).   

As a result of these findings, and in consideration of recent extreme precipitation events in British 
Columbia that had damaged highway infrastructure, the remaining three highway assessments 
focused on extreme rainfall and other drainage challenging events.

CALCULATING EXTREME RAINFALL VALUES FOR INFRASTRUCTURE VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENTS

Extreme rainfall event design values are not always readily available for vulnerability 
assessments, especially for older infrastructure or through climate projection work. The values 
used for vulnerability assessments depend on the infrastructure system design, which in the 
past has relied on historical climate information for extreme events. They can vary significantly 
depending upon the location, topography, local and historical weather and climate conditions 
and the infrastructure involved.  For example, the Coquihalla Highway assessment identified an 
extreme rainfall intensity event as >76 mm of rain over a period of 24 hours, while the Yellowhead 
Highway and highways 20, 37A and 97 assessments used 24 hour rainfall values of >35 mm 
and >98 mm, respectively, to define extreme rainfall.  While the general projections outlined in 
Section 3 provide a starting point for this type of analysis, they are only the first step of a more 
focussed analysis necessary to answer questions about specific infrastructure systems. 

Table 6: Summary of Findings from British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure 
Vulnerability Assessments. (Source: British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure, 2014b)

Vulnerability 
Assessment
Coquihalla

Yellowhead

Bella Coola

Stewart
Pine Pass

Summary of Findings

All high level vulnerabilities identified for this highway segment were associated with HISD 
events.  HISD events also dominated the medium vulnerability outcomes.
80% of the higher vulnerability items were related to HISD events.  Other vulnerability factors 
identified included: 

Sensitivity to freeze/thaw impacts on winter maintenance; and 
Sensitivities to spring freshet impacts on culvert systems.

•  Bridge structure sensitivities to high temperature;
• 
• 
Higher vulnerabilities were associated with the impact of freshet conditions on protection 
works and bridge end fill.

Within the medium vulnerability category, 27% were related to HISD events.  The remainder 
were associated with freshet events.  These events are seen to challenge protection works, 
stabilization works and drainage elements in a very similar fashion to HISD events.
Same results as Bella Coola; 26% of vulnerabilities related to HISD events.
High vulnerabilities were associated with the impact of freshet conditions and HISD events on 
protection works and bridge end fill and third party utilities.  Of the high vulnerabilities, five were 
directly related to HISD events while the others were associated with freshet conditions.

Within the medium vulnerability category, 53% were related to HISD events.  The rest were 
associated with freshet events.  These events are seen to challenge protection works, 
stabilization works and drainage elements in a very similar fashion to HISD events.

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

85
85

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
