…

Future projections are consistent with observed trends. Climate change scenarios (in the absence of 
adaptation measures) project that the length of the winter road operating season will decrease from 
approximately 65 days in 2010 to 58 days by 2020 and 49 days by 2050 (with a 6 to 8 day margin of error 
per season).

Adaptation costs: It is possible that the winter road will remain viable through 2050, although there may 
be significant costs associated with flexible scheduling and increased construction and maintenance 
requirements. These costs are estimated in the range of $55 to 155 million3 over a 35-year horizon.

There is also a significant risk of disruptions associated with late opening, early closure, or non-opening 
of the road. If the TCWR season length drops to fewer than 45 days, the road will no longer be able 
to accommodate an average season’s demand. This has direct implications for mine production. In 
these circumstances, the most significant costs are likely to be associated with a shift to other modes of 
transportation. The total estimated cost of this scenario over 35 years is approximately $213 million, with a 
maximum cost of $1.8 billion (consisting mainly of production losses). 

In summary, changes to the TCWR’s operational season length create significant economic risks for both 
operators and users, assuming demand for the road increases or remains stable. Improved understanding 
of climate thresholds and associated costs for road owners and users may help to inform future economic 
and vulnerability assessments for winter roads.

Written based on findings from Perrin et al., 2015.

3 

These estimates represent net present values in 2015 dollars with a 4% discount rate applied.

4.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

Adaptation practices for roads vary by season and type of road (e.g., all-weather vs. winter). 
Generally, adaptation approaches for northern roads fall under three major categories: maintenance 
and monitoring practices; infrastructure planning and siting; and construction techniques and 
technologies. 

4.3.1 MAINTENANCE AND MONITORING PRACTICES

4.3.1.1 All-weather roads

Ongoing monitoring of infrastructure conditions is important for identifying maintenance priorities, in 
preparation for gradual climatic changes and extreme weather events. In areas at risk of permafrost 
thaw, all-weather roads can be maintained through several methods, including clearing snow from 
vulnerable sections of roads built on permafrost (e.g., side slopes); conducting alternative routing 
assessments prior to reconstruction; and road-shoulder widening (Transportation Association of 
Canada, 2010). Culverts experiencing accelerated permafrost degradation can be replaced or 
expanded if runoff capacity is exceeded, and accompanying ditching/drainage may be enhanced 
in this event as well (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). As permafrost thaws, all-weather roads that carry 
significant traffic – particularly heavy vehicles – will require greater maintenance compared to lower-
traffic routes.

Monitoring can also mitigate the impact of forest fires, which often result in the closure of road 
segments. While some delays are inevitable, a public notification system can help mitigate 
bottlenecks and other effects of closure. Monitoring ground conditions after a forest fire is also 
important, as fires typically have an impact on underlying permafrost (Semeniuk, 2014).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

44
44

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
