specifically because of the cracking phenomenon that lets rain water penetrate and consequently 
increase the saturation level of the soil and of roadway materials (Masseck, 2014).

The relative rise in sea level of approximately 40 centimeters since the beginning of the 20th century 
exposes several portions10 of the Quebec road system, in particular along Highway 20 and Route 
132 (Bernatchez and Fraser, 2011). The rise of relative sea level, among other things, reduces soil 
stability under buildings, infrastructure and roads in Quebec (Bernatchez et al., 2012). It decreases 
the stability of the transport system as a whole and, consequently, that of the supply and mobility 
system. The acceleration of this phenomenon is likely to increase the risk of road flooding from storm 
surges in the St. Lawrence corridor (Savard et al, 2016. Lemmen et al., 2008; Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change, 2013). The problem of waves and tides on the Quebec coast along 
the Gulf and up the middle estuary is further compounded by the fact that the coast will be less 
protected by decreasing ice cover. In addition, submersion events could become increasingly 
frequent and intense and reach areas that, until now, were not highly affected. Without adaptation 
measures that respect the coast’s geomorphology, erosion will continue to affect the natural 
system, the integrity of the built environment and the quality of life for most communities living in 
coastal areas (Bernatchez, 2015; Ouranos, 2015).

Riprap11, seawalls, jetties, etc., are forms of protection that reinforce the public’s sense of safety 
(Cooper and Pile, 2014; Friesinger and Bernatchez, 2010; Linham and Nicholls, 2010). That said, these 
methods are costly and may be a factor in the breakdown of some natural slopes and beaches 
(lowering, shrinking, etc.), especially if they are used to protect slopes in loose zones (Bernatchez et 
coll., 2008; Bernatchez, 2015). Where sediment is loose, riprap reduces beaches’ natural ability to 
absorb the energy from storm surges. It is therefore likely to contribute to erosion (Drejza et al., 2014; 
Bernatchez et al., 2011; Bernatchez and Fraser, 2011) and scour at the edges of riprap and other 
artificial linear structures. Furthermore, turbulence that occurs when water hits the edges of a structure 
erodes the sand of any unprotected neighboring areas (Bernatchez and Fraser, 2011). 

In the SeptÎles and Percé regions, the width of beaches has shrunk by 85% and 44% respectively, where 
the shoreline was artificially enhanced by a rigid protective structure (Bernatchez and Fraser, 2011).
Other effects of climate change on terrestrial infrastructure are associated with the increased intensity 
of rain precipitation in the winter that could create negative impacts, in particular for the management 
of surface water runoff (Groleau et al., 2007). For example, existing drainage systems on coastal roads 
can sometimes contribute to the formation of ravines where water collects (Ministère de la Sécurité 
publique du Québec, 2012), and this may trigger landslides and speed up erosion. On the other hand, 
in the south of the province, around the St. Lawrence Valley, rising average temperatures and changes 
in precipitation patterns could have a positive impact due to less snow and ice on roads, which could 
translate into lower costs for ice and snow removal of roads (Webster et al., 2008).  

Other effects of climate change on land infrastructure are summarized in Table 2. 

10  A portion of road corresponds to a route itinerary. It can be regional or local.
11 

 Riprap is an adaptation option built by dumping of stones of various size with a soft slope in order to absorb and dissipate wave 
energy before it reaches the shore (Circé et al., 2016)

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

199
199

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
