KEY FINDINGS

•  Climate change will affect the natural environment of all regions of Quebec and may damage or 

cause service interruptions to transportation systems. Nunavik has, and will continue to, experience 
significant climate change and will have to deal with the thawing of the permafrost on which 
transportation infrastructure is built. In eastern Quebec, the increase in relative sea level, loss of ice 
cover, freeze-thaw cycles and changes to storm systems will contribute to further erosion of riverbanks 
and shorelines. For all regions of Quebec, Surface runoff management is a challenge.

• 

The vulnerability of transportation systems to climate change varies according to regional 
characteristics, the type of infrastructure and its use. The condition and maintenance of 
infrastructure, the current use of transportation systems and the availability of alternatives during 
service interruptions, are all factors that influence the scope of climate change impacts on 
transportation systems.

•  Extreme weather events represent one of the greatest risks for the transportation sector, in all 

the regions of Quebec. Episodes of heavy rain, floods, coastal erosion and landslides will affect 
both the transportation infrastructure and the mobility of people and goods. The isolation of 
communities that depend more on one particular mode of transportation could be accentuated 
by extreme weather events.

•  Although thawing permafrost is the most significant climate change impact affecting Quebec’s 

northern communities, similar to the northern territories, rising temperatures are also reducing winter 
mobility due to shorter freezing periods.   The shorter winter season and loss of ice cover make access 
to the region and its resources more difficult for individuals who depend on them for their way of life.  

•  Climate change adaptation issues represent significant social, institutional, environmental 

and economic challenges. Success stories in this area are the result of multisectoral initiatives, 
involving players from the public and private sectors and civil society, and their inclusion in 
existing planning efforts. 

•  Acquiring data to monitor the condition of infrastructure and efforts to search for effective 
solutions for transportation systems are key means of adapting to the inevitable changes. 
Adaptation options will affect both the design and management practices for the operation and 
maintenance of infrastructure.  Analysing the potential performance of these options depends on 
a solid knowledge of the transportation systems and the environment in which they operate.

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

183
183

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
