Storm surges are related to the height of the sea above the astronomical tide during heavy storms. 
More frequent storm surges could increase marine submersion events as well as erosion of natural 
environments such as beaches and dune ridges. Storms can also cause the collapse of breakwaters, 
dams and other hydraulic structures (Bernatchez et al., 2012).

If sandy beaches are exposed to strong winds for long periods of time in the spring and fall, the winds can 
carry sand and contribute to moving dunes. This affects road maintenance in the Magdalen Islands.

The main meteorological factors that can affect forest fires include temperature, wind speed and 
direction, relative humidity, precipitation and atmospheric stability (Ordre des ingénieurs forestiers 
du Québec, 2009). These factors vary in time and space, and will likely have a greater adverse 
effect in the northwest region of the province (Boulanger et al., 2013). The section of the road system 
located within the limits of commercial forestry operations primarily serves this industry. Fires caused by 
lightning can have a major impact on road access to resources and at the same time, on the vitality 
of these industries’ operations and the communities that depend on them. 

In 2013, the Société de protection des forêts contre le feu (SOPFEU) fought 84 fires (SOPFEU, 2014). 
During the summer of that same year, major fires at the northern limit of the commercial forestry 
operations required protection of the Eastmain and Baie-Johan-Beetz communities. In the James 
Bay region, the only road connecting Matagami to Radisson was closed for over 300 kilometers, 
requiring the evacuation of several hundred workers, leaving communities isolated by the flames 
(Gouvernement du Québec, 2013; see Figure 12). 

Figure 12: Forest fire in Chibougamau in 2005. 
(Source: Société de protection des forêts 
contre le feu) 

Other types of disturbances to road transportation 
are also associated with extreme weather events. 
The uprooting of trees can disrupt road access due 
to the presence of debris.  Also, transport planning 
and road maintenance could be disrupted due 
to the increased frequency and intensity of heat 
waves, as extreme heat can expose workers to 
occupational illnesses and injuries (e.g., heat stroke, 
heat exhaustion and heat cramps) (National 
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, 2016). 
Recommended controls for reducing workplace 
heat stress include engineering controls (e.g., 
use of reflective or heat-absorbing shielding or 
barriers) and work practices (training, hydration, 
acclimatization and rest breaks) (National Institute 
for Occupational Safety and Health, 2016; 
Commission des normes, de l’équité, de la santé et 
de la sécurité du travail, 2016).

4.2 MARINE TRANSPORTATION

Some marine infrastructure dates back several decades, with the exception of northern infrastructure 
which was created at the turn of the 21st century by the provincial and federal governments and 
local authorities (Clerc et al., 2011; Ministère des Transports du Québec, 2011). Aging infrastructure, 
along with rising temperatures, reduced ice cover and increased frequency and intensity of extreme 
weather events, could increase marine transportation vulnerability.

4.2.1 MARINE TRANSPORTATION IN THE ST. LAWRENCE CORRIDOR

Scientific studies differ on the precise effect of climate change on fluctuations in water levels and 
flow between Lake Ontario and the St. Lawrence. Due to human interventions (e.g., buildings, 
water level control, etc.), it is difficult to establish the expected magnitude of associated levels and 
flow (Bouchard and Cantin, 2015). That said, simulations of the effect of higher temperatures on 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

202
202

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
