7.0 INTERDEPENDENCIES WITH OTHER URBAN SECTORS

Urban transportation networks depend on other infrastructure and utilities, (including electricity and 
telecommunications) to move large volumes of people and goods efficiently. The interdependencies 
among these systems, the economy, and society are explored in this section.  

Electricity is one key interdependency. Growing dependence on the electrical grid for urban mobility 
(particularly for LRT and commuter rail systems, but also for automobiles and infrastructure) can 
create multi-sectoral vulnerability when extreme weather events disrupt the supply and distribution of 
electrical power. Ensuring traffic signals remain operational during and immediately following extreme 
weather is another concern.  

Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) applications, used heavily for public transit and traffic 
management, also depend upon telecommunications infrastructure that can be affected by extreme 
weather (Revi et al., 2014). Without adequate coordination, interactions between water mains and 
underground public transit systems can potentially disrupt both sectors. This is the case under both 
slow-onset climate change and during extreme weather events. For example, pipes can freeze 
and rupture during freeze-thaw cycles or extreme cold conditions damaging the water distribution 
infrastructure and disrupting the underground public transit systems. This has been experienced by the 
Toronto Transit Commission’s subway system in recent winters (McLeod and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014).

The ability of transportation agencies to reduce damages associated with severe weather is therefore 
affected by how other municipal divisions and utility providers (e.g., telecommunications and energy 
supply) integrate climate change considerations into their own planning and service delivery. If one 
sector is at risk, so are many others. For example, if floods or heat waves disrupt the energy supply, 
all other services can be affected, causing failures to cascade. If road traffic is not flowing freely, the 
efficiency of an entire city may be reduced. 

In locations where infrastructure is at risk of being compromised or failing as a result of climate 
impacts, Business Continuity Planning becomes important. This refers to planning that ensures services 
are not compromised by extreme or unforeseen events. Planning in advance how the workforce can 
be more effectively deployed in emergency and post-emergency situations is critical, particularly 
since climate change is anticipated to bring more frequent extreme weather events. Practitioners 
interviewed for this chapter indicated that interdepartmental coordination can be improved if 
decision-makers work closely with city engineers and technical advisory committees on climate 
adaptation strategies for transportation infrastructure and operations. 

For example, the City of Toronto’s Transportation Services Division (TSD) has collaborated with a 
number of other municipal sectors and agencies on climate change adaptation and preparedness 
activities. Table 3 identifies these ongoing initiatives. Interdependencies between sectors identified 
by TSD include power outages caused by extreme heat, wind, and freezing rain, as well as impacts 
on the traffic control system and communication infrastructure. Transportation practitioners suggest 
that a climate change risk assessment of the electricity sector would help to identify areas of the City 
most vulnerable under various climate scenarios. This information would inform the implementation 
and spatial deployment of adaptation measures, such as uninterruptable power supply technology to 
traffic control signals. 

Disruptions to road and transit networks will also affect the ability of staff to travel to work, resulting 
in personnel shortages and, ultimately, impacts to municipal service delivery. Business continuity 
planning for extreme weather events can address these issues, by planning for alternative work 
arrangements, periodic training,  trial-testing of emergency management procedures, and 
maintaining an emergency contact information database for staff (held by a supervisor and 
accessible at all times).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

302
302

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
