Outside of municipal departments, there is also a need to fully engage urban civil society and provide 
information about the importance of adaptation to the public (Larrivée, 2010). Practitioners suggest 
that public engagement on adaptation tends to yield conversations about climate mitigation (the 
reduction of carbon emissions). The task of municipal agencies is to emphasize the importance of 
both policies in tandem to maximize social value from infrastructure investments. Public engagement 
is also necessary to prepare society to function – access jobs, health care and other activities – when 
transportation systems or infrastructure systems are performing at lower levels.  

8.0 GAPS AND BARRIERS

Practitioners suggest that without buy-in from the executive to operational levels on the severity of 
climate change risks, adaptation planning efforts often fail to be fully implemented. In some instances, 
practitioners have found success by communicating the importance of avoiding more significant 
costs in future through proactive investments. Cost-benefit analysis can also support adaptation 
decisions, by helping practitioners prioritize infrastructure-upgrade investments and demonstrate the 
value of actions taken to reduce future vulnerability (Feltmate and Thistlethwaite, 2012). As more cities 
achieve and communicate long-term cost savings and economic competitiveness from adaptation 
measures, barriers to the widespread introduction of these measures are reduced.

Coordinating actions among multiple levels of government, agencies, and sectors is another 
challenge to adaptive decision-making. For example, municipal governments facing flood risks must 
coordinate emergency-response with other orders of government, in addition to dealing with the 
challenges of flood prevention and physical protection (Chiwizer and Tarlock, 2013). 

9.0 CONCLUSION

This chapter has demonstrated many ways in which urban transportation networks are vulnerable 
to climate change and extreme weather, and has identified efforts that Canadian cities are making 
to manage these risks. While municipalities have historically taken adaptive action in the wake of 
catastrophes, the case studies identified in this chapter suggest that increasingly, municipalities and 
their partners are working to proactively adapt both infrastructure and operations in advance of 
climate impacts. Case studies in the chapter provide examples of Canadian urban regions engaging 
in vulnerability assessments, structural and physical improvements, and organizational change to 
improve their resiliency to a rapidly changing transportation environment. The literature identifies 
additional adaptation approaches that may be applied by transportation professionals in Canada, 
as appropriate. It is clear that solutions will involve an appropriate mix of proactive and reactive 
adaptations.  

This chapter has also highlighted the importance of redundancy (of both routes and modes) to 
enhance resiliency, as well as the importance of “low-regret” adaptation strategies in building 
support for adaptation efforts within governments and communities. The high up-front costs of 
many adaptation strategies (particularly structural solutions) may be a deterrent, and the complex 
fiscal and operational environments of modern cities pose obstacles to adaptation. Therefore, it is 
increasingly important for transportation practitioners to work in collaboration with other municipal 
sectors towards common adaptation goals. With strong cooperative efforts, Canada’s multimodal 
urban transportation networks can more successfully meet the challenges of a changing climate.

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

304
304

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
