5.0 ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION

Walking and cycling networks are critical to the movement of people within Canadian cities. Public 
transit users, cyclists, and auto travelers are all pedestrians at some stage in their journeys, and 
pedestrian and cycling facilities provide the most reliable forms of connectivity within cities. Active 
modes have increasingly been a focus of investment at the municipal level in Canada, addressing 
climate change concerns from both mitigation and adaptation perspectives (Younger et al., 2008; 
Ayres, 2014). While the social and environmental benefits of active transportation are well-publicized 
in municipal planning documents, these modes are also becoming more attractive for short trips as a 
way to save time as Canadian cities become increasingly dense and traffic-congested. 

Active transportation modes also offer an important form of redundancy to urban transportation 
networks (Box 1). Walking and cycling offer a “safety net,” permitting travel when mechanized 
transport is temporarily unavailable. Given the benefits of active transportation in terms of public 
health, relative insensitivity to climate change impacts, and low capital costs and environmental 
impacts, many cities in Canada (and globally) are increasingly investing in these modes.

PRECIPITATION 

Active transportation systems face many of the same vulnerabilities as roadways in terms of 
pavement degradation, storm-water management issues related to runoff and permeability, and 
associated operational disruptions (e.g., flooding and washout). This is especially true for sidewalks 
and bicycle lanes next to urban roadways, which make up the majority of active transportation 
infrastructure in Canada (Transport Canada, 2011). 

There tends to be a modal shift away from walking and cycling during precipitation events – all forms 
of precipitation reduce the proportion of trips taken by active modes (Koatse and Rietveld, 2009). 
Similarly, pedestrian safety decreases in bad weather, with the number of outdoor injuries increasing 
dramatically in response to winter precipitation (including snow, rain, and freezing rain) (Morency et 
al., 2012). However, active transportation remains an important form of redundancy. Travelers are 
likely to walk in poor weather conditions if roads or transit lines are incapacitated, which means the 
volume of commuter (i.e. essential) trips is not significantly affected by severe weather (Koatse and 
Rietveld, 2009; Sabir et al., 2010).   

TEMPERATURE 

Extreme temperatures also affect the use of active modes. Walking and cycling on hot days requires 
more exertion and may pose health risks, particularly to vulnerable populations (such as the elderly) 
(Younger et al., 2008), a phenomenon worsened by the urban heat island effect (see Section 2.2).  
Some research (i.e. Sabir et al., 2010) suggests that during extreme cold, cyclists shift to public transit 
and walking, while the opposite is true during periods of extreme warm weather. However, other 
research (i.e. Koatse and Rietveld, 2009) has found that both extremely high and low temperatures 
are likely to reduce cycling activity.

CHANGING WATER LEVELS AND STORM SURGE

As with roadways, walking and bicycle paths (especially along coastal roads, or in ocean-side parks) 
are at risk of inundation and wash-out due to sea-level rise and storm surge (Mills, 2016). 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

285
285

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
