⑦  Air convection embankments refer to the creation of embankments with clean, coarse, and 

poorly-graded rock (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). The resulting large, 
interconnected voids assist in air convection, extracting heat while maintaining the structural 
integrity of the embankment (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012).

⑧	 Heat drains consist of permeable geocomposite material and a thin corrugate plastic cover placed 

underneath an embankment. These allow for heat extraction during winter as air flows through 
the layers (Montufar et al., 2011). Heat drains have been found to significantly reduce ground 
temperatures (Montufar et al., 2011).  

Methods to enhance the stability of embankments include:

⑨	 Geotextiles (i.e. permeable fabrics) reduce thaw-settlement by separating embankment fill and 

underlying soil, and by preventing embankment “spreading”. These materials are typically applied 
to areas that have a deep active layer and are poorly drained, in which mixing of subgrade soil and 
embankment fill is likely (Transportation Association of Canada, 2010).

⑩	 Berms (often with gentle slopes) protect low embankments from excessive thawing (Beaulac and 
Doré, 2006) by providing a physical barrier to the accumulation of snow, much like a snow fence 
(IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). 

Additional reinforcement techniques involve pre-thawing permafrost to reduce the effects of freeze-
thaw settlement, and excavating/replacing ice-rich permafrost with fill (IMG-Golder Corporation 
Environmental Consulting, 2012).

2
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 2: TESTING TECHNIQUES TO PREVENT 
PERMAFROST THAW 

An experimental road section along a segment of the Alaska Highway was built in 2008 to test engineering 
techniques designed to prevent permafrost thawing under road infrastructure. The test site, 5 km southeast 
of Beaver Creek (Yukon) in a zone of discontinuous permafrost, was divided into twelve 50-m sections, 
including an undisturbed control section. Techniques being tested include: crushed-rock air convection 
embankments, heat drains, thermo-reflective air convection sheds, longitudinal air convection ducts, 
reflective aggregate surface treatments, grass-covered embankments, and plowing snow on side slopes 
(described in previous sections). 

Research is ongoing, but results from the first three years of monitoring suggest that some techniques have 
the potential to promote permafrost formation (or ground refreezing) and active-layer thinning, preserving 
the permafrost or reducing the rate of degradation (Malenfant-Lepage et al., 2012).

The three most promising techniques include longitudinal air convection ducts, thermo-reflective air 
convection sheds, and air convection embankments. These techniques utilize the “chimney effect,” 
wherein cold air is allowed to sink into the embankment and warm up. Lighter and warmer air is then 
released upward, removing embankment heat and lowering ground temperature. The light-colored 
aggregate has also shown strong potential to reduce subsurface warming. All seven techniques yielded 
results superior to the “do-nothing” scenario.

Results also suggest that the flow of water in the soil is a key factor in the dynamics of heat transfer and 
permafrost degradation at the test site (De Grandpré et al., 2012). A drainage ditch was excavated in the 
fall of 2010 to lower the water table, decrease the water flow and reduce the amount of heat conveyed 
through the road embankment. Since then, the water level and flow have decreased significantly. Models 
are currently being developed to provide a better understanding of the heat transfer and extraction 
processes generated by these techniques.

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

…

49
49

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
