SEA ICE AND WIND

High winds have been a source of costly delays for ferries servicing Newfoundland, Labrador, and 
Nova Scotia (CBC News, 2015b; Cape Breton Post, 2015; Catto et al., 2006). When combined with 
earlier seasonal break-up and fragmentation of sea ice, winds pose additional navigation hazards. 
For instance, in the winter of 2015, ice blown into the Strait of Belle Isle resulted in lengthy delays and 
frustration for passengers attempting to travel between Newfoundland and Labrador (CBC News, 
2015b). Similarly, increasing easterly wind strength in Channel-Port aux Basques, Newfoundland may 
threaten the reliability of ferry transportation in the area, an important crossing point from the island to 
the mainland (Catto et al., 2006).

High winds will continue to pose risks to vessels and ports, based on projected increases to the 
frequency of extreme weather events. At the same time, warmer summer weather and the 
decreasing extent and duration of sea ice will offer potential benefits to commercial shipping, the 
cruise industry, and eco-tourism via an extended Maritime shipping season (Andrey and Mills, 2003; 
Leys, 2009; Savard et al., 2016).

3
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 3: PLANNING FOR FUTURE EXTREME WEATHER 
CONDITIONS AT HALIFAX HARBOUR

The Province of Nova Scotia, with support from Natural Resources Canada has been conducting a 
case study on the impacts of climate change on coastal transportation infrastructure in Halifax Harbour. 
Researchers are using cost-benefit analysis to assess vulnerabilities to changing climate parameters and 
adaptation options. Analysis focuses on marine shipping and intermodal transfers to truck and rail. This 
includes an investigation of how rail delays resulting from extreme weather or infrastructure damage might 
affect the delivery of goods to marine ports. The results of this study were not yet available at the time of 
writing this assessment. 

Variables under consideration in the study included sea-level rise, storm surge, and coastal subsidence. 
Maps and computer models were used to visualize potential impacts on the system. Volunteer participants 
in the study included CN rail and major port operators. This cost-benefit analysis will help to demonstrate 
the impacts of climate change on businesses near Halifax Harbour. 

Written with input from Shawn MacDonald (Climate Change Unit, Government of Nova Scotia). 

6.2 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

Atlantic Canada’s marine ports and operators have employed a number of practices to improve 
their resilience to climate and extreme weather risks. One example is Bay Bulls Harbour (Figure 13), 
an economic hub in eastern Newfoundland that is proximate to St. John’s and the productive 
fishing grounds of the Grand Banks. In 2010, Hurricane Igor caused extensive damage to the wharf.  
When the wharf was reconstructed, the community elected to include adaptive measures to better 
withstand future storm conditions. Sea-level rise, storm surges, and extreme weather were considered. 
As a result, the new wharf was built 0.5 m higher than previously, its directional orientation was 
changed, and a breakwater of 1.5 m was constructed to provide increased protection. Bay Bulls 
and its economic assets are now better-prepared for higher-intensity weather conditions (Office of 
Climate Change, Energy Efficiency and Emissions Trading, 2013). There are an increasing number of 
cost/benefit analyses demonstrating that capital and other expenditures undertaken to reduce risks 
of infrastructure damage result in long-term cost savings (see Case Study 5).

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

243
243

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
