…

Table 3: Adaptation options evaluated in the Chignecto Isthmus CBA.

Adaptation Option

Agricultural dykes, 
existing location
Agricultural dykes, 
shortened
Engineered dykes, 
existing location
Engineered dykes, 
shortened, protect 
public infrastructure only
Engineered dykes, 
shortened protect all 
infrastructure
Re-route the Trans-
Canada Highway 
(50km)

Option 
Number

1

2

3

4

5

6

RESULTS

Description

Raising/topping-up dykes in existing locations to 10 m. Public 
infrastructure not protected behind dykes.
Combination: Topping-up dykes and rebuilding to 10 m in existing 
locations, but shortened in certain sections. Raise infrastructure.
Build engineered dykes on top of existing dykes, engineered to 2070, 
1-in-100-year events (10 m).
Shorten dykes, build engineered dykes on top of existing dykes, as well 
as new stretches, engineered to 2070, 1-in-100-year events (10 m); 
raise rail that is not being protected by existing dykes.
Shorten dykes, build engineered dykes on top of existing dykes, as well 
as new stretches, engineered to 2070, 1-in-100-year events (10 m).

Re-route a vulnerable 50 km stretch of the Trans-Canada Highway.

The CBA is a high-level analysis intended to provide strategic direction on adaptation options – not to 
inform operational-level decision-making or costing. 

The cost of impacts associated with climate change over the period from 2015 to 2064 in today’s dollars is 
estimated at $124 million. When potential trade loss is incorporated, this cost rises to $435 million. 

The preferred adaptation option is an approach involving engineered dykes designed to protect against 
flooding associated with a 1-in-100 year storm event in 2070 (Option 3). Dykes would be shortened 
(compared to their current length) and protect all infrastructure (road, rail and electricity). The cost of 
the preferred option is estimated at approximately $93 million and its Net Present Value – calculated as 
the difference between the benefits of adaptation and costs of climate change impacts (discounted for 
evaluation in dollars today at 4 percent) – is estimated at $31 million. When lost trade due to climate change 
impacts is broadly accounted for, the Net Present Value of the preferred option grows to $278 million. 

In this case, the cost of taking no adaptation action exceeds the costs associated with infrastructure 
renewal.

Lessons learned from the project relate to the challenges of integrating divergent stakeholder interests – 
however, practitioners believe the project has allowed for information-sharing around a common threat. 
Given that agricultural and transportation departments have typically worked separately, the process 
is likely to provide a more coordinated approach to the future management of the Isthmus. This study 
highlights the value of the dykes, and has challenged all stakeholders to think collaboratively and critically 
about how assets are protected in the Chignecto region.

Written with input from Jeff Hoyt (Government of New Brunswick) and Sabine Dietz (Aster Group 
Environmental Services).

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

250
250

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
