WIND 

High winds can result in cancelled, delayed or redirected flights when cross winds are too strong for 
aircraft to safely take off or land (United Kingdom Department for Transport, 2014). Wind can also 
damage equipment on the ground. For instance, in 2012, high winds tipped over an array (part of 
the instrument landing system) at the J.A. Douglas McCurdy Sydney Airport in Nova Scotia, affecting 
landing operations and requiring NAV CANADA to make unexpected and costly repairs (Helen 
MacInnis, J.A. Douglas McCurdy Sydney Airport, personal communication, 2015). 

Power outages accompanying windstorms can create major problems for air transportation. For 
example, when Hurricane Arthur hit the Maritimes in the summer of 2014, Fredericton International 
Airport lost power and had to rely on a backup generator (Andrew Isbill, Fredericton Airport Authority, 
personal communication, 2015). The generator allowed the airport to continue with some operations, 
although operators had concerns about its potential failure. More frequent high-intensity wind events 
would increase risks associated with these impacts, although projections indicate that daily average 
wind speeds are not likely to increase significantly in the Atlantic region (Loder et al., 2013).

TEMPERATURE 

Atlantic aviation is also vulnerable to changing temperatures. Increasing freeze-thaw cycles pose 
risks to runway stability, while extreme heat and cold reduce aircraft engine performance and fuel 
efficiency (Transportation Research Board, 2008).

Increasing turbulence as a result of higher-temperature conditions (increased air density) is expected 
to affect flights in the North Atlantic by mid-century. The proportion of flight time for transatlantic 
journeys spent in conditions of “moderate-or-greater turbulence” is likely to increase 40-170 percent 
by mid-century, resulting in longer trip times, greater fuel consumption, and more greenhouse-gas 
emissions (Williams and Joshi, 2013). 

7.2 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

Adaptation actions at Atlantic airports are not well documented in the public domain. However, 
Atlantic aviation faces many of the same climate risks as operators in other Canadian jurisdictions 
(including extreme weather events and temperature extremes). Thus, many of the practices outlined 
in other chapters of this report apply to Atlantic Canada. General risk avoidance practices include 
standard procedures for accessing weather forecasts and planning flights, and for advanced aircraft 
instrumentation systems. 

8.0 MULTI-MODAL RISK ASSESSMENTS AND COST-BENEFIT ANALYSES 

Some initiatives in Atlantic Canada have considered the vulnerability of the region’s transportation 
network with a multimodal lens. These include risk assessments and cost-benefit analyses of climate 
change impacts and adaptation options for transportation infrastructure.

8.1 RISK ASSESSMENTS

In 2012, the Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) completed an expert-based risk assessment 
of infrastructure, waterways, and biological systems in the Atlantic Large Aquatic Basin (LAB), 
which includes the Newfoundland Labrador Shelf, Scotian Shelf/Slope, and the Gulf of Maine 
(Department of Fisheries and Oceans, 2013). The assessment process identified and rated six key 
risks based on “risk exposure” (vulnerability to impacts) on 10- and 50-year horizons. Risks relevant 
to transportation include increased demand for emergency services, infrastructure damage, and 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

247
247

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
