Transit ridership per capita in Canada is also growing annually (Canadian Urban Transit Association, 
2012), while rates of auto ownership in CMAs are decreasing (Perl and Kenworthy, 2010). Transit is 
attracting greater attention from all levels of government in Canada, with federal and provincial 
spending support for urban transit in Canada growing at a rate of 5.2 percent annually since 2008 
(Transport Canada, 2013). This is consistent with a broader international trend in urban governance to 
enhance public transportation modes as a method to reduce traffic congestion and improve public 
health (Bradford, 2008). 

Finally, it is worth considering the interactions of multiple infrastructure systems in cities. Vehicles 
and at-grade rail systems rely heavily on drainage infrastructure to manage storm runoff. Rail transit 
networks in cities such as Calgary, Edmonton, Toronto, and Montreal depend on reliable electricity to 
power vehicles and communications networks. Vehicles and bus transit systems also rely on municipal 
electricity and emergency response resources for traffic signals and safety. This provides important 
context for this chapter, as both the public and private sectors in Canada are challenged to maintain 
or improve this array of interrelated urban infrastructure while simultaneously enhancing the resilience 
of transportation networks to changing climate conditions. 

1.2 ADAPTATION TO A CHANGING CLIMATE

A number of strategies can be used to reduce the impacts of observed and anticipated changes in 
climate and extreme weather on urban transportation systems. The strategies discussed in this chapter 
fall into the following general categories:

• 

• 

Investing in more resilient materials, infrastructure, and operational practices for transportation 
infrastructure; 

Improving redundancy within transportation networks – this refers to the availability of multiple 
paths or modes for urban travel with similar user costs; 

•  Updating the climate design criteria used in engineering standards to better reflect future 

conditions; 

• 

Improving land use policies and controls (e.g., zoning amendments or construction requirements in 
vulnerable areas); and 

•  Enhancing the resilience of communities to extreme weather and climate effects through social 

adaptations.

2.0 CLIMATE AND URBAN TRANSPORTATION 

Understanding the historical interactions of climate, weather, and geography are important to 
determine how climate change will affect urban transportation in Canadian cities in the 21st century. 
Location is an important factor in urban vulnerability to climate change, as many cities in Canada are 
located in low-lying areas next to significant bodies of water (Filion and Bunting, 2010). Floodplains, 
coastal regions, and other vulnerable areas could experience significant flooding, erosion, and 
infrastructure damage as a result of a changing climate and more frequent extreme weather events 
(Revi et al., 2014). While today’s planning provisions often restrict development in vulnerable areas, 
this legacy of urban vulnerability persists, and is heightened by increasing population densities. 
Understanding how cities have dealt with climate impacts in the past helps vulnerable cities make 
informed decisions and investments, in order to adapt to emerging climate conditions. 

This section provides an overview of climate and weather-related impacts on urban transportation 
in Canada, and projected climate conditions for the 21st century. Regionally-specific discussions of 
climate can be found in other chapters of this report.

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

270
270

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
