have been almost entirely washed out by a hurricane of this magnitude if built as initially planned 
(Environment Canada, 2015). In Hazel’s wake, the City also placed greater emphasis on restoring 
transit services in a timely manner to alleviate road congestion during and after emergencies 
(Environment Canada, 2015).

Hurricane Hazel also shifted decision-makers’ perspectives in Ontario. They no longer framed natural 
disasters as “acts of god” – rather, an important and transformative link was made between weather-
related damage and planning decisions (Henstra, 2011). Hazel prompted the Toronto and Region 
Conservation Authority to make many policy changes that resulted in greater resilience to extreme 
weather and flood events. Specifically, the Authority:

Figure 4: Personnel of the Canadian Army 
clearing away debris in the aftermath of 
Hurricane Hazel. (Source: Library and Archives 
Canada) 

Figure 5: Fallen tree branches following the 
ice storm. (Source: Environment and Climate 
Change Canada) 

•  Expropriated floodplain lands near 

watercourses and prevented development in 
these areas; 

• 

• 

Increased the amount of water-absorbing 
green space in the city; and,

Improved watercourse management 
infrastructure and techniques (Robinson and 
Cruikshank, 2006). 

Prior to Hurricane Hazel, volunteer groups 
typically led storm clean-up efforts in Ontario. 
Hazel gave municipalities the impetus to 
leverage provincial and federal governments for 
resources to adequately prepare for and recover 
from extreme weather events (Robinson and 
Cruikshank, 2006). 

EASTERN CANADA ICE STORM, JANUARY 1998

From January 4th to 10th, 1998, significant amounts 
of freezing rain accumulated from eastern 
Ontario to Nova Scotia. Greater than 100 mm 
of ice fell in more than 80 hours of precipitation, 
leaving over 4 million people without electricity, 
and resulting in significant transportation 
disruptions. Electrical wires, utility poles and tree 
branches blocked roadways, and power outages 
disrupted traffic signals. Roads were closed 
and public transit services were delayed and 
cancelled, while icy conditions caused accidents 
and made travel dangerous (Bertin, 1998). More 
than 16,000 Canadian Forces personnel were 
deployed to manage the aftermath; Environment 
Canada estimated the initial insurance claims to 
be more than $1.5B, with a total exceeding $3 
billion (Environment Canada, 2013b).

Following the ice storm, several measures were implemented based on the lessons learned. For example, 
the province of Quebec adopted legislation requiring all municipalities to prepare emergency plans 
and created better communication between the provincial and municipal governments (Institute for 
Catastrophic Loss Reduction, 2016). Hydro-Quebec also took measures to prevent power outages such 
as reinforcing transmission towers, adding additional hydro lines and burying power lines (The Canadian 
Press, 2008). While these measures were largely focused on public health and safety, better emergency 
planning, communications and electricity systems also support the resiliency of transportation systems.

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

273
273

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
