While some runways in the territories are paved, the vast majority are gravel. Paved and gravel 
runways have different sensitivities to climate (in particular to changes in ground conditions), and 
therefore require different adaptation methods. However, while gravel runways may be easier to 
maintain in a northern context, no new-generation jet aircraft are certified to operate on non-paved 
surfaces (Parliament of Canada, 2011). The Boeing 737-200, which has not been manufactured since 
the 1980s, is the most modern gravel-kitted aircraft. However, this model has higher fuel consumption 
and upkeep costs compared to more modern aircraft (Parliament of Canada, 2011).

2.4 MARINE TRANSPORTATION

Marine transportation is also important for community resupply (e.g., the transportation of food and 
fuel) during shipping months in the Northwest Territories and Nunavut. Despite its coastline along 
the Beaufort Sea, the Yukon has no marine-based facilities, although there is docking infrastructure 
along the Yukon River. While marine shipping is more cost-effective than air shipping in Nunavut, it 
is often hampered by a lack of port infrastructure and difficult conditions on the water. Cambridge 
Bay has basic facilities, and only Pangnirtung has a harbour facility. Inland marine transportation 
from Hudson Bay to Baker Lake (via the Chesterfield Narrows) is used to deliver fuel and construction 
supplies by barge and tanker to support the construction and operation of the Meadowbank gold 
mine (Transportation Safety Board of Canada, 2012). There are also plans to expand marine usage in 
some places. At Pond Inlet, a new marine and small craft harbour is planned; this would increase the 
community’s capacity for resupply of food, fuel and other goods (Government of Canada, 2015). 
Additionally, the Iqaluit Marine Infrastructure Project – involving the construction of a port and sea lift 
facility – aims to reduce offloading times and improve worker safety (Government of Nunavut, 2015).  

The Northwest Territories has an extensive network of river transportation vessels and facilities used for 
community resupply. The Mackenzie River acts as an important cargo shipment route for transporting 
goods to communities along the river, the Mackenzie Delta, the coast of the Beaufort Sea and the 
interior of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). Additionally, some suggest 
that marine facilities in Tuktoyaktuk harbour once used to support oil and gas activities in the Beaufort 
Sea could be revamped to support offshore activity and search and rescue operations (Matthews, 
2014). However, the port is not suitable for larger vessels and currently features a shallow 32-km 
channel approach with sections less than 4m deep (Prolog Canada Inc, 2011).

2.5 RAIL TRANSPORTATION

Rail infrastructure is limited in the territories, but provides important services in some locations. 
For example, Canadian National (CN) Railway runs one return bulk commodity train daily to 
Enterprise and Hay River, Northwest Territories, that supplies the community and mining industry 
(Yukon Government et al, 2008). The line is one of the most costly routes in CN’s network due to the 
challenging area of service; for instance, the rail bed is constructed on permafrost, which limits train 
speed (Government of Northwest Territories, 2015a). Maintaining this service is important, however – 
over half of all bulk commodities entering the territory do so by rail (e.g., petroleum, agriculture and 
forest products) (Government of Northwest Territories, 2011).

The only rail line operating in the Yukon is the White Pass and Yukon Route, which operates as a 
tourist train from Carcross, Yukon to Skagway, Alaska (White Pass and Yukon Route, 2015). However, 
this may change: a study has been completed investigating the feasibility of a rail link from Alaska 
and the Yukon to the North American rail grid. This route would provide an alternative North 
American gateway to the Pacific Rim via ports in northern British Columbia and Alaska (Yukon 
Government et al, 2008).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

35
35

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
