methods to mitigate runoff (National Cooperative Highway Research Program, 2006), such as 
mandating the use of permeable materials (Credit Valley Conservation Authority, 2014). These are 
also relevant for active transportation – for instance, the North American City Transportation Officials 
(NACTO) guidelines for sidewalk and bikeway design recognize the importance of low-impact 
considerations for stormwater management. This includes increasing the permeability of construction 
materials (simultaneously reducing long-term infrastructure maintenance costs) to deal with excessive 
runoff (NACTO, 2012).

Another example includes zoning amendments or changes to construction requirements based 
on floodplain mapping, avoiding routing transportation through vulnerable areas, or requiring that 
infrastructure be elevated above a certain point (AMEC Inc., 2011). Municipalities increasingly 
recognize that by considering land-use and transportation at the same time, vulnerability to changing 
environmental conditions may be reduced (Larrivée, 2010).

STRUCTURAL AND PHYSICAL ADAPTATIONS 

Perhaps the most tangible adaptation category, these strategies include engineering-based 
solutions to enhance the physical resiliency of urban transportation networks. To adapt to more 
frequent and intense rainfall events, practitioners may widen road culverts, shoulders, and ditches to 
improve stormwater management and sheet flow, and construct deeper gravel wells under roads 
and rails (Savonis et al., 2008). Flood risks due to sea level rise and storm surge can be mitigated by 
constructing dykes and employing other flood-management techniques around low-lying urban 
areas to protect roads and highways (AMEC Inc., 2011; Mills, 2016).

To adapt to changing temperatures, municipalities may employ alternative, more heat- and rut-
resistant pavement materials, as well as rut-resistant pavement designs (i.e. thinner surfaces) (Andrey 
and Mills, 2003; United States Federal Highway Administration, 2015). For example, the Ontario Ministry 
of Transportation’s “SuperPave” system is a materials selection system that uses local weather-station 
data and pavement-performance data to dictate appropriate heat- and rutting-resistant asphalt 
mixes for provincial highways and some municipalities in Ontario (Ontario Ministry of Transportation, 
2013) (see Chapter 6). The City of Toronto has also installed cooling fans for traffic signals, and 
intelligent transportation system (ITS) infrastructure, to reduce risks from heat (City of Toronto, 2011). 

For transportation infrastructure built on warming permafrost in northern cities, adaptation strategies 
include mechanical stabilization of embankments and the removal of permafrost before construction; 
however these methods are extremely costly (Cheng, 2005; United States Arctic Research Commission 
Task Force, 2003). Snow sheds, air ducts, and thermosyphons can also protect roads and rail lines from 
warming temperatures (Reimchen et al., 2009). Dawson City has installed light-coloured pavement 
on the city’s main street to increase the reflectivity and reduce the impact of higher temperatures on 
permafrost (Walsh et al., 2009).

Other structural/physical adaptations include:

• 

Installing backup power infrastructure for overhead electricity (i.e. for trolleybuses, streetcars) and 
signals (McLeod and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014).

•  Elevating roadways and rail lines in flood-prone areas (AMEC Inc., 2011; Koatse and Rietveld, 2012). 

•  Undertaking comprehensive “flood-proofing” of transit corridors, in which culverts are replaced 

and flood sensors are installed on rail infrastructure (Transportation and the Environment Task 
Force, 2014).

•  Waterproofing circuit breaker houses and other underground facilities that provide power to 

subways (McLeod and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

290
290

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
