Figure 1: Canadian CMAs with the highest growth rates from the 2006 National Census to the 2011 
National Census. (Source: Statistics Canada)

Both large and mid-sized cities are leading the urbanization movement in Canada. While the greater 
metropolitan areas of three cities (Montreal, Toronto, and Vancouver) now account for 35 percent of 
the Canadian population (Postmedia News, 2012), many smaller cities have experienced significant 
growth as well (e.g., Saskatoon, Kelowna, and Moncton). This is a trend experts expect to continue 
well into the 21st century. Thus, adapting to climate risks in Canadian cities will occur in tandem with 
managing urban population growth.

The degree to which Canadian cities will be affected by climate change and their capacities to 
adapt varies considerably. “Adaptive capacity” is a function of many factors, including geography. 
CMAs are distributed in a number of climate regions, including two in Canada’s north (Whitehorse, 
Yukon, and Yellowknife, Northwest Territories), that face specific challenges related to rapid warming 
and thawing permafrost (see Chapter 3).

Canada’s urban development in the postwar period has been characterized by low-density, 
sprawling suburban development outward from traditional downtown cores, which encourages (and 
often requires) the daily use of automobiles (Blais, 2013).  Road congestion is taking an increasingly 
heavy toll on Canadian urban regions, accounting for $6 billion to $11 billion in lost economic 
productivity annually in the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area, and $500 million to $1.2 billion 
annually in the Metro Vancouver area, depending on the specific metrics applied (Dachis, 2013; 
Dachis, 2015). However, many Canadian municipalities have begun to recognize the importance of 
compact and walkable neighbourhoods for improving the efficiency and sustainability of their urban 
environments (Ontario Ministry of Infrastructure, 2013; Metro Vancouver, 2011; Haider et al., 2013). 
As a result, there is a general movement to build “up” rather than “out,” and population density is 
increasing along with population growth: in CMAs, population density increased by an average of 6 
percent from 2006-2011 (Statistics Canada, 2011a; see Figure 2). 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

268
268

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
