have been forced to adapt to thinning sea ice. This has required travelling farther distances to hunt 
and harvest animals that have changed their migratory patterns (Inuit Circumpolar Council, 2008). 
Northern residents are also affected by high transportation costs, reflected in the prices of food, fuel, 
and other goods.

2.0 AN INTRODUCTION TO CANADA’S NORTHERN TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM

While territorial transportation networks are similar in some respects, each territory’s infrastructure 
has unique characteristics. For instance, Nunavut has no all-weather roads connecting it to southern 
Canada, relying instead on air and marine transportation. The Yukon depends primarily on road 
transportation, and has all-weather roads connecting all communities except for Old Crow. The 
Northwest Territories, meanwhile, depends on marine, rail, air, and road transportation (Table 2).

The frozen landscape offers opportunities for transportation, providing a seasonal foundation for 
winter roads. During the winter, sea, river, and lake ice can facilitate the movement of goods and 
people throughout the territories. However, operating windows for winter roads are limited, with 
roads typically only in operation from November/December until March/April (Prowse et al., 2009). In 
addition, permafrost conditions affect the stability of all-season transportation infrastructure, including 
roads and airport runways.

During the summer, navigable waters are used for shipping purposes, providing community resupply to 
remote areas. The air sector plays a significant role in all three territories and serves as the year-round 
link between northern communities and southern Canada for essential medical and evacuation 
services. 

In light of the risks to northern transportation systems posed by a changing climate (discussed in detail 
in subsequent sections), the need for adaptation related to transportation has been acknowledged 
by both federal and territorial governments. The Government of the Northwest Territories 
commissioned the development of a Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Department of 
Transportation in 2013 (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). Nunavut established the Nunavut Climate Change 
Centre, released a report on climate change impacts and adaptation, and collaborated with the 
Canadian Institute of Planners on an “adaptation planning toolkit” in 2011 (Government of Nunavut, 
2011; Bowron and Davidson, 2011). The Nunavut government also produced a report on engineering 
challenges for coastal infrastructure, including docks, in relation to the impacts of climate change 
(Journeaux Assoc., 2012).  Adaptation work is ongoing in the Yukon, particularly at Yukon College 
and through the Yukon Climate Change Secretariat (Northern Climate ExChange, 2014a and 2014b). 
Several of these efforts have been undertaken in collaboration with federal departments, including 
Transport Canada and Natural Resources Canada.

2.1 SYSTEM OVERVIEW

Figure 1 and Table 2 present an overview of transportation routes and infrastructure in Canada’s 
North. The following sections discuss the regional significance of each of the major modes of 
transportation – road transport, aviation, marine transport, and rail – in greater depth.

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

31
31

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
