and drainage are also affected by climate change.  Maps characterizing permafrost areas can 
help to better plan development, and are an important tool to protect infrastructure in this region. 
Many challenges remain in the area of    northern infrastructure adaptation, particularly in relation 
to knowledge transfer, acquisition of long-term data, the use of new technologies to optimize data 
acquisition, and interventions (Transport Canada, 2015).

In urban areas, frequent and more intense rains cause local flooding and will likely increase with 
climate change. A combination of measures would help better manage stormwater issues. 

Extreme weather events appear to pose the greatest risk for infrastructure and transportation systems 
in all seasons. Infrastructure design, along with all aspects of operation, maintenance, management 
and refurbishment is, and will continue to be, affected by climate change.

Adaptation is a social and institutional challenge that should be treated in an integrated fashion. 
The impact of climate change on infrastructure cannot be studied in isolation from other factors 
(social, political, cultural, environmental and economic) that influence infrastructure usage and 
management. Local and global vulnerabilities of the Quebec transportation system must be 
recognized in order to develop relevant adaptation tools and measures that help maintain the 
condition of infrastructure and transportation operations. 

The Quebec government has dedicated considerable efforts over the last two decades to better 
understanding the impact of climate change on the natural environment as well as on transportation 
infrastructure and mobility. The challenges related to storm water management such as bank erosion 
and permafrost thaw are particularly well documented. Strategies to develop solutions to these 
problems are becoming better understood. On the basis of this work, the government has started to 
implement concrete actions to increase overall resilience. Nevertheless, transportation adaptation 
continues to be a subject requiring further research.

There is also a need to better document climate risks to organizations, companies and operating systems. 
Understanding the interaction between natural environmental changes caused by climate change and 
the design, organization and management of transportation systems could benefit from more studies.

With respect to road transportation, more research is need for the coordination between different 
stakeholders and assessments of the impact of climate change on road signalling and peripheral 
equipment, as well as on the use and development of informal roads and corridors in the North.

As for rail transport, few studies were identified. Therefore, it remains difficult to determine specific rail 
transportation challenges in Quebec. 

In the area of marine transportation, there is a need to improve and further document knowledge 
of the vulnerability of infrastructure and marine transportation to climate change, especially in 
southern Quebec. Several themes are worth looking into, such as: assessing premature damage to 
infrastructure associated with climate change; and studying the combined impact of increased 
navigation and climate change on invasive marine species.

With respect to electrical transmission and distribution, the thresholds and tolerance levels of equipment 
and infrastructure to hostile conditions (strong winds, lightning, freezing rain, etc.) need to be determined. 
This can help prevent disruption to communications systems in transportation infrastructure such as the 
fibre optic cables used in the Arcelor Mittal railway damaged due to heavy rain. 

Finally, monitoring the condition of infrastructure relative to a well-documented baseline condition 
would help improve the understanding of potential vulnerabilities, evaluate the performance of 
measures implemented, and intervene in a more intelligent and strategic manner in problem areas. 
Thus, long-term data collection is important both to continue to document the impact of climate 
change, and to define design criteria and best practices for maintenance and management. 
Enhanced knowledge also allows for the exchange of best practices regarding infrastructure design, 
construction and maintenance.

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

210
210

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
