SENSITIVITIES OF CANADIAN TRANSPORTATION TO CLIMATE 

All transportation systems are climate-sensitive. These 
sensitivities can translate into infrastructure damage 
and deterioration, disruptions to transport operations, 
and unsafe conditions. Some of the most vulnerable 
components of Canada’s transport system are integral 
to remote and resource-based communities in the 
North. However, a changing climate and extreme 
weather will affect all modes of transportation in every 
Canadian region.  

Transportation’s sensitivities to climate and extreme 
weather are illustrated by the impacts of acute 
weather events in recent years. For example, 
Canada’s costliest disaster – the June 2013 floods 
in Alberta – resulted in an estimated $6 billion in 
damages and recovery costs, and saw 1,000 km 
of roads destroyed and hundreds of bridges and 
culverts washed out. Similarly, the July 2013 flash flood 
in the Greater Toronto Area, which is considered to 
be the most expensive natural disaster in Ontario, 
caused major transit delays, road closures, and flight 
cancellations (Environment Canada, 2014). 

EXTREME WEATHER TRENDS

Trends in extreme precipitation events 
have been difficult to identify from 
climate data, due to spatial variability in 
precipitation patterns. However, insurance 
data demonstrates that natural disasters 
have been increasing in Canada, including 
events associated with flooding, wind, 
and wildfires (Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction, 2012). 

While many factors, other than 
climate change, contribute to rising 
insurance losses (including exposure of 
property, increasing wealth, and aging 
infrastructure), this trend demonstrates 
a pattern of infrastructure vulnerability 
in Canada to extreme weather events 
(Warren and Lemmen, 2014).   

Extreme weather events are not the only climate risk to transportation. Other risks to the Canadian 
transportation system, associated with a changing climate, include the following: 

• 

Temperature changes and fluctuations contribute to infrastructure deterioration and operational 
challenges, especially in permafrost regions of northern Canada, but also across southern Canada 
due to changing freeze-thaw cycles during the winter and heat waves during the summer.

•  Changing ice conditions affect marine operations and vessel navigation, especially in northern 

Canada, with broad implications (both positive and negative) for economic development, trade, 
and security.  

•  Sea level rise and storm events can increase risks of coastal erosion, flooding, and associated 

damage, with implications for transportation infrastructure and operations in coastal areas of Canada.  

•  Low inland water levels (particularly in the Great Lakes) can reduce vessel capacity, and create 

navigation difficulties.

ADAPTATION OPTIONS

Adaptation options for transportation may include engineering and technological solutions, as well as 
policy, planning, management, and maintenance approaches. Some examples, from the chapters in 
this report, include:

•  Changing pavement mixes for roads, for example using more heat-tolerant pavements; 

•  Expanding drainage capacity for infrastructure, including culvert size;

• 

Increasing maintenance, including clearing debris from culverts to reduce flooding risks, and 
clearing snow to preserve permafrost stability under vulnerable roads;

 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTIONS 

9
9

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
