6.0 AIR TRANSPORTATION

6.1 CLIMATE IMPACTS ON AIR TRANSPORTATION 

For communities in the North, many which are not connected via roads, disruptions to aviation can 
significantly impact mobility and restrict the supply of goods. For example, in 2014, when Canadian 
North grounded all of its flights to and from Iqaluit during a blizzard, passengers in Pangnirtung, 
Qikiqtarjuaq, Hall Beach, Igloolik, Cape Dorset, Pond Inlet, and Clyde River were affected (CBC 
News, 2014).

Climate stressors that have an impact on air transportation in the North include fog, freezing rain, 
heavy precipitation, high winds, and blowing snow. For example, extreme fog and condensation can 
delay flights and shut down airports, particularly in coastal communities (Klock et al., 2001). While data 
on fog and condensation is limited, firsthand accounts indicate that fog events have become more 
frequent in the territories, resulting in reduced visibility at airports (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). With few 
communities possessing navigational systems, this makes approaches to airports more challenging. 
For example, as of 2013, eight airports in the Northwest Territories did not have the navigational 
systems in place to assist pilots in landing during their approach. Thus, under extreme fog conditions, 
these airports are forced to suspend operations. For example, the airport in Wekweeti, Northwest 
Territories, was shut down for a week in September 2011 due to dense fog (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). 

Rain and freezing rain can also have an impact operations by decreasing traction on runways and 
taxiways, necessitating the use of de-icing products prior to take-off. Loss of friction and flooding of 
runways can also cause flight cancellations, as was the case in Inuvik in 2011 when ground personnel 
were unable to keep the runway clear (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). In addition, similar to all-weather 
and winter roads, changing air temperatures can impact the structural integrity of permafrost under 
runways and taxiways. 

Gravel runways and taxiways also present unique challenges for aviation in northern Canada, as they 
can become significantly weaker following periods of heavy precipitation or spring thaw (Transport 
Canada, 2016). The weakening of these surfaces may limit or completely halt runway operations 
(Transport Canada, 2016). This exacerbates another capacity issue: many airstrips in northern Canada 
can only accommodate relatively small aircraft (Parliament of Canada, 2011).

Table 4: Overview of climate and extreme weather impacts on air transportation.

Climatic factor
Air Temperature

Snow

Rainfall

Fog

Impact on aviation
Permafrost  degradation  can  damage  and  degrade  runways/taxiways  (Government  of 
Nunavut et al., 2011).
Increased snowfall may cause flooding in the thaw seasons, damaging permafrost under 
runways/taxiways (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

Blizzards, blowing snow, and winter storms can reduce visibility and delay flight operations 
(e.g., via the accumulation of snow on runways) (Hanesiak et al., 2009).
Increased rainfall can reduce traction on runways/taxiways (Best, et al., 2014). 

Intense  periods  of  freezing  rain  can  cause  delays  to  flights  and  could  cause  airplanes 
to  experience  issues  with  braking  and  sliding  off  airstrips  (IMG-Golder  Corporation 
Environmental Consulting, 2012). 
Increased  fog  episodes  may  require  additional  training  and  procedures  for  airport 
personnel in order to ensure safety (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

Intense periods of fog can delay flights until visibility improves (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

51
51

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
