 

4
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 4: ROAD SAFETY AND CLIMATE CHANGE IN 
PRINCE GEORGE

Prince George, located in the interior of British Columbia, is home to approximately 76,000 people. The 
city has a wide range of transportation modes, including rail, inland marine, and urban transit. While the 
city’s transportation network faces a number of risks from climate change, warmer winter temperatures 
are likely to have the greatest impact, primarily due to increased freeze-thaw cycles, rain-on-snow events, 
and freezing rain. Flooding on the Nechako (due to ice jams) and Fraser (due to freshet) rivers is another 
key concern. Prince George developed a number of transportation-specific climate change adaptations 
in 2012, in recognition of the risks flooding poses to roads, active transportation infrastructure, and rail 
facilities. This was done in the context of a larger community adaptation plan.

A steering committee composed of local practitioners and experts from academia (to balance local 
needs with best practices) identified 23 forward-looking adaptation actions, in the areas of infrastructure, 
operations, emergency response and safety, and financing. 

Through the process, the city also identified a number of ongoing initiatives that fall under the umbrella of 
climate adaptation. These included snow and ice control, salt management, road elevation, and dyke 
construction. For instance, following an ice-jam flood of an industrial area in 2008, the city elevated a 
roadway to a 1-in-200 year flood level, and constructed a 3.3 km dyke to protect local rail infrastructure 
(Picketts, 2012). The committee’s final recommendations for immediate action included changes to winter 
road maintenance, improvements to road safety, and climate-sensitive design considerations (Picketts, 2012). 
The city listed transportation as its highest-priority area in the city for continued action (Picketts et al., 2013). 

Prince George is now focused on implementing action items in key areas, with promising early returns. The 
city has begun to aggregate climate data and procedural information to better inform road maintenance 
decision-making, including data on vehicle and climate interactions. With respect to road design and 
stormwater management, a number of new permeable materials have been proposed for testing. Next 
steps include:

•  Continuing partnerships with universities and the provincial government; 

• 

• 

Encouraging climate assessments for all new infrastructure projects; 

Incorporating climate data into decision-making criteria; 

•  Maintaining dialogue with the transportation industry; and,

• 

Encouraging the exchange of information among city staff members (Picketts, 2012).

The transportation component was considered successful by practitioners, given the high degree of public 
interest in mobility issues; the practical nature of the solutions that were explored; and the clear potential 
for significant cost savings. However, one drawback to the project’s focus on winter road safety was 
relatively little attention was paid to active and public modes of transportation (Picketts, 2014). Feedback 
from practitioners involved in the implementation process highlighted four key areas for attention, with 
specific relevance to adaptation in mid-sized, northern communities:  

1.  Building and maintaining local knowledge and capacity for decision-making around climate 

adaptation; 

2.  “Mainstreaming” or normalizing adaptation into the plans, priorities, and professional practices of local 

officials; 

3.  Focusing on tangible projects around which the community can rally and easily identify results; and; 

4.  Linking adaptation actions to costs and priorities through clear communication to both politicians and 

members of the public (Picketts, 2014). 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

…

300
300

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
