 

1
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 1: IMPLICATIONS OF A CHANGING CLIMATE 
FOR THE TIBBITT TO CONTWOYTO WINTER ROAD 

The Tibbitt to Contwoyto Winter Road (TCWR; Figure 8) is a 570-km private industrial road (also used by the 
public) in the Northwest Territories and Nunavut. It provides access and supplies to three active diamond 
mines and other mining locations. The majority of the road is built over frozen lakes, and both the construction 
and operation of the road are sensitive to climate variations. Thus, winter warming trends have been 
identified as a concern for the longevity of the road.

TCWR Facts: 

• 

• 

The TCWR is the busiest heavy-haul winter road in the world, moving a record 10,922 loads (330,002 
tonnes) in 2007. It provides access to a region served by no other highways.

The minimum ice thickness required for very light loads is 70 cm, while 107 cm is required for maximum 
loading (42 tonnes). Ground-penetrating radar is used to measure ice thickness. 

•  Construction of the road takes approximately 5 to 6 weeks prior to opening each year.

• 

The TCWR is typically operational for 8 to 10 weeks, starting between January 26 and February 11 and 
ending between March 21 and April 16.

Climate trends: Analysis of regional climate data demonstrates that the TCWR’s operating season length 
correlates with temperature and related variables, including freezing-degree days, melting-degree days, and 
ice thickness – of these, the strongest indicator of a longer season is the accumulation of freezing-degree days. 
Winter temperatures in the region have increased significantly over recent decades (Figure 9); correspondingly, 
freezing-degree days and observed annual maximum ice thickness have both decreased, while melting-
degree days have increased. 

Figure 8: Map of the TCWR’s route through the 
Northwest Territories and Nunavut. (Source: Tibbitt 
to Contwoyto Winter Road Joint Venture)

Figure 9: Historical average temperatures 
observed in Yellowknife for five previous climate 
normal periods. (Source: Environment and 
Climate Change Canada)

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

…

43
43

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
