Warmer temperatures also provide some opportunities for Ontario’s roads, including:

•  Greater fuel efficiency for many vehicles in warmer winters (Maoh et al., 2008); 

•  Longer construction seasons (Andrey and Mills, 2003); and,

•  Reduced winter maintenance requirements (Fu et al., 2009).  

CHANGING WATER LEVELS AND ICE PATTERNS

Fluctuating water levels and changing ice patterns in rivers and lakes may also result in roadway 
flooding. In Ontario, this risk is highest during spring river-ice breakup (Andrey and Mills, 2003). Seiche 
events (referring to temporary changes in lake levels caused by fluctuating atmospheric pressure) 
also present flood risks throughout the Great Lakes basin for roads adjacent to bodies of water. More 
frequent Seiche floods may affect set-back requirements for roads and other critical infrastructure in 
vulnerable areas over the long term (International Joint Commission, 2014a).

WIND

Wind speeds throughout the province are projected to increase in coming years (Cheng et al., 2012b; 
Environment Canada, 2014), presenting risks to road transport. Strong winds disperse chemical road 
treatments; produce drifting snow that reduces visibility, stability, and maneuverability; and damage 
signals and other tall structures (OFCM, 2002).

4.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

PRECIPITATION AND FLOODING 

Several practices identified in the literature may reduce the impacts of extreme precipitation on 
Ontario’s roads. These include using alternative routes; conducting risk assessments for new road 
infrastructure; widening culverts and making other drainage improvements; and conducting more 
frequent maintenance (Savonis et al., 2008). Some of these practices have been adopted in Ontario: 
for instance, Toronto has increased regular monitoring and clearing of blocked drainage culverts to 
address the increased flow of debris (City of Toronto, 2015). The Ontario Ministry of Transportation (MTO) 
has also undertaken research to update Ontario’s intensity, duration, and frequency (IDF) curves to 
more accurately characterize precipitation in the province, and has assessed the vulnerability of 
Ontario’s highway drainage infrastructure to more severe precipitation events (see Case study 1).

Efficient management and use of de-icing materials (including salt, sand, and brine) reduces the 
impacts (and associated costs) of freezing rain. For instance, York Region treats rock salt with beet 
juice to increase its melting capabilities, yielding budget savings of approximately 8 percent annually 
(Clean Air Partnership, 2012). 

Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) can also support adaptation on an operational level. Variable 
message signs can warn motorists of roadway safety concerns in real time to prevent accidents 
during precipitation events (Andrey and Mills, 2003). Similarly, Ontario’s Road Weather Information 
System (RWIS) (deployed in the 1990s) provides MTO and its contractors with real-time environmental 
information to inform responsive winter highway maintenance practices (Buchanan and Gwartz, 2005).

CHANGING WATER LEVELS AND ICE PATTERNS (FLOOD RISKS)

In areas particularly vulnerable to flooding, road infrastructure can be relocated or elevated to 
reduce risks (Savonis et al., 2008). However, elevating roads is costly, and relocation may raise 
issues related to land expropriation. Therefore, it is often more prudent to enhance the capacity of 
stormwater management and other flood-prevention infrastructure, such as breakwaters or dykes 
(Andrey and Mills, 2003). 

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

158
158

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
