3.3 CLIMATE, WEATHER AND TRANSPORTATION IN THE PRAIRIES

Shifting climate and weather conditions will affect all modes of transportation in the Prairies. Examples 
of these impacts include:

•  Damage to roads, railways, and other structures as a result of flooding, erosion, and landslides;

• 

Increased frequencies of freeze-thaw cycles over the short term, damaging roads, rails, and 
runways;

•  Compromised frozen substrates of winter roads; and 

• 

Increased rutting of heated pavement (Sauchyn and Kulshreshta, 2008).

The Prairies may also experience benefits associated with warmer winters, including:

•  Cost reductions associated with non-ice road infrastructure;

•  Reductions in the length and severity of the frost-affected season, potentially resulting in long-term 

repair and maintenance cost savings; and

•  Reduced cold-weather damage to rails (Sauchyn and Kulshreshtha, 2008).

Each mode can be expected to respond differently to climate-related risks. Sections 4, 5, 6, and 7 discuss 
past climate impacts, future risks, and adaptation practices separately for road, rail, air, and marine. 

4.0 ROAD TRANSPORTATION

4.1 IMPACTS ON ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE

Extreme precipitation events create problems for roadway drainage. Truckers in the Prairies report an 
increased frequency of roadway flooding during extreme precipitation events, which may be partly 
attributed to inadequate culvert capacity (Kim Graybiel, Saskatchewan Ministry of Environment, 
personal communication, 2015). Washout and bridge scour may also occur as a result of extreme 
precipitation (Transportation Research Board, 2008).

Greater variability in temperature contributes to more rapid deterioration of road infrastructure. It is 
expected that the Prairies will experience an increase in the frequency of freeze-thaw cycles by mid-
century (Sauchyn and Kulshreshtha, 2008), stressing road surfaces and bridges and increasing renewal 
and replacement costs (Amiro et al., 2014). Extreme heat causes asphalt pavements to rut and bleed 
(Transportation Research Board, 2008). 

Drought has also had negative impacts on road infrastructure in the Prairies. Greater Edmonton 
experienced drought conditions from 2014-2015, leading to severe cracking of roadways as a result of 
desiccation of clay sub-soils; this can be explained in part due to the removal of water by vegetation 
(Kelm and Wylie, 2008) – damage was particularly severe in neighbourhoods with mature tree stands. 
Wildfires occurring during droughts typically do not seriously damage road infrastructure, given the 
inflammability of pavements and the relatively brief duration of these events.

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

117
117

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
