Developing	
  Effective	
  Dialogue	
  between	
  Practitioners	
  of	
  Climate	
  Change	
  Vulnerability-­‐Risk	
  Assessments	
  

	
  
 
 
Engineers’ formative training included many sessions on the code of ethics.  They are required to 
complete written examinations on these matters as part of their registration into the profession.  
As a consequence, the average engineer fundamentally believes that every professional, 
regardless of their discipline, must adhere to the same standards of practice. 
 
Engineers are very comfortable with the concept of peer review.  However, as applied scientists, 
they are not as interested in the purity of the science, that is, getting the precisely correct answer.  
Within engineering practice, peer review is generally applied in the sense of improving the 
quality of a design or report, assurance of compliance with codes and standards, or providing 
certification. 
 
This is much more a process of assessing the professional practices applied to a project and much 
less one of proving a scientific principle.  It is common for engineers to go over each other’s 
work and sign-off on the professional integrity of the process.  When they do so, they are staking 
their license on their opinion and are therefore very careful about what they offer as professional 
judgement.  In essence, engineers are looking for a scientific foundation that is good enough to 
support their activities and assure public wellbeing. 
 
As long as they understand the strengths and weaknesses of a particular scientific fact, or have 
assurance from others who are qualified to offer these judgements, engineers are very 
comfortable with proceeding on an initiative while adding appropriate safety margins and 
contingencies.  These processes are ingrained in the professional culture.  In day-to-day practice 
some engineers may not immediately identify that other professionals may be operating within 
completely different professional/cultural environments. 
 
Ultimately, engineers are driven by a number of principles that can be simply stated.  
Engineering initiatives should be: 
 

§  Safe; 
§  Environmentally sound; 
§  Functional; 
§  Reliable; 
§  On time; and  
§  On budget. 

 
 
 
While the engineer’s practice is founded on science, the fundamental characteristic of the 
profession is application and, provided that appropriate safeguards are employed, they will 
accept less than perfect information to advance a project to completion. 
 
 

 

Rev	
  6	
  –	
  Jun	
  4,	
  2014	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  Page	
  7	
  of	
  33 


