4.2 FUTURE RISKS 

EXTREME AND CHANGING PRECIPITATION

Research suggests Southern Ontario is likely to experience more frequent and severe extreme 
weather events by late-century (Cheng et al., 2012a). Past impacts of heavy or prolonged 
precipitation, including flooding and bridge scour in summer, and icy roadways and fallen power lines 
in winter, have been disruptive to Ontario’s roads, bridges, and supporting infrastructure, and similar 
occurrences pose future risks. 

Changing patterns of precipitation will also likely affect Ontario’s roads. The province can expect 
more instances of flooding and washouts as rainstorm frequency increases, which pose safety risks 
(Boyle et al., 2013). Vehicle accidents are up to 45 percent more likely during severe precipitation 
events (Andrey et al., 2003). Additionally, freezing rain (as a proportion of winter precipitation) is likely 
to increase throughout the province (Bruce, 2011; Cheng et al., 2011), creating safety and winter road 
maintenance challenges (i.e. increased salt and sand requirements).

RISING TEMPERATURES AND EXTREME HEAT

Rising annual temperatures and more frequent extreme heat events have increased instances of 
pavement softening, rutting, flushing, and bleeding in Southern Ontario in the past (Mills et al., 2009; 
Woudsma et al., 2007). These impacts are likely to be exacerbated in the future considering projected 
temperature trends (see Section 3). High temperatures causing thermal expansion of bridge joints 
(“blow-ups”) have also resulted in bridge closures and detours in some jurisdictions (Transportation 
Research Board, 2008), although the risk of this impact remains low in Ontario.

Warmer winter temperatures and more short-term (i.e. daily) temperature variability are likely to 
produce more freeze-thaw cycles throughout the province, resulting in pavement deformation 
and shearing (Boyle et al., 2013; Ho and Gough, 2006). Resulting road damage could interrupt 
economically important transportation activities, such as heavy-lift/special project cargo movement, 
logging, and mining, affecting rural communities in Central and Northern Ontario.

Research suggests that while the impacts of climate change on pavement may be modest overall 
in Southern Ontario, changing conditions should be considered when selecting highway pavement 
materials (Tighe et al., 2008). For low-volume roads, research indicates that longitudinal cracking 
and rutting of pavement will worsen as a result of freeze-thaw cycles and extreme heat in the South, 
while transverse cracking will become less problematic (Mills et al., 2009). Roads will generally require 
maintenance earlier in their life spans.

Higher temperatures are likely to shorten operating seasons for winter roads in Central and Northern 
Ontario. For instance, Deloitte (2014) projects that operating windows for winter roads serving 
Ontario’s central and northern First Nations’ communities will decline 12 to 20 percent by 2050 from 
present conditions, and 20 to 40 percent by 2100. Potential socioeconomic consequences include: 

•  A shorter seasonal window for the movement of freight and people (Deloitte, 2014); 

•  Higher maintenance costs (Boyle et al., 2013; Transportation Association of Canada, 2010);

•  Reduced load capacity (due to decreased ice thickness) (Prowse et al, 2009); and, 

•  Road embankment failure (Transportation Association of Canada, 2010; Transportation Association 

of Canada, 2011).

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

157
157

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
