5.2 FUTURE CLIMATE RISKS

As rail corridors in British Columbia tightly parallel highway routing, with transportation corridors sharing 
mountain passes and routing along rivers, it is not uncommon for drainage failure events on one 
system to also negatively affect the other.  In several of the case studies considered previously, failures 
on road system components resulted in mudslides onto the rail system. Therefore, severe weather 
events that negatively affect one system may have simultaneous impacts on others.  

Climate change work by British Columbia’s Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure indicates 
that in these same corridors, highways will continue to be affected by intense precipitation events 
leading to drainage component failure and slope instability, and that these events are anticipated 
to increase both in frequency and intensity into the future.  Given the close proximity between road 
and rail in British Columbia and the history of sequential and coincident failure of these systems, it is 
reasonable to project similar patterns of vulnerability for the rail system.

5.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

While specific references to rail companies conducting climate change assessment and adaptation 
work in British Columbia were not identified in the literature, it was observed that rail companies in 
British Columbia are making considerable effort to address the impacts of severe climate events, 
including extreme precipitation. The recommendations that arise from these investigations and 
follow up activities are very similar to those that may arise from focussed climate change assessment 
analyses. The forensic analysis conducted as part of the TSB investigation process is a critical input to 
climate change adaptation assessment, such as the work conducted by the British Columbia Ministry 
of Transportation Infrastructure for the province’s highway system.   Examples of these actions are 
listed in Table 9.

Table 9: Example follow-up actions from TSB Reports.

Date

Jan 1995

Location
Procter

Mar 1997

Conrad

Follow Up
CP:
••

••
••

••

••

Provided employees instruction on basic rock slope 
inspection, principles of rock slope stability, and 
methods for stabilization and protection;
Extended annual rock slope inspections;
Initiated aerial inspections to evaluate rock slope 
features at higher elevations; 
Established a procedure to evaluate and catalogue 
a broader range of mitigative measures for rock slope 
instability.

CN:
•• Constructed additional surface drainage works at 

Conrad, and installed a prototype washout detector;
Used aerial photographs to identify sites at Thompson/
Fraser geologically similar to Conrad; inspected those 
sites and installed drainage improvements;

Citation

TSB Report No. R95V0017 

Procter – Jan 20. 1995

TSB Report No. R97V0063 
Conrad – Mar 26, 1997

•• Conducted geotechnical subsurface investigations 

at selected locations and installed instruments 
(pneumatic piezometers) to measure groundwater 
pressures; 

•• Developed a slope-monitoring assessment procedure 

to report all incidents related to rockslides and 
landslides to the geotechnical department for action 
or for data to assess long-term stability of soil slopes. 

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

90
90

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
