Figure 5: Mean annual ground temperature 
(MAGT) across northern Canada recorded 
during the International Polar Year (2007-09).  
B and C show permafrost temperature 
standardized anomaly time series (relative to 
1988-2007 mean) for a site near Norman Wells 
(12 m depth) and at Alert (15 m depth).  
(Source: Derksen et al., 2012)

Figure 6: Projected median relative sea-level 
change in 2100 for a high greenhouse gas 
emissions scenario (RCP8.5; after James et 
al., 2014). The scenarios and methods used 
are described in Atkinson et al., 2016. (Source: 
Natural Resources Canada)

Air temperature also strongly influences the freeze-
up and break-up dates of river and lake ice, 
while changes in both air temperature and snow 
cover affect ice thickness (Brown and Duguay, 
2010).  Duration and thickness of ice cover are 
critical for the sustainability of many winter roads 
in Canada’s northern territories. Delayed freeze-
up, and earlier break-up dates observed in recent 
years are projected to continue, with simulations 
suggesting that by mid-century freeze-up will 
occur about 15 days later than it has historically, 
and that break-up will occur 5 to 25 days earlier. 
For the same period, maximum ice thicknesses are 
projected to decrease by 20 to 30 cm (Brown and 
Duguay, 2010).

3.1.3 SEA LEVEL 

Sea level changes in Canada’s northern 
territories are dominated by vertical land 
motion that has been ongoing since the last 
glaciation, when the land beneath ice sheets 
was depressed hundreds of metres, and has 
slowly been rebounding back over thousands of 
years (Atkinson et al., 2016). This phenomenon, 
known as glacial isostatic adjustment, results 
in observed sea level falling across most of the 
Canadian Arctic, despite the fact that global 
mean sea level has risen. An important exception 
is the Mackenzie Delta/Beaufort region of the 
western Arctic that lay near the margin of the 
last ice sheet and is experiencing sea level rise 
as a result. Tide-gauge records covering the past 
50 years indicate that sea level has risen 2.4 mm/
year at Tuktoyaktuk, NT, but fallen by 1.5 mm/
year at Alert, Nunavut (Ford et al, 2016).

Future patterns of sea level change will be 
similar to historic patterns, with the magnitude 
of change influenced by global greenhouse 
gas emissions and associated increases in mean 
global sea level.  Where the land is currently 
rising rapidly, future sea level is projected to 
continue to fall, even under a high greenhouse-
gas emissions scenario, and some locations 
could experience more than 80 cm of sea-level 
fall by 2100 (Figure 6). Where the land is sinking 
slowly, including the Mackenzie Delta/Beaufort 
region, sea level is projected to rise more than 
40 cm by 2100.  While not all of this change is 
due to a changing climate, adaptation will still 
be required. 

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

40
40

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
