specific to Quebec infrastructure. Nevertheless, it is clear that any impact on the rail system has 
significant repercussions on the entire supply chain in Canada (QGI Consulting, 2009). See Chapter 5 
for more information on these challenges.

Managing water runoff along train tracks is a major concern (AREMA, 2003). Extreme weather events 
and episodes of heavy rain can cause drainage and erosion problems, and increase the risk of a 
system breach due to disruptions in communications. For example, an episode of heavy rain in 2010 
eroded the soil under the tracks of a section of the Arcelor Mittal railway. In addition to preventing the 
trains from moving, the erosion caused a rupture in the fiber optic cables that ensure communication 
throughout the system. Extreme weather events can also increase the risk of tracks being blocked by 
debris. As the climate continues to warm, extreme weather events and episodes of heavy rain will 
become more frequent and/or more pronounced (Ouranos, 2015) increasing the vulnerability of rail 
transportation in Quebec.

Brakes are also frequently tested during bad weather. In some sectors, particularly in the center 
of the province, personnel must remain on site and in personnel camps, during heavy storms. 
Maintenance work is then suspended and delays associated with performing inspections and 
additional maintenance costs are to be expected based on the increasing frequency of such events 
(Gouvernement du Québec, 2015).

Climate factors that contribute to triggering landslides (e.g., abundant rain, rapid snow melt and 
such other events likely to increase as the climate warms) have a tendency to increase rail system 
vulnerability.  This would be especially significant in areas prone to landslides, such as the clay rich 
regions of the St. Lawrence valley, where soil characteristics interact with land use and exacerbate 
the vulnerability of rail transportation systems. 

Similar to road transportation, rail transportation is vulnerable to impacts from forest fires caused 
by lightning. The economic impact of fires is particularly significant for the network in the center of 
the province, where there is little redundancy. In 2013, Arcelor Mittal Mines Canada, which uses rail 
tracks in Quebec and has three camps for its staff, saw its operations restricted for several days near 
Manic-Cinq due to fires and smoke. Access to industrial sites, including those for general maintenance 
activities, was restricted by near zero visibility conditions. Decreased visibility created by bad weather 
(fires, heavy rains, etc.) also makes operating a locomotive more complex and dangerous. 

Changes in freeze-thaw cycles also affect track integrity and can reduce the lifespan of 
infrastructure. They can also trigger landslides, which is particularly problematic on tracks where 
required clearances around the infrastructure are minimal. 

Tracks undergo a certain expansion during times of extreme heat and a certain contraction during 
deep freezes, but generally react well to temperature variations. However, in the context of significant 
thermal variation, this expansion phenomenon can damage tracks.

4.3.1 RAIL TRANSPORTATION IN THE ST. LAWRENCE CORRIDOR

Bank erosion, flooding and submersion problems, phenomena heightened by climate change, affect 
coastal train tracks such as the Charlevoix Railway Inc. and the Gaspé Railway Company, as well 
as railways located along streams, like the Compagnie de chemin de fer de l’Outaouais and the 
Chemin de fer Québec Central.  Erosion can compromise network structural integrity, and even cause 
a complete interruption of activities in the affected region. A landslide in Gascons on the Gaspé 
Peninsula suggests such rail network vulnerabilities in this region (Locat et al., 2013). Furthermore, in the 
Charlevoix and North Shore areas (around Sept-Îles particularly), some track segments are affected 
by challenges related to slope stability, geotechnical issues, or rockfall (Leroueil et al., 2001). 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

204
204

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
