•  Performing regular maintenance of stormwater management systems, especially culverts, to 
maintain capacity, and designing drainage systems to direct runoff away from the roadbed 
(rather than parallel with the roadway), therefore avoiding erosion of the roadbed and exposure 
of utilities (City of Toronto, 2014).

•  Maintaining positive cross-slope to facilitate the flow of water from road surfaces, and increasing 

culvert/ditch capacities (United States Federal Highway Administration, 2015).

•  Sealing and/or elevating where appropriate street-level vents and manholes, protecting 

underground pump rooms, circuit breaker houses and other underground facilities that provide 
power to subway systems (McLeod and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014).

•  Elevating portions of vulnerable roads, sidewalks and bicycle paths above projected sea-level or 

flood lines (Schwartz, 2011).

INSTITUTIONAL ADAPTATION

Institutional adaptation refers to the adoption of policies targeting climate change. This includes 
changes to transportation agencies’ service delivery, and approaches to infrastructure maintenance. 
For instance, on rail lines experiencing buckling, service or speed reductions might be implemented at 
least in the short term to ensure safety (Savonis et al., 2008). This category also includes:

• 

Innovative financing measures available to municipalities for adaptation, such as:

 -

 -

 -

“Green” bonds (debt instruments used to raise private capital for projects with specific 
environmental purposes, including urban transit and active transportation);

Local tax rebates or incentives for green roofs and other stormwater management 
infrastructure and practices, which may produce benefits for transportation in terms of 
reduced runoff; and,

Intergovernmental grants targeted for resilient transportation infrastructure (Harford et al., 
2015).

•  Organizational practices identified through the PIEVC (Public Infrastructure Engineering 

Vulnerability Committee) climate change vulnerability assessment protocol. For example, 
recommendations from a PIEVC assessment of impacts related to higher temperatures and 
increased precipitation on roads and associated structures in Sudbury included the following:

 - More closely monitoring hydraulic data for culverts, as well as key pavement performance 

indicators (e.g., freeze-thaw cycles, average and extreme temperatures) annually; 

 - Changing pavement mixtures to better withstand heat (i.e. SuperPave);

 -

 -

Performing sensitivity analyses on the slope stability of high-risk embankments; and,

Improving tree coverage on low-speed roads to reduce the urban heat island effect 
(Engineers Canada, 2014).

•  Organizational planning, financial and risk management practices. One example is the work 

undertaken by TransLink to integrate climate risk into decision-making processes, which is a 
responsibility of their Chief Financial Officer (see Case Study 5).

• 

Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS). These are becoming more prevalent, and have potential 
adaptive applications in urban centres. ITS technologies can help municipalities “adaptively 
manage” traffic flow, infrastructure maintenance practices, and investment patterns through the 
collection of data on operations, structural integrity of infrastructure, and other variables, including 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

291
291

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
