OBSERVED AND PROJECTED CHANGES TO CANADA’S CLIMATE AND HYDROLOGY

Canada has experienced a number of changes to climate variables affecting the transportation 
sector, including temperature, precipitation, permafrost, relative sea level, sea, lake and river 
ice, inland water levels, and extreme weather events; and further changes to these variables are 
projected (Table 1). 

Table 1:  Summary of observed and projected changes to climate and hydrological variables 
relevant to the Canadian transportation system. (Source: Warren and Lemmen, 2014; other sources  
as indicated)

Variable

Temperature

Observed Changes

Canada has become warmer.
 • The average air temperature has 

increased by 1.5°C during the period 
from 1950 to 2010.

 • Hot summer days have become 
more frequent since 1950, while 
the frequency of cold nights has 
decreased, nationally.

Precipitation & Snow 
Cover

Canada has generally become wetter.  
 • Annual average precipitation has 

increased in recent decades.

 • Annual snowfall has declined over most 

of southern Canada and increased in 
the north over the last 6 decades.

Projected Changes
Canada will continue to warm.
 • Warming will be greatest in winter, 

with the largest temperature increases 
projected in northern Canada. 

 • The magnitude of projected warming 

varies substantially with the emission 
scenario.

 • Unusually warm days are projected to 
occur more often throughout the 21st 
century, while unusually cold days and 
nights will become less frequent. 

 • Heat waves are projected to become 

longer, more frequent and more 
intense. By mid-century, a one-in-20-
year extreme hot day is projected to 
become about a one-in-5 year event 
over most of Canada.

Most of Canada will continue to get 
wetter, with regional differences in 
seasonal patterns.
 • Precipitation may decline in summer 
and fall in parts of southern Canada. 

Most of Canada will see less snow cover.
 • Snow cover is projected to decrease in 
southern Canada (especially the west 
coast mountains), while it is projected 
to increase in northern Canada due to 
increased precipitation.

Heavy precipitation events are projected 
to occur more often.
 • Rare extreme precipitation events are 

projected to occur about twice as often 
by mid-century over most of Canada, 
relative to the period from 1950 to 2010.

Permafrost

Permafrost has warmed. 
 • Permafrost temperatures at many sites 

across Canada have increased over 
the past two to three decades.

Permafrost is projected to continue to 
warm at higher rates than those observed 
to date. 
 • It will take many decades to centuries 

for colder permafrost to completely 
thaw.

 
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTIONS 

7
7

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
