3.0 CLIMATE

Canada’s northern territories are characterized by long cold winters interrupted by short, relatively 
cool, summers. Precipitation is light, particularly in the western and northern parts of the region, and 
occurs predominantly in the summer months.  There is great regional variability in both seasonal 
temperatures and precipitation. For example, average winter temperatures in the northern part of the 
region are around -37˚C, but only -18˚C in the south (Environment Canada, 2015). Average summer 
temperatures range from 16˚C in the south to 6˚C in the north. Variability among seasons, years, and 
decades is high.

A critical component of the northern climate system is the cryosphere – terrestrial, freshwater, and 
marine areas that are seasonally or permanently frozen. This includes snow, glaciers, and permafrost, 
as well as lake, river and sea ice. Many of the most dramatic climate change impacts observed in 
Canada’s North relate to changes in the cryosphere (Derksen et al, 2012). A final element of the 
northern climate system is the marine climate. While changes in ocean temperature, salinity, and 
other parameters have important implications for northern ecosystems and traditional ways of life, this 
chapter only considers changes in sea level as it affects coastal transportation infrastructure.

WHAT IS ARCTIC AMPLIFICATION?

Arctic amplification refers to the faster rate of 
warming that characterizes Arctic regions relative 
to the rest of the world (Figure 3). While many 
factors contribute to this phenomenon, one key 
factor is the increased surface absorption of heat 
associated with reductions in snow and sea ice 
cover. Snow and ice are highly reflective, whereas 
the darker surfaces of open water and tundra 
absorb heat, causing greater warming (National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration, 2013).

Figure 3: Global temperature anomalies for 2000 
to 2009, showing how much warmer (red) or 
colder (blue) a region is compared to the norm 
for that region from 1951 to 1980. While average 
global temperatures from 2000-2009 were about 
0.6°C higher than they were from 1951–1980, the 
Arctic warmed by about 2°C. (Source: Courtesy 
NASA/JPL-Caltech)

3.1 TRENDS AND PROJECTIONS

3.1.1 ATMOSPHERE

Arctic regions have warmed, and will continue 
to warm, more rapidly than most regions of the 
world, due in part to the phenomenon known 
as Arctic amplification (see textbox). Canada’s 
North has already experienced some of the most 
significant surface air temperature warming 
observed anywhere on the planet (Bush, et al., 
2014). The greatest observed warming, 2.6˚C for the 
period 1948-2014, has occurred in the Northwest 
Territories’ Mackenzie District (Environment Canada, 
2015). Over the same period, the warming trend 
in Canada was 1.6˚C, and about 0.8˚C globally. 
Warming over the rest of northern Canada was 
equal to or greater than warming observed over 
the country as a whole for the period 1948-2014, 
with warming of 2˚C observed in the Arctic Tundra 
region, and 1.6˚C for the Arctic Mountains and 
Fjords region of Nunavut. 

Projections suggest that warming of the North 
will continue to be greater than in Canada as 
a whole, with the greatest warming occurring 
in winter and fall (Bush et al., 2014). In climate 
change models, the magnitude of warming 
for the latter part of this century is strongly 
dependent upon the level of global greenhouse 
gas emissions.  Under a high-emissions scenario, 
winter warming in excess of 10˚C is projected 
for large areas of the North.   Even under a low 
emissions scenario, average winter temperatures 
will increase by more than 5˚C.

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

36
36

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
