The Great Lakes greatly affect regional temperature and precipitation patterns (Gula and Peltier, 
2012). Warmer temperatures over the 21st century will likely be associated with a continued decrease 
in winter ice cover on the Great Lakes, consistent with observed trends (Kahl and Stirrat, 2012), and 
an increase in lake-effect snow in some locations. Increased temperatures (and evaporation) and 
a longer ice-free season could lead to water-level decreases of 0.5-1 m in the Great Lakes and St. 
Lawrence River by 2055 (Shlozberg et al, 2014; Brown et al., 2012). However, long-term future trends 
toward lower water levels may be overestimated due to the limitations of traditional modeling 
efforts (MacKay and Seglenieks, 2013). As of February 2015, water levels in Lake Ontario and the St. 
Lawrence Seaway were 20 cm below monthly historical averages (International St. Lawrence River 
Board of Control, 2015).

4.0 ROAD TRANSPORTATION IN ONTARIO 

4.1 PAST IMPACTS

Historical examples of climate impacts to transportation networks, particularly extreme weather 
events, can affect public and political perceptions of risk and the likelihood of adaptation 
action. Major events that have affected transportation in Ontario include Hurricane Hazel in 1954 
(Environment Canada, 2013b; see Chapter 9) and the North American Ice Storm of 1998. During the 
latter event, ice accumulation on electrical infrastructure, roadways, and rail lines caused significant 
damage and disruption, shut down transportation and signalization networks, and stranded travelers 
(Environment Canada, 2013b). 

In December 2013, another severe winter weather event caused road obstructions throughout 
Southern and Central Ontario, due to fallen branches, transmission lines, and heavy ice. The City of 
Toronto (2014) estimates its municipal agencies incurred costs and lost revenue of approximately $106 
million as a result of the storm. A number of important adaptive practices were identified following this 
event, including the need to:

• 

Improve information-sharing between provincial and municipal governments; 

•  Enhance coordination between emergency personnel and the infrastructure sector;

•  Provide backup power for traffic signals; and 

•  Update Ontario’s emergency response plan (Office of the Fire Marshal and Emergency 

Management, 2014).

Recent extreme summer storm events have also caused widespread disruption and damage. In 
2002, Northwestern Ontario was struck by intense rain, resulting in $31 million in estimated damages to 
highways, as well as lengthy closures to TransCanada highways (Chiotti and Lavender, 2008). Damage 
would likely have been more severe had this storm occurred in a more urbanized area.  

The impacts of these events on connectivity are greater for regions dependent on roads and 
highways with few alternate routes for mobility (such as in Central and Northern Ontario). Washouts 
from extreme weather events have stranded travelers for extended periods of time in some cases, 
affecting economic flows and delaying emergency-response personnel.

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

156
156

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
