Figure 14: Komo, British Columbia train derailment 
caused by debris flow onto train tracks. (Source: 
Transportation Safety Board of Canada)

KOMO – NOVEMBER 2009

On November 17, 2009, a Canadian Pacific (CP) 
freight train travelling west between Boston Bar 
and Vancouver struck a debris slide consisting 
of rock, mud and trees.  The locomotive and 
three cars loaded with copper concentrate 
derailed (Figure 14). The locomotive engineer 
and conductor sustained non-life-threatening 
injuries. At the time of the incident, the area was 
experiencing very heavy rainfall, caused by an 
atmospheric river event.  

The slide occurred during a period of heavy 
rain (Transportation Safety Board of Canada, 
2010). Large volumes of water transited through 
a highway culvert located above the affected 
track.  While the culvert had sufficient capacity 
to handle the water volume, diversion features 
downstream of the culvert were overtopped 
and significant volumes of water established an 
alternate channel that impacted the train tracks 
at a location where there were no culverts.  The 
diversion resulted in rock, debris and mud being 
carried downslope and onto the track below.

FERNIE – MARCH 2011

On March 8, 2011, twenty-seven rail cars loaded with coal derailed near Fernie, British Columbia.  
There were no injuries.  

Figure 15: Fernie, British Columbia rail track 
showing ice build-up. (Source: Transportation 
Safety Board of Canada) 

The TSB attributed the failure to rail rollover, resulting 
in excessive wide gauge (Transportation Safety 
Board of Canada, 2012). The rail gauge canted 
outward as a result of ice build-up between the 
base of the rail and the tie plates (Figure 15). The 
area had experienced numerous freeze-thaw 
cycles over the previous four weeks, which drew 
snowmelt water to the base of the rail through the 
pumping action of passing trains.  The TSB report 
also notes that between February 11 and 20, the 
ambient temperature was above 0°C during the 
day and below freezing at night.  There were 
23 millimetres of rain, between February 11 and 
14, followed by snow accumulation of about 58 
centimetres between February 15 and 17.  After 
February 17, through the end of the month, the 
temperature was below freezing and as low as 
-32°C. While this incident was attributed to freeze-
thaw, the root cause was high levels of snow, 
contributing to snow-melt accumulation at the 
base of the tracks.  This, combined with cycling 
between temperatures above and below the 
freezing point, contributed to the failure.

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

88
88

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
