 

1
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 1: AN INNOVATIVE TOOL TO ASSESS CLIMATE 
RISKS AT THE CITY OF TORONTO 

Adaptation is critical for large cities’ transportation networks, given the social and economic importance of 
safe and fluid mobility. The City of Toronto anticipates that climate-related risks to its transportation system 
will significantly increase in coming decades (City of Toronto, 2008). Decisions made today regarding 
capital investments, program delivery, and relationships with key partners will be important to ensure that 
the City improves its resilience to climate change. 

This reasoning underpinned the City of Toronto’s decision to develop a Climate Change Adaptation 
Strategy. Toronto’s City Council provided the necessary political capital, resulting in a report and program 
entitled “Ahead of the Storm: Preparing Toronto for Climate Change” (City of Toronto, 2008). This was 
a screening-level, cross-cutting exercise in assessing organizational vulnerability to climate change, 
including a review of international best-practices and tools. Transportation was a key focus area of a multi-
stakeholder working group, featuring participants both internal and external to the City of Toronto. The 
resulting report recommended the development of a practical tool for assessing vulnerabilities and risks to 
the city’s transportation infrastructure and operations, in the context of both extreme weather events and 
slow-onset climate change. The City selected a consultant consortium to create a Climate Change Risk 
Assessment Tool and Process (CCRAT). This software application enables service and infrastructure providers 
to identify and prioritize key environmental and climate change-related risks, as well as to assess the 
benefits of various mitigation and adaptation actions.

The City of Toronto’s Transportation Services Division (TSD) demonstrated leadership and helped develop 
and apply the CCRAT pilot. The outputs included an overview document, an assessment process, a 
software tool, and a user manual. This was a ground breaking exercise for the City. Prior to this undertaking, 
the City did not know if it was feasible to deploy a risk assessment tool with available resources and 
knowledge. 

In 2011, TSD applied CCRAT to evaluate the vulnerability and resilience of 90 high-priority assets and critical 
services to seven extreme weather events. Through a series of 15 half-day workshops, 14 risk assessors,  
looked at 1650 impact scenarios for the time periods 2010-2020 and 2040-2050. The team developed 
“risk scenarios” (combinations of extreme weather events and impacts) based on identified causes and 
vulnerabilities. Impacts could be multiple or cascading (i.e., up to “four-order impacts”), for example, 
economic impacts resulting from transportation delays caused by road or lane closures during extreme 
weather events. TSD’s risk assessors also identified more than 60 existing initiatives that enhance adaptive 
capacity, as well as 100 short- and long-term adaptation actions. Examples of ongoing initiatives include:

•  Adding heating and cooling fans in traffic signal controllers; 

•  Developing guidelines for the construction of “green” streets; 

•  Coordinating efforts to enhance the urban canopy to reduce heat-island effects; and,

•  Using combination ploughing and salting vehicles to better react to freezing rain conditions (City of 

Toronto Environment Office, 2011).

The development and application of the CCRAT was an opportunity for the municipality to demonstrate its 
due diligence to citizens, and build organizational awareness. Another key output was the city’s Climate 
Change Risk Management Policy, which established an institutional foundation for adaptation. 

Practitioners involved with the CCRAT consider it a success. The use of both top-down (city-driven) and 
bottom-up (grassroots) approaches where appropriate was considered particularly beneficial, as was 
the establishment of a well-defined work program in which roles and responsibilities of all stakeholders 
were clearly delineated. Each functional group within TSD developed clearly-defined expectations for the 
services they deliver and the infrastructure they maintain. The appointment of specially-trained risk assessors 
for each group was viewed as integral to organizational cohesion. Selecting a chief risk assessor as a 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

…

296
296

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
