6.1 HISTORICAL CLIMATE IMPACTS

6.0 AIR TRANSPORT

Climate affects air transportation systems in many ways, including: 1) accidents where weather 
conditions have contributed to the causes; 2) service interruptions that have been caused by 
weather; and, 3) impacts on physical infrastructure systems.

WEATHER-RELATED ACCIDENTS

The air industry has a long history of managing and coping with weather conditions and has 
established standard procedures for accessing weather forecast information and incorporating that 
information into flight planning (Klock and Mullock, 2001). Impacts of severe weather are normally 
managed through avoidance practices, resulting in flight delays and through advancements in 
technology that incorporate advanced aircraft instrumentation systems. The result is a very low 
frequency of weather-related accidents.

In British Columbia, only seven aircraft incidents with weather related contributing factors over the last 
thirteen years have been of sufficient magnitude to warrant TSB investigation (Table 10).

Table 10: Summary of Aircraft Incidents Related to Weather Conditions.

Date

Incident

Contributing weather factors

Jun 6, 2002 Collision with Terrain, Needle Peak, BC 

Adverse weather in mountainous terrain

(Transportation Safety Board of Canada, 2003) 

Jan 19, 2005 Control Difficulty Due to Airframe Icing, 

Severe in-flight icing conditions 

Kelowna, BC (Transportation Safety Board of 
Canada, 2005)
Runway Overrun—Collision with Terrain, Powell 
River, BC (Transportation Safety Board of 
Canada,  2007)
Loss of Visual Reference / Collision with Terrain, 
Golden, BC (Transportation Safety Board of 
Canada, 2008)
Runway Excursion, Blue River, BC (Transportation 
Safety Board of Canada, 2013c)
Loss of Visual Reference and Collision with 
Terrain, Terrace, BC (Transportation Safety Board 
of Canada, 2013b)
Collision with Terrain, Kelowna, BC 
(Transportation Safety Board of Canada, 2013a)

Mar 8, 2006

Feb 7, 2008

Mar 17, 
2012
Jun 1, 2012

Aug 13, 
2012

Downwind conditions on approach; 
hydroplaning

Poor visibility 

Deteriorating weather

Poor visibility 

High-density altitude conditions and 
reduced visibility. 

The TSB reports demonstrate that, historically, weather is rarely the sole cause of aircraft incidents.  
Rather, it is weather conditions and pilot error combined which led to an incident.  Furthermore, 
the relative scarcity of weather-related aircraft incidents indicates that the air sector has effective, 
ongoing management strategies and technological development to accommodate severe weather 
conditions, and will not fly when conditions are unsafe. 

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

93
93

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
