 

2
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 2: CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION AT THE CITY 
OF MONCTON
Many Maritime cities have already begun experiencing climate-related impacts. In Moncton, New Brunswick, 
the frequency of flooding from extreme storm events and changing tidal patterns has increased over the past 
decade (City of Moncton, 2013). Moncton is located at the nexus of the Petitcodiac River and the Bay of Fundy, 
a region that experiences one of the largest tidal ranges in the world. Coastal and inland flooding, as well as 
erosion, pose significant risks to transportation infrastructure. The region is also expected to experience gradual 
sea-level rise and significant precipitation and temperature increases by mid-century (AMEC Inc., 2011). 

From 2010 to 2012, communities in the Greater Moncton Area participated in the Atlantic portion of the 
Regional Adaptation Collaborative (RAC) program. This cost-sharing initiative with provincial and federal 
governments was designed to identify climate-change threats, vulnerabilities, and adaptation tools useful 
in addressing erosion, coastal and inland flooding, infrastructure design, and groundwater management. 
Transportation was an area of focus within this initiative, largely in recognition of historical problems in the 
region with transportation and sanitary-sewer infrastructure located below flood thresholds. 

Specific recommendations for the City of Moncton emerging from the RAC exercise, were to: 

•  Develop new arterial roads to avoid low-lying areas and the floodplain of the Petitcodiac and its tributaries; 

• 

• 

Elevate new roadway and bridge infrastructure to ensure access to essential services during extreme 
weather events;

Flood-proofing major roads at vulnerable elevations to minimize flood-related damage and ensure 
rapid system recovery; and,

•  Mandate higher flood elevations in future transportation planning decisions (AMEC Inc., 2011). A 

minimum elevation of 10.5 metres was proposed to reflect the 100-year flood event line the region is 
likely to experience by 2100, informed by floodplain mapping.

In response, the City of Moncton produced a corporate Climate Change Adaptation and Flood Management 
Strategy in 2013, and has since introduced a series of policy changes. For example, the City:

•  Changed its zoning bylaw to set minimum floor elevations for habitable space at 10.5 m;

•  Will elevate new roadways and bridges, where feasible to do so, above the 10.5-m threshold;

•  Developed extensive evacuation plans for existing vulnerable roadways in the event of a major storm 

surge event; and

•  Offers a $500 rebate on the installation of an approved backwater valve, as part of an incentive 

program for local property owners.

Building on these initiatives, Moncton has developed a Regional Sustainable Transportation Master Plan that 
will help the City assess the vulnerability of all transportation modes in the network using detailed mobility 
and flood scenarios. The results will help the City prioritize network improvements and street upgrades. The 
models and flood scenarios allow for provincial officials to identify their interests (provincial infrastructure in the 
community) likely to be affected under future conditions. Recommendations will be made to council regarding 
infrastructure requiring upgrading or abandonment, with budgetary requirements made clear.

The effectiveness and timeliness of Moncton’s adaptation planning, policies, and practices can be 
attributed to the support for adaptation from all levels of government. At the municipal level, the Climate 
Change Action Committee, composed of staff from most City departments, reports to council annually.  
Practitioners agree that it has done an excellent job of creating accountability on climate adaptation both 
within and between departments. Developing an integrated approach both within the municipality and 
with provincial and federal partners has proven invaluable. 

Written with input from Elaine Aucoin (Environmental Management and Planning, City of Moncton) and 
Stephane Thibodeau (Engineering and Environmental Services, City of Moncton).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

298
298

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
