KEY FINDINGS

•  Enhancing redundancy (particularly across modes) in urban transportation networks increases 
resilience to climate change. A redundant system gives travelers choices so that if one option 
performs poorly, other effective options are available. Redundancy becomes even more important 
in emergency situations (including those arising from extreme weather conditions) as it allows 
travelers to complete trips, and economies to function, even when major service disruptions occur.

•  Extreme weather events influence the perspectives and actions of urban decision-makers. Events 

with severe socioeconomic impacts demonstrate to municipal decision-makers that human activity, 
short-sighted planning decisions, or failure to act, can exacerbate weather-related damages.  
Expropriating floodplain lands and re-routing roadways away from vulnerable areas are examples of 
policy changes made in response to extreme weather events in some Canadian cities.

•  “Low-regret” or “no-regret” adaptation strategies offer municipalities opportunities to enhance the 
resilience of transportation infrastructure at key points in infrastructure lifecycles, at little additional 
cost.  One example is enhancing stormwater management capacity to reflect probable future 
precipitation conditions, when existing infrastructure reaches a renewal period. These strategies 
also build public support for adaptation efforts if benefits are tangible, communicated clearly, 
and realized quickly.

• 

• 

The cost of resilient infrastructure is considered a barrier to implementing adaptive actions. In 
terms of both capital and operational funding, innovative financing tools and intergovernmental 
partnerships could help promote adaptation when addressing Canada’s growing municipal 
infrastructure deficit.

There is a need for structured collaboration among government departments, transportation 
agencies, emergency services, municipal councils, engineers, climate change specialists, and 
civil society. Collaboration helps to ensure adaptation is a community-wide endeavour and 
highlights key interdependencies for the urban transportation sector (for example, with electricity 
and telecommunications providers).

•  Canadian cities are undertaking a number of resilience-enhancing initiatives. Examples from 

Whitehorse, Prince George, Toronto, and Moncton demonstrate the diversity of adaptive 
strategies required to deal with the range of geographic and climatic challenges across the 
country. These case studies also suggest that, increasingly, urban practitioners are moving beyond 
risk assessment and beginning to implement adaptive practices and build resilient infrastructure. 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

266
266

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
