1.0 INTRODUCTION 

Atlantic Canada includes the provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, 
and Newfoundland and Labrador. While each province has unique geographic and cultural 
characteristics, their shared proximity to the Atlantic Ocean and combined coastlines (exceeding 
40,000 km) (Environment Canada, 2012) result in many common climate vulnerabilities for 
transportation systems. These include risks associated with both extreme weather events (e.g., 
flooding, seasonal storms) and gradual, long-term changes (e.g., sea-level rise, changing patterns of 
temperature and precipitation). Governments and the private sector have recognized the need for 
adaptive action to reduce losses, avoid future costs, and benefit from potential opportunities.

This chapter examines the risks and opportunities for Atlantic Canada’s transportation sector, as well 
as practices to increase its resilience to a changing climate. It addresses all four major transportation 
modes (roads, rail, marine, and air).  

Literature examining the impacts of climate on transportation systems in Atlantic Canada is quite 
limited. Therefore, this chapter draws heavily upon other sources of information, including interviews 
with transportation professionals. This research complements other assessments of climate impacts 
and adaptation for Atlantic Canada as a whole (Vasseur and Catto, 2008) and the Atlantic coast 
more specifically (Savard et al., 2016).

1.1 

ENVIRONMENTAL CHARACTERISTICS

Atlantic Canada has a diversity of landscapes, including five distinct terrestrial ecozones (Environment 
Canada and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, 1999). Prominent landforms include rugged 
mountains (e.g., the Torngat Mountains in Labrador), fertile valleys (e.g., the Saint John River Valley in 
New Brunswick and the Annapolis Valley in Nova Scotia), and extensive coastlines. The interior regions 
of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and Newfoundland and Labrador are dominated by rolling to rugged 
uplands, and are much more sparsely populated than the coasts. 

Climate regions range from cool humid-continental to Arctic tundra, with the influence of the warm 
Gulf Stream in the south giving way to the cold Labrador Current in the north. Seasonal conditions 
reflect competing tropical and polar, and continental and maritime, influences. The Atlantic coasts 
experience the full range of tropical and extra-tropical storm systems frequently associated with high 
winds, precipitation, and storm surge. 

1.2  DEMOGRAPHIC CHARACTERISTICS

Atlantic Canada is home to approximately 2.4 million people.  The region experienced modest 
population growth from 2006 to 2011 (a provincial average of 2.2 percent), although at lower rates 
than the national average (5.9 percent) (Statistics Canada, 2011). Population shifts within the region 
demonstrate significant migration from rural areas to urban centres, with much greater population 
growth in major cities (see Table 1). 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

221
221

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
