2.0 REGIONAL CLIMATE PROFILE

2.1 OBSERVED CLIMATE TRENDS

Atlantic Canada’s historic climate record is characterized by high year-to-year variability, as well as 
variability in long-term trends (over several decades) in several key climate parameters. For the period 
1948-2014, mean annual temperature in the Atlantic Canada Climate Region4 increased 0.7°C, similar 
to the global average for the same period and representing the least amount of warming of any 
Canadian region (Environment Canada, 2015a). Increases have also been observed in sea-surface 
temperatures and ocean acidity (Loder et al., 2013). No clear trend is evident for mean annual 
precipitation in the region, although both summer and fall have experienced precipitation increases 
(Mekis and Vincent, 2011).

Of greater interest to Atlantic Canada’s transportation system are changing patterns of extreme 
weather, such as heavy precipitation and seasonal storms. These events increase flood risks (both 
inland and coastal), and exacerbate issues in areas prone to erosion. Due to the rarity of extreme 
weather events, it is difficult to identify trends in the historic record, particularly at the regional scale. 
For example, from 1950-2010 the occurrence of heavy precipitation shows a statistically significant 
increase at some locations in Atlantic Canada, but a decrease at others (Bush et al., 2014). While 
changes in average wind speeds and direction are absent from the historic record, analysis of the 
density of intense storm centres for the period 1961-2000 indicates that Atlantic Canada includes 
some of the stormiest areas in North America (Savard et al., 2016). While the frequency of North 
Atlantic hurricanes shows no long-term significant change (United States Environmental Protection 
Agency, 2015), the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth Assessment Report (2013) and 
the United States Global Change Research Program (2014) note that hurricane intensity has increased 
in the Atlantic region since the 1980s. 

Changes in sea ice cover and sea levels have implications for marine and coastal transportation 
infrastructure. Sea ice coverage has decreased significantly in recent decades, although inter-annual 
variability remains high (Figure 1). Reduced sea-ice cover makes coasts more vulnerable to erosion 
by waves during winter storms. Trends in relative sea level for most of Atlantic Canada, excluding 
Labrador, show slow and steady sea-level rise. This increase is primarily due to glacial isostatic 
adjustment in the Atlantic provinces, referring to the slow vertical land motion or “rebounding” of 
land depressed by hundreds of metres under ice sheets during the most recent ice age (James et al., 
2014). Sea-level rise results in impacts from waves and storm surge at higher coastal sites not previously 
at risk (Atkinson et al., 2016).

4 

 Including New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, and the island of Newfoundland, but excluding Labrador.

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

223
223

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
