In the past, the general solution to erosion under rail lines was to replace fallen or sunken rock. 
However, due to the increasing frequency of repairs and associated costs, this method may no longer 
be sufficient or effective (Stephen Newson, Province of Nova Scotia, personal communication, 2015). 
Physical barriers, such as dykes have also been used to protect rail infrastructure from the effects of 
storm-surge flooding, and erosion, but these protections may not be sufficient in future. Adaptation 
options are currently being examined for dyke systems in the Chignecto Isthmus, for example (Case 
Study 5). 

One practice that has been used to increase the resilience of rail infrastructure vulnerable to 
temperature extremes is to replace continuously welded rail (CWR) with shorter segments, which have 
joints allowing track to expand and contract (Lim et al., 2003). (CWR, which has longer rail segments, 
generally reduces track maintenance costs and increases the average service life of rail components 
under moderate temperature conditions). For example, following the June 2014 derailment in Pictou, 
300 feet of CWR from the point of derailment was replaced with 39-foot track panels that are easier to 
maintain and replace in the event of stress caused by heat or temperature fluctuations. Additionally, 
the company conducted a stress test on the rail line, and employees reviewed rail maintenance 
requirements. To prevent similar events in the future, the railway has developed a new technical 
training program, and train speeds have been restricted to 40 km/h during summer months and may 
be further restricted to as low as 16 km/h when warranted by extreme heat conditions (Province of 
Nova Scotia, 2014). 

6.0 MARINE TRANSPORTATION

6.1 PAST IMPACTS AND FUTURE RISKS 

Marine transportation in Atlantic Canada has long been affected by adverse climate conditions 
and storms, disrupting operations and damaging vessels, ports, and navigation infrastructure. 
These impacts are particularly challenging for Newfoundland and Labrador, which relies heavily 
on marine transportation for resupply and connectivity (CBC News, 2015b, 2015c). Over the past 
century, improved forecasting and monitoring technologies have considerably reduced risks to 
marine operators from extreme weather. However, ports and vessels remain vulnerable to a number 
of future risks associated with a changing climate. Lost productivity from weather-related disruptions 
in Atlantic Canada’s marine transportation sector is estimated to total millions of dollars annually 
(Catto et al., 2006).

PRECIPITATION, EXTREME WEATHER, STORM SURGE, AND SEA-LEVEL RISE

Hurricanes have caused major damage to marine infrastructure and vessels in the past. During 
Hurricane Juan,  storm surges of 1.5-2 m and wind gusts up to 230 km/h, damaged coastal wharves and 
other port infrastructure in Halifax Harbour, blew containers off ships, snapped weather buoys, and sank 
and damaged vessels (Bowyer, 2003a Bowyer, 2003b). “White Juan”, a hurricane-force nor’easter in 
February 2004 (five months after the hurricane), resulted in 10-15 m waves and a storm surge that further 
damaged ports in Nova Scotia (Environment Canada, 2013a). In 1995, during Hurricane Luis, a 30 m 
wave struck an ocean liner off the coast of Newfoundland (Environment Canada, 2013b). 

Rising sea levels and increased storm surge are also expected to pose greater risks over the course 
of the 21st century (Bush et al., 2014). Sea-level rise in the range of 70-100 cm is projected for many 
key coastal locations in Atlantic Canada by 2100 (Savard et al., 2016); and in some cases, higher 
tides and storm surges could inundate and damage wharves, terminals, and loading equipment in 
the absence of adaptive action (Andrey and Mills, 2003). Figures 12a and 12b illustrate the extent of 
possible inundation for Halifax Harbour in 2100, based on two sea-level rise scenarios (high- and low-
probability). In some locations sea-level rise could permit the entry of ships with greater drafts and 
heavier cargo loads (Andrey and Mills, 2003). 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

241
241

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
