…

One of the major conclusions of this work is that no technique can be efficiently implemented without 
a thorough assessment of the surrounding terrain at the appropriate scale. This includes information on 
the site’s ground composition (including ice distribution and volume); thermo-physical properties; history; 
specific processes driving or sustaining permafrost; and the drainage network’s sensitivity to change.

Written by Katerine Grandmont (Cold Regions Geomorphology and Geotechnical Laboratory, Université 
de Montréal).

5.0 RAIL TRANSPORTATION

Rail plays a smaller role in the territories than in other Canadian regions, but does provide important 
services. Similar to road infrastructure, rail track is particularly vulnerable to the effects of permafrost 
degradation. Thawing may cause heaving, sinkholes, potholes and settlement issues for railways in 
northern Canada (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). Associated adaptations 
can either be active, removing heat from the embankment, or passive, reducing heat absorption 
(Ferrell and Lautala, 2010). Some engineering solutions for roads can also be applied to rail 
infrastructure, including embankment widening and the installation of thermosyphons, snow sheds, 
and insulation. The following methods may also be used: 

•  Ventiduct embankments refer to pipes placed alongside the traditional soil embankment, 

allowing air to pass through the embankment and drawing heat from the soil. In order to reduce 
heat absorption of the soil during the summer months, these pipes can be sealed (Ferrell and 
Lautala, 2010).

•  Stone embankments are used to create pore space within embankments and allow air to 

penetrate the structure and natural convection to remove heat from the subgrade (Ferrell and 
Lautala, 2010).

•  Snow/sun sheds reduce snow accumulation and solar radiation on the embankment. They can 

also reduce water infiltration and permit airflow, removing heat from embankment surfaces (Ferrell 
and Lautala, 2010).

Extreme weather can damage embankments and create washouts and soil/rock slides, which may 
result in rail line closures (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). The incorporation 
of higher-capacity culverts for embankments and bridges can mitigate the effects of seasonal 
drainage and extreme events (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). Some rail 
companies also have winter operating plans that include snow removal, sanding and salting, track 
and wheel inspections, temporary slow orders, and personnel training initiatives (Lemmen and Warren, 
2004). Although rail transport is limited in Canada’s North, greater rail infrastructure development may 
be feasible in the future (Yukon Government, 2013). For a more detailed assessment of impacts and 
adaptations related to Canada’s rail sector, refer to other regional chapters.

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

50
50

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
