Follow Up
CP:
••

Date

May 1998

Location
Creston

Nov 2009

Komo

••

••

••

CN:
••

••

CP:
••

Mar 2011

Fernie

Provided training on rock and soil slope stability to 
track maintenance supervisors; 
Initiated a new culvert inspection policy requiring that 
culvert inspections be carried out annually; 

•• Contracted the services of World Weather Watch 

for a warning system to provide detailed, accurate 
weather forecasts, and notification of severe weather, 
referenced to track mileage and station; and
Instructed railway safety inspectors to focus on 
drainage issues and review railway maintenance 
practices in territories susceptible to slope instability.

CN and CP:
•• Monitor Fraser Canyon corridor and conduct regular 

inspections by geotechnical engineers/geologists; 
and
Engage in research to improve detection of rock falls 
and slides.

Citation

TSB Report No. R98V0100 
Creston – May 31, 1998

TSB Report No. R09V0235 

Komo – Nov 17, 2009

Installed an Emergency Slope Washout System in the 
Komo area.
Implemented a protocol for local supervisors to 
contact CN and CP during rain events, periods of 
extraordinary runoff, and other potentially damaging 
weather systems and to notify railway contacts of any 
specific problems.

Installed rolled tie plates and new rail at the 
derailment site; and

TSB Report No. R11V0057 

Fernie – Mar 8, 2011

•• Moved the 30 mph speed sign to ensure that trains 

complete braking prior to reaching this curve, 
reducing the lateral loading on the curve.

TSB:
••

Established a minimum frequency requirement for the 
electronic geometry inspection of all tracks.

Many of these sample actions are the type of recommendations that arise from focused vulnerability 
assessments. Actions cover a range of research, monitoring, procedural, maintenance, reporting 
and engineering activities. From this, we can conclude that rail companies in British Columbia are 
conducting activities to reduce climate risks (see Box). The TSB and rail companies extrapolate from 
forensic analyses of climate related failure events to establish generalized actions and approaches to 
mitigate the risk of such events throughout the rail system in general. 

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

91
91

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
