Finally, the 14 Inuit communities and the Cree community of Whapmagoostui in Nunavik are only 
accessible from the southern part of the province by air or sea, as are the Magdalen Islands and 
certain communities located in the far eastern portion of the lower North Shore. 

In Quebec, the planning, design, and management of transportation infrastructure; as well as 
construction, repair and maintenance work, are the responsibility of several institutional and private 
partners. Various Quebec government departments, public transportation agencies, public transit 
agencies, federal government departments and agencies, carrier associations, inter-municipal 
councils and municipal transportation agencies, local municipalities, regional county municipalities, 
metropolitan communities and First Nations communities are all involved to varying degrees. 

Quebec’s Ministère des Transports, de la Mobilité durable et de l’Électrification des transports 
(MTMDET)  plays a central role in the management and sharing of responsibilities for transportation 
infrastructure. Highways; national, regional and collector roads; and some access roads to remote 
resources and communities fall under Quebec’s jurisdiction (Ministère des Transports du Québec, 
2015b). The MTMDET shares the management of these networks with carriers and private operators, 
as well as some local and regional authorities.6 The main railway networks are primarily under federal 
jurisdiction, but are also under provincial jurisdiction (short lines), as well as under the responsibility 
of a dozen private organizations, or large railway companies such as Canadian National (CN) or 
Canadian Pacific (CP). Quebec ports and airports are owned and managed by a wide range of 
public and private stakeholders.

Furthermore, the MTMDET produces manuals and guides to direct the design, management and 
maintenance of transportation structures and systems. These manuals are used as the main reference 
guide by Quebec municipalities for roads under their responsibility. 

Figure 1 presents Quebec transportation infrastructure and shows the diversity of the main 
infrastructure in Quebec and the many organizations that share in its management. 

6 

 The Société de développement de la Baie-James (SDBJ) for the James Bay road network owned by Hydro-Qué-
bec, and the Kativik Regional Government for the Nunavik airports.

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

186
186

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
