In 2013, there were three million registered on-road vehicles in British Columbia, representing 13 
percent of the Canadian total on-road vehicle registrations that year. This includes 2.7 million light-
duty vehicles (automobiles, SUVs and lighter trucks), or approximately one vehicle for every 1.7 
people in the province (Statistics Canada, 2015b). The province’s population is, therefore, highly 
dependent upon the road system. Climate-induced interruptions in road service can have a 
significant impact on the lives and livelihood of the people of British Columbia.

3.2 RAIL

British Columbia has approximately 6,500 kilometers of railway (Figure 6), primarily served by Canadian 
National (CN) Rail (~4,400 km) and Canadian Pacific (CP) Rail (~1,720 km). Regional railways comprise 
another 402 km of track. This extensive infrastructure is designed to facilitate the efficient flow of 
goods through the Asia Pacific Gateway. The railways provide 24-hour, year-round service to port and 
terminal networks in Vancouver and Prince Rupert.  

CN’s main rail routes in British Columbia run from Vancouver to Edmonton, Alberta from Fort Nelson to 
Vancouver, and from Prince Rupert to Edmonton. CN Rail employs three Intermodal terminals in the 
province, located in Vancouver, Prince George, and Prince Rupert (CN, 2015). CN also operates an 
intermodal service from Prince Rupert, British Columbia to Whittier, Alaska. Called the AquaTrain, rail 
cars are loaded onto a barge directly and transported.  Alaska is completely dependent on CN Rail 
AquaTrain service for its freight transport, as this service is connected to all Alaskan Freight train routes 
(Alaskarails, 2015). CP’s main rail route runs from Vancouver to an Intermodal Terminal in Calgary, 
Alberta, and the company has one intermodal terminal in Vancouver (CP, 2015).  

In 2013, the British Columbia rail system moved 63 million tonnes of commodities, representing over 
20 percent of the Canadian total (Statistics Canada, 2015c). Of these, the principal commodities, by 
tonnage, were coal, lumber and wood products, sulphur, cement, automobiles, and wheat.  Many 
of the commodities reflect the resource-based nature of the British Columbia economy, and indicate 
the impact of trade with the Pacific Rim.

In addition to freight services, VIA Rail offers passenger services along two corridors, from Toronto, 
Ontario to Vancouver (The Canadian) (Via Rail, 2015a) and from Jasper, Alberta to Prince Rupert, 
British Columbia (Western Canada) (Via Rail, 2015b). 

3.3 AIR

There are 39 airports in British Columbia which are federally certified for passenger service, in addition 
to 251 registered land-based airports, aerodromes, heliports and water aerodromes (Transport 
Canada, 2015; Government of British Columbia, 2016a). Certified airports include Vancouver, the 
second busiest airport in Canada, Victoria the tenth busiest and Kelowna the eleventh busiest (Travel 
BC, 2016). (See Figure 6 for principle airports). Vancouver International Airport (YVR) handles over 19 
million passengers and more than 256, 900 tonnes of cargo in 2014 (Vancouver Port Authority, 2014). 
Airport expansion plans are expected to increase capacity.

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

78
78

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
