6.0 AIR TRANSPORTATION 

6.1 PAST IMPACTS

Severe weather, including extreme temperature and storm events, has commonly caused flight 
delays and cancellations at airports in Ontario. Events affecting one airport can also have a ripple 
effect, disrupting air travel in other parts of Canada and North America.  

For example, from January 5 to 9, 2014, an unusual combination of rain, snow, snow squalls, and wind 
chills/extreme cold in Eastern Ontario and other parts of Canada severely disrupted passenger travel 
at many airports, including Toronto Pearson International. Extreme cold (reaching -39°C with wind 
chill) and ice build-up slowed ground crews and caused some equipment (e.g., fueling) to fail or 
operate intermittently. The sudden drop in temperature also caused snow and slush, from earlier rain, 
on taxiways, apron, and gate areas to freeze. Temperatures were too cold for chemical treatments 
to effectively melt the ice and snow. These operational impacts in tandem with other factors (such 
as the airport receiving high numbers of diverted flights from other airports), created delays and 
disruptions in passenger travel throughout Canada. In response to this event, the Greater Toronto 
Airports Authority (GTAA) reviewed and developed recommendations on the airport’s operations, 
customer service, and communications (GTAA, 2014a).

6.2 FUTURE RISKS

Literature suggests air transportation is affected by a changing climate and extreme weather in 
several ways. The following climate risks are relevant to airports and aviation in Ontario.

•  More variable temperatures increase the risk of ice build-up on wings (GTAA, 2014b).  

•  Warmer conditions result in decreased air density, which provides less lift for aircraft. This can 

increase requirements for fuel and runway length (Andrey and Mills, 2003). 

• 

Increased freeze-thaw cycles can cause runway buckling (Transportation Research Board, 2008). 

•  Extreme cold and heat can affect airplane engines and airport operations, resulting in service 

delays and reduced on-time performance (OFCM, 2002; Woudsma et al, 2007). 

• 

Thawing permafrost poses a risk to the stability of runways in northern communities dependent 
upon aviation (Transportation Association of Canada, 2010).

•  Flood-prone areas face an increased risk of runway flooding associated with extreme precipitation 

events and seasonal changes in water levels (Andrey and Mills, 2003; ICAO Secretariat, 2010). 

•  Greater wind intensity (both daily and during extreme events) increase incidences of foreign 

objects on runways, taxiways, and maintenance facilities, and impede maintenance of airplanes 
(especially high on the body, including snow removal and de-icing procedures) (OFCM, 2002). 

•  Warming temperatures will also lead to more “mixed” precipitation events (for instance, freezing 

rain combined with snow and rain) during winter operations (GTAA, 2014b). 

Airports are also affected by weather events in other areas, since flights may need to be grounded or 
rerouted, further straining infrastructure and operations.

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

166
166

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
