1.1 GEOGRAPHY AND THE PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT

The Prairie provinces collectively account for approximately 20 percent of Canada’s total surface 
area, including both land and water (Statistics Canada, 2005). The Prairies extend west from Hudson 
Bay to the crest of the Rocky Mountains, spanning several major watersheds and geographic areas 
(Sauchyn and Kulshreshtha, 2008).  This results in significant climatic diversity (Figure 1). 

The flat, dry plains of the south-central Prairie ecozone occupy 25 percent of the region’s land area, 
characterized by persistent and often severe moisture deficits. This ecozone is the region’s agricultural 
and industrial heartland, and one of Canada’s most extensively-modified — only remnants of the 
grasslands and less than half of the wetlands that existed prior to European settlement remain 
(Sauchyn and Kulshreshtha, 2008). This region gives way to the Boreal Plains in central Manitoba, 
central Saskatchewan, and most of central and northern Alberta, an area characterized by mixed 
and coniferous forests (Sauchyn and Kulshreshtha, 2008). The Boreal Shield lies north and east of the 
interior plains in northern Saskatchewan and northeastern Manitoba.

The four remaining ecozones are on the margins of the Prairies, accounting for small proportions of 
the region’s area and population. The Taiga Plains extend from the Mackenzie River valley of the 
Northwest Territories up the tributary valleys of northwestern Alberta, containing forests with limited 
productivity due to a cooler climate and shorter growing season (Sauchyn and Kulshreshtha, 2008). 
The Taiga Shield extends across Canada’s subarctic, including the northern reaches of Manitoba and 
Saskatchewan and northeastern Alberta. At opposite corners of the Prairies are the Hudson Plains 
in the Prairies’ northeast (containing the Hudson Bay Lowlands), which are dominated by extensive 
wetlands (Beaudoin et al., 1997), and the Montane Cordillera in southwestern Alberta. The Cordillera 
contains significant ecological diversity and landscapes of high relief, ranging from low-elevation 
fescue grassland through montane forest to subalpine forest and alpine tundra (Sauchyn and 
Kulshreshtha, 2008). Mountain snowpacks and glaciers of the Cordillera provide most of the southern 
Prairies’ river flow and water supply (Sauchyn and Kulshreshtha, 2008). 

Figure 1: Ecozones of the Prairie provinces. (Source: Natural Resources Canada)

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

108
108

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
