Authority, personal communication, 2016). Ferry routes support tourism and regional connectivity. 
In Newfoundland and Labrador, a number of ferry routes travel from Labrador to the island of 
Newfoundland, including St. Barbe-Blanc Sablon and Goose Bay-Cartwright-Lewisporte. Ferries from 
North Sydney, Nova Scotia travel to Newfoundland, while Nova Scotia connects to Prince Edward 
Island via the Caribou-Wood Island Ferry. Other key routes include the Nova Scotia-New Brunswick 
route via Digby to Saint John, and the route operating between Prince Edward Island and Îles de la 
Madeleine, Quebec (Souris to Cap-aux-Meules) (Ferry CTMA, 2015). 

3.3 AIR TRANSPORTATION 

Atlantic Canada’s airports move over 7.8 million people annually, a figure more than three times 
the region’s population size (Atlantic Canada Airports Association, 2012). The airport system includes 
seven National Airports System (NAS)7 airports (below) in addition to many smaller community airports: 

•  Fredericton International Airport, Greater Moncton International Airport, and Saint John Airport 

(New Brunswick); 

•  Gander International Airport, and St. John’s International Airport (Newfoundland and Labrador);

•  Halifax Stanfield International Airport (Nova Scotia); and 

•  Charlottetown Airport (Prince Edward Island).

Less freight is moved by air than by other modes in the Atlantic region – usually only time-sensitive or 
specialty goods. However, freight volumes are still significant, with over 60,000 metric tonnes moved 
annually (Atlantic Canada Airports Association, 2012).

4.0 ROAD TRANSPORTATION: IMPACTS AND ADAPTATIONS

4.1 PAST IMPACTS AND FUTURE RISKS

A number of climate-related variables, including extreme weather events, storm surges, and freeze-
thaw cycles, have impacts on both road infrastructure and operations in Atlantic Canada.

EXTREME EVENTS 

The most severe regional-scale impacts are related to tropical or post-tropical storms, and associated 
with heavy precipitation, strong winds, and storm surges. Examples include Hurricane Juan 
(September 2003), which resulted in $100 million in direct damages to infrastructure in Halifax alone, 
including roads and highways (Bowyer, 2003a), and Hurricanes Earl and Igor, which struck within a 
week of each other in September, 2010 resulting in road closures throughout Atlantic Canada. In 
Newfoundland and Labrador, approximately 150 communities were isolated by road closures during 
Hurricane Igor, and parts of the Trans-Canada Highway were washed away (Canadian Climate 
Forum, 2014). The prospect of more frequent extreme weather events (i.e. shortened return periods) 
will increase the risk of roadway flooding which strands users, increases driving times, disrupts freight 
flows, and can disrupt emergency services (Chu, 2012; Vasseur and Catto, 2008).

Wind gusts from 80-160 km/h have been recorded regionally during tropical and post-tropical storm 
events (Environment Canada, 2013b). High winds have closed major Atlantic bridges such as Halifax’s 
MacDonald Bridge and the Confederation Bridge (Catto et al., 2006). In summer 2014, Hurricane 

7 

 The NAS designation is given to airports in provincial capitals and other airports with annual traffic exceeding 200,000 passenger 
movements (Transport Canada, 2010). 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

230
230

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
