9.0 KNOWLEDGE GAPS AND CONSTRAINTS TO ADAPTIVE DECISION-MAKING IN ONTARIO 

Despite progress on a number of initiatives in the province, barriers to adaptation in the transportation 
sector persist. Limited resources and expertise can be are obstacles to developing and implementing 
meaningful adaptation strategies, particularly in Central and Northern Ontario. 

The cumulative impacts of climate change on transportation infrastructure, referring to two or more 
simultaneous impacts, are understudied and difficult to predict. For instance, increasing numbers of freeze-
thaw cycles in Ontario may combine with non-traditional, mid-winter flood events exceeding stormwater 
thresholds, creating destructive lifting and shearing forces on highways, bridges, locks, and harbours, with 
potentially costly and damaging effects. While concrete examples of these impacts are lacking in Ontario, 
recent winter storm events in the United States and United Kingdom suggest that infrastructure damage 
resulting from flooding on frozen ground may be severe (Oh et al., 2010; Met Office, 2014). 

Treating adaptation as an issue separate from other aspects of transportation is an additional 
constraint.  Communities and practitioners in Canada have not yet integrated adaptation goals into 
much of their transportation planning and decision-making (Newman et al., 2013; Henstra, 2015). 
Some initiatives in Ontario, such as those highlighted in case studies, represent noteworthy exceptions. 

Constraints also exist within the climate science and adaptation community, the transportation sector 
(broadly considered), and the integration of efforts across these two fields. The variety and complexity 
of available climate model data makes it difficult for decision-makers to assess vulnerability and 
determine appropriate adaptation options. Engineers Canada (2012) also argues that a lack of 
localized climate projections makes it difficult for decision-makers to justify investing in more expensive 
adaptive infrastructure over cheaper infrastructure, which is typically designed for historic climate 
pressures (often with the use of outdated data). Remedies to this situation include maintaining and 
developing more robust historical records and climate modeling processes, and training engineers in 
dealing effectively with climate uncertainty. 

A further challenge is the traditional complexity of the freight system and different jurisdictional 
responsibilities. Considering the range of actors and agencies at play in international road freight 
activity, it is often difficult to determine how to undertake climate adaptation, and who is responsible. 

10.0 CONCLUSIONS

Ontario faces diverse and potentially costly risks associated with changing climate conditions 
and evolving transportation requirements. While Ontario’s adaptive capacity is generally high, 
vulnerabilities to extreme weather and gradual changes in climate present challenges to 
transportation decision-makers and infrastructure operators. 

The adaptation practices described in this chapter speak to the willingness of decision makers to 
confront the risks to efficiency and safety posed by a changing climate to both infrastructure and 
operations. The challenge at all levels is to provide coordinated, timely, and effective responses to 
these risks. 

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

175
175

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
