changes to the navigability of waterways. Of these, it was determined that the greatest risks are 
posed to infrastructure by changing climate conditions over both timescales. Authors note that this 
assessment’s methodology can be applied to smaller-scale risk assessments of ports and coastal 
transportation systems in Atlantic Canada.

Public and private institutions are developing tools to assist in the assessment of climate change risks. 
For example, the “CoastaL Impact Visualization Environment” (CLIVE) tool, created in partnership 
by the University of Prince Edward Island (UPEI) and Simon Fraser University, offers a “virtual tour” of 
likely coastal erosion and storm-surge impacts on Prince Edward Island. CLIVE is operated by a game 
controller and allows the user to “fly” over Prince Edward Island’s coastline, examining past and future 
sea levels (at 30, 60, and 90 year future intervals). This tool also quantifies sea-level rise risks, including 
land area lost. This tool is useful for assessing transportation infrastructure vulnerability to coastal 
changes in order to better plan for changes in maintenance, structure, or location over the short and 
long term (Office of the Vice-President, Research, 2015).

8.2 COST-BENEFIT ANALYSIS 

Some practitioners in the region are undertaking cost-benefit analyses of adaptation options in order 
to ensure the benefits of a given option outweighs the costs associated with climate change. The 
costs of direct (damages) and indirect (disruptions and closures) climate impacts on transportation 
systems can be significant. At the same time, adaptation efforts can be costly – infrastructure is 
expensive to build, and changing operational practices can cause short-term delays, confusion, and 
other inefficiencies (Füssel, 2007). Case Study 5 summarizes a cost-benefit analysis of climate impacts 
and adaptation options for the Chignecto Isthmus.

5
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 5: ADAPTING TO FLOODING AND STORM-SURGE  
RISKS IN THE CHIGNECTO ISTHMUS

The Chignecto Isthmus is one of Canada’s most important transportation corridors, and the sole land 
bridge joining mainland Canada (New Brunswick) with Nova Scotia. Marsh areas within the Isthmus had 
dykes installed in the 1700s for agriculture. Since that time, significant infrastructure has been built within this 
area, including the Trans-Canada Highway, the CN Railway, and electricity-transmission lines serving Nova 
Scotia. Trade through the Isthmus is conducted by both road and rail, carrying an estimated value of $50 
million per day and $20 billion annually. 

Recent studies demonstrate the vulnerability of the region to sea-level rise and storm-surge flooding 
(Webster et al., 2011, Lieske and Bornemann, 2012; and Webster et al., 2012). By 2100, 38 km of dykes, 19 km 
of rail, and 19 km of the Trans-Canada Highway could be severely affected by flooding in a 1-in-100 year 
storm event (Figure 16). However, there has been a lack of information on the economic costs associated 
with these impacts in the Chignecto region. 

A collaborative cost-benefit analysis (CBA) of adaptation options (including maintaining the status quo) 
was undertaken to assess the economic consequences of sea-level rise and storm surge on significant 
infrastructure (highways, rail, agricultural dykes, and electricity) and trade in the Isthmus. The project 
features collaboration among the Provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia and Natural Resources 
Canada. The CBA had three objectives:

•  Build on existing local assessments of climate change impacts and adaptation options, adding 

economic analysis to the discussion. 

•  Quantify economic costs associated with flood-related damages to the transportation corridor in order 

to demonstrate the benefits (monetary and otherwise) associated with potential adaptation options. 

• 

Support decision-makers in the selection of informed adaptation investments. 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

…

248
248

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
