and roughness to determine safety based on mode, length of trip, trip type (e.g., recreational vs. 
industry), and other factors (NAIN Research Centre Kaujisapvinga, 2015).

Vessels travelling along rivers often need to reduce cargo loads to allow for travel through shallow 
coastal areas. In the future, reduced water levels may further affect the cargo capacity of low-
draft barges (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). In this case, adjusting the loads of some barges may not be 
sufficient – route adjustment may be needed in order to traverse some areas. Along the Mackenzie 
River, barges have adjusted their routes and reduced speeds while travelling through difficult waters 
(Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

Governments have an important role to play in supporting marine navigation. The following services 
have been identified as critical to safe marine transportation: the production of navigational charts; 
the deployment and maintenance of navigational aids; the provision of weather and ice information 
and ice-breaking services; and the surveillance and monitoring of marine traffic (Office of the Auditor 
General, 2014). In addition, the International Maritime Organization (IMO) has developed a Polar 
Code, covering a full range of design, construction, equipment, operational, training, search and 
rescue and environmental protection matters applicable to ships operating in the waters surrounding 
the two poles (International Maritime Organization, 2016). 

7.3.2 ADAPTATIONS FOR MARINE FACILITIES

For marine infrastructure in the western Arctic vulnerable to storm surges and coastal erosion, practices 
to reduce risks may include mapping areas most likely to be affected and constructing defenses to 
limit damage. Coastlines can be protected via the construction of barriers composed of sandbags, 
sunken vessels, and rocks and gravel to reduce the impacts of erosive wave action (IMG-Golder 
Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). However, while sea defense structures help to protect 
the coast, changes in coastal sediment dynamics which may occur as a result of construction or a 
changing climate are important considerations. In some cases, it may be necessary to relocate shore-
based cargo resupply infrastructure (e.g., fuel manifolds and piping infrastructure) to prevent damage 
(Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). Studies of sea ice behavior can help determine appropriate dock locations 
and shipping lanes. Docks could then be outfitted with systems to minimize the development of sea ice. 
In the immediate future, piers and mooring structures may require repair and reconstruction as a result 
of sea-ice impacts (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). 

For facilities along rivers, several adaptation practices have been applied to date. Along the 
Mackenzie River, mooring points have been moved so that barges may offload in stable locations 
closer to shore where less erosion has taken place. Gravel ramps have also been re-established to 
replace eroded materials in some locations (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

In some cases, it may be necessary to dredge harbours should water levels decline. This has been 
done in several northern communities in the past, including Tuktoyaktuk and Hay River (on Great 
Slave Lake), to cope with shallow water conditions. However, dredging operations require substantial 
resources that can serve as barriers to many communities. For instance, the cost to dredge a deeper 
channel in Tuktoyaktuk to allow the passage of cargo vessels has been estimated in excess of $100 
million (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). There may also be a greater need for transferring cargo between 
vessels of different sizes to allow passage in shallow harbours, and during high wind events. However, 
this process slows down ships transporting goods to further locations (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

57
57

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
