8.0 INFORMATION GAPS

There are a number of gaps in available information related to the determination of climate 
impacts on transportation in Canada’s northern region. These include reliable and relevant climate 
information; available training, guidance and tools; and technical information for infrastructure. 

Regarding climate information, territorial governments and others have expressed interest in 
developing regional climate change scenarios in order to improve understanding of future conditions 
(Environment Yukon, 2009). In a survey of mining and transportation practitioners in the Yukon, 
participants also identified the need for downscaled climate data – some expressed concern that 
the data they were using was not appropriate for their area. Projections related to climatic elements 
such as rain-on-snow events, snow and permafrost interactions, and relationships between snowmelt 
and rain are in particular demand (Northern Climate ExChange, 2014b). There are two notable 
challenges to obtaining these climate change scenarios for the territories: limited baseline data is 
available at the local level, and capacity in the northern territories is restricted by limited financial 
and human resources (Government of Nunavut et al., 2011). The limited number of weather stations in 
the North and short duration of climate records also present challenges to developing local climate 
change scenarios. Practitioners have also indicated they lack practical and user-friendly guidance 
tools for using climate data, as well as training for practitioners and decision-makers (Northern Climate 
ExChange, 2014b).

Further development of building standards, codes, and community planning information that 
takes into account projected changes in climate have also been identified as desirable.  These 
would need to consider existing technical guidance on factoring in future climate changes when 
building on permafrost (Auld et al., 2010), and expand upon the Standards Council of Canada’s 
Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative that has developed standards for: 1) thermosyphon 
foundations (CSA Group, 2014a); 2) moderating the effects of permafrost degradation on building 
foundations (CSA Group, 2014b); 3) managing changing snow-load risks for buildings in Canada’s 
North (CSA Group, 2014c); and 4) drainage-system planning, design and maintenance in northern 
communities (CSA Group, 2015). Relevant variables include ground ice content as well as 
experienced and projected ground temperatures and permafrost thicknesses. Such information could 
be used to develop maps identifying areas suitable for infrastructure development (Champalle et al., 
2013), and be used at regional and local scales to determine areas with low, moderate, or high levels 
of vulnerability (Calmels et al., 2015).

Improved channels for information-sharing among northern practitioners and residents is another 
important gap. Tools such as the Arctic Adaptation Exchange portal, developed during Canada’s 
Arctic Council Chairmanship, help facilitate the sharing of adaptation best-practices among 
circumpolar communities (Arctic Adaptation Exchange, 2014). 

For marine transportation, updating geospatial databases to account for the challenges and 
opportunities presented by a changing climate is important. This involves updating maps and 
navigational charts to reflect changes in ice coverage and traffic, as well as providing the marine 
community with information and charting strategies to deal with future climate uncertainty. Publicly 
available data on coastal erosion would be particularly beneficial (Champelle et al., 2013). For 
example, the Coastal Information System (maintained by the Geological Survey of Canada) provides 
qualitative coastal changes based on multiple years of video and aerial photography that can be 
used by communities experiencing coastal change (Couture et al., 2015). In addition, improved 
hydrological monitoring would allow better understanding of the impacts of climate change on runoff 
volumes, evaporation rates, and water levels, and would benefit community resupply operations in 
the Northwest Territories. Lastly, improved water level monitoring, including a water level-monitoring 
network and ice/debris advisory service, would benefit barge operators throughout the region 
(Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

58
58

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
