Ontario (Transportation Association of Canada, 2010). However, warmer winters could reduce cold-
weather rail maintenance for Ontario’s railways (Andrey et al, 2003).

Wind also poses risks to rail transportation, such as more schedule disruptions and delays; hazardous 
material spills; railcar blow-over (albeit only during extremely rare events); and disruptions and 
damage to signalization equipment (OFCM, 2002). Given increasing daily average wind speeds 
throughout the province (see Section 3), these risks may increase in the 21st century.

More frequent and intense rainfall events may flood rail track, create service disruptions and delays, 
and reduce on-time performance (Woudsma et al, 2007; OFCM 2002; Koatse and Rietveld, 2012). 
Rail lines near watercourses are vulnerable to flooding associated with changing water levels and 
changing patterns of lake ice (Koatse and Rietveld, 2012). 

5.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

A number of practices to reduce rail vulnerabilities exist in the literature. In the case of extreme heat 
and rail buckling, approaches include imposing speed restrictions, reducing service frequency, and 
conducting more frequent track inspections (Savonis et al., 2008). Cargo cooling and refrigeration 
may reduce product loss and damage for freight carriers (Andrey and Mills, 2003). Researchers have 
also reported reductions in peak rail temperature by using low-solar absorption rail coatings in sunny 
conditions (Wang et al., 2015). GO Transit has changed its engineering practices to reduce the 
vulnerability of its rail to extreme heat (Case study 2).

To reduce infrastructure flooding near watercourses, approaches in the literature include: improving 
flow management processes, constructing dikes, along with other flood-prevention engineering 
solutions (Savonis et al, 2008), and elevating track segments (Koatse and Rietveld, 2012). During 
extreme precipitation events, rail providers may reduce service frequency and increase the timeliness 
of travel and service advisories (Savonis et al., 2008). Operations can also be modified for forecasted 
conditions (OFCM, 2002). For example, following various extreme events in the Greater Toronto 
Area, Metrolinx and GO Transit undertook a number of adaptive measures to enhance rail-corridor 
resiliency, including:

•  Flood-prevention efforts in the Don Valley, installing rail embankment-failure and high-water 

detectors; 

•  Service-planning for extreme winter weather (which involves running fewer trains, but reduces the 

likelihood of delays or cancellations, to ensure business continuity in snowy conditions); and 

• 

The installation of emergency electricity backup at their rail maintenance facility.

Table 4 provides an overview of the impacts and adaptations discussed in this section.

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

163
163

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
