 

1
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 1:  ASSESSING THE RESILIENCE OF HIGHWAY 
DRAINAGE INFRASTRUCTURE AT THE ONTARIO MINISTRY OF 
TRANSPORTATION 

There are concerns that an increase in the severity of precipitation events may threaten the future design 
capacity of Ontario’s highway drainage infrastructure. The Ontario Ministry of Transportation (MTO) 
undertook two interrelated research initiatives to assess this vulnerability and determine appropriate 
adaptation strategies.  

PROJECT 1:  UPDATING INTENSITY, DURATION, AND FREQUENCY (IDF) CURVES FOR 
ONTARIO

This project aimed to update Ontario’s intensity, duration, and frequency (IDF) curves to more accurately 
characterize precipitation in the province. 

In partnership with the University of Waterloo, researchers developed IDF curves for all locations in the 
province. These curves use Environment and Climate Change Canada’s most recent historical climate 
data, and are available via an easy-to-use online platform.5 The MTO continues to partner with the 
University of Waterloo to identify trends in the historical rainfall record, which can provide an alternative 
method of developing future scenarios.

PROJECT 2:  ASSESSING HIGHWAY DRAINAGE AND STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
INFRASTRUCTURE

This project assessed the resilience of existing highway drainage infrastructure to future precipitation loads, 
and identified adaptation strategies for a variety of infrastructure components, over their design life.  

Researchers sampled two sections of provincial highway, representing different levels of use (Highway 37 
near Belleville and Highway 417 near Ottawa). They analyzed the capacity of 25 pipe runs in each section, 
as well as 46 culverts. The project had three key stages.  

Stage 1:  Identifying reliable (i.e. likely) precipitation projections under future climate conditions. Based on 
a review of climate studies in Ontario, and analysis of data, the researchers determined that projected 
precipitation intensity varies across the province. Accordingly, the researchers considered three climate 
change scenarios feasible for the infrastructure resilience analysis: 10-, 20-, and 30-percent increases in 
rainfall intensity. (Note that horizons for change were not defined in this study.) 

Stage 2: Assessing design capacities of sewers and culverts. This stage identified the proportion of existing 
infrastructure that will meet future capacity requirements based on the three precipitation scenarios – that 
is, the proportion of infrastructure with “hydraulic resilience.” While researchers identified minor impacts on 
sewers for the two sample highway networks, most infrastructure was deemed to possess sufficient capacity 
for future conditions.

Stage 3:  Identifying adaptation measures to alleviate potential drainage issues. This stage required 
researchers to match adaptations to the risks identified. It was determined that where an increase in the 
flow velocity presents erosion risks to culverts, more erosion-resistant materials can be used to protect 
drainage structures. If headwater elevation is a concern, the chosen adaptation will depend on severity.  
In general, MTO does not allow drainage designs which permit overtopping (i.e. flooding) on Ontario 
highways; however, if overtopping is unavoidable, twinning existing sewers and culverts to increase 
capacity is useful.  

Bridges are typically designed with limited excess drainage capacity, due to the greater expense of these 
structures. However, this study determined that precipitation increases up to 30 percent do not pose a 
threat to bridges. If bridge scour or erosion is likely, physical protection can be provided. 

5 

 The tool can be found at http://www.mto.gov.on.ca/IDF_Curves/terms.shtml

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

…

161
161

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
