…

More frequent intense rainfall events also increase the risk of slope failures. Small failures may have no 
immediate impact on the driving surface, but over time may block ditch drainage (if located on the 
backslope), or eventually reach the pavement (if located on the foreslope). Alberta Transportation has not 
changed slope design criteria to meet these design conditions, as the cost to make all slopes more rain-
resistant would be prohibitive. Standard designs are in development to allow staff to repair shallow slope 
failures at minimal cost. 

Written with input from Peter Dzikowski and staff at Alberta Transportation.

 

2
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 2: CLIMATE VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENT FOR 
QUESNELL BRIDGE, CITY OF EDMONTON

The Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) Engineering Protocol, led by 
Engineers Canada, was developed as a 5-step process to analyze the engineering vulnerability of 
individual infrastructure systems based on current climate and future climate projections.  One of the 
first PIEVC assessment projects in Canada was undertaken at Quesnell Bridge in Edmonton, Alberta. This 
assessment was unique in that the bridge had reached the end of its lifecycle and was scheduled for 
refurbishment; therefore, many components were reconsidered in light of the protocol’s recommendations. 
The study concluded that while “generally robust”, the bridge faces a number of future vulnerabilities to 
likely increases in the frequency and intensity of extreme weather events, such as:

•  wearing of the bridge’s exposed deck surface and water-proofing membranes, and

•  overloading of the deck drainage systems and retention pond.

The PIEVC assessment identified risks to operations/maintenance (e.g. snow clearing) and serviceability/
safety from future combinations and sequences of extreme events (e.g. road flooding, icing). As a result, 
the study recommended that the bridge’s design criteria be updated to include changing annual climate 
loadings and extreme weather events under climate change scenarios; in some cases, climate data 
contributing to the development of rehabilitated infrastructure components (surface and drainage) dated 
from the 1960s (City of Edmonton, 2008).

Reconstruction of the bridge was completed in 2011. The PIEVC assessment informed waterproofing and 
paving of the bridge’s west side, the creation of new stormwater-management facilities, and the addition 
of two general-traffic lanes and one transit-priority lane (City of Edmonton, 2011).

Written with input from Hugh Donovan (City of Edmonton)

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

121
121

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
