…

Adaptive road and rail measures formed a major part of this expansion. Bridges were raised and piers 
modified to ensure road and rail traffic could continue unimpeded on the road network traversing the 
now-expanded floodway channel. Examples include:

•  PTH 59 South Highway Bridge: Two existing northbound and southbound road bridge structures were 

replaced. The new bridge structures are 4 m higher and 50 m longer than the previous structures.

• 

Trans-Canada Highway Bridge: The original bridge was replaced with two new bridge structures, 3.9 m 
higher and 98.6 m longer than the original bridge. 

•  PTH 15 Highway Bridge: The PTH15 Highway Bridge was replaced with a new structure approximately 

1.9 m higher than the previous bridge, with additional modifications. 

•  PTH 44 Highway Bridge: The PTH 44 Highway Bridge was replaced with a new structure 0.9 m higher and 

16 m longer than the previous structure, along with intersection improvements.  

•  CN Sprague Railway Bridge: The Sprague Railway Bridge, carrying the CN line, was replaced by a new 

bridge approximately 77 m longer and 2.7 m higher than the previous structure.

•  CN Redditt Railway Bridge: The new CN Redditt Railway Bridge is approximately 34 m longer and 2.3 m 

higher than the previous structure.

•  CP Keewatin Railway Bridge: The new CP Keewatin Railway Bridge is approximately 37 m longer and 

1.3 m higher than the previous structure.

While not specifically part of the Red River Floodway expansion, plans are underway to raise the level of 
PTH 75 south to the U.S. border in line with the level of Interstate-29 south of the Canada-U.S. border. This, in 
conjunction with the expansion of the Red River Floodway, will enhance the reliability of trucking along the 
Mid-Continent Corridor and its east-west linkages that connect Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba to 
central U.S. markets. 

Written by Al Phillips

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

130
130

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
