6.2 ADAPTATION PRACTICES 

INFRASTRUCTURE 

Modifications have been made at airports in the Prairies to improve the ability of runways to shed 
precipitation (Perimeter Aviation Representatives, personal communication, 2015). For example, 
certain types of sealants are being used on gravel airstrips. These involve applying a ¾” to 1” thick 
layer of a water-shedding material, although the runway is still classified as a treated gravel airstrip. 
These sealants are used on some runways in Saskatchewan and Alberta, although are not yet 
reported on Manitoba gravel airstrips. The sealant assists in reducing the percolation of moisture into 
the runway base material, and instances of standing water, which helps to reduce traction issues for 
aircraft trying to land on shorter runways (International Civil Aviation Organization Secretariat, 2010). 

OPERATIONS

Air carriers operating in the Prairies report some changes to operations and equipment to better 
manage the challenges posed by weather and changing climate conditions. As an adaptation to 
scheduling disruptions in remote northern communities, carriers have expanded ground facilities 
(warehousing) so freight aircraft that have been delayed can offload outside the community’s normal 
business hours and continue on their route. Ground transportation services can then pick up and 
distribute freight during business hours.  Carriers in northern communities that lack de-icing stations are 
also using portable de-icing mechanisms to deal with more frequent icing. 

To adapt to more frequent fog events, one carrier in Saskatchewan has reported making scheduling 
changes to allow fog to dissipate, moving early morning departures to late morning for some 
communities (Lloyd Epp, West Wind Aviation, personal communication, 2015).

A potential adaptation to disruptions caused by temperature certification issues is to reduce the 
number of different aircraft types or configurations in a given fleet. While there are other operational 
reasons for minimizing the number of aircraft types in a fleet (i.e. simpler maintenance requirements), 
consistency in air temperature certification is a factor in the Prairies. 

7.0 MARINE TRANSPORTATION

This section identifies risks faced by vessels and ports in the context of a changing climate and 
patterns of extreme weather, and describes adaptive efforts to cope with these impacts. As the 
Prairies’ only access point to tidewater, the following discussion of issues focuses specifically on 
Churchill and its unique situation.

7.1 FUTURE CLIMATE IMPACTS AND OPPORTUNITIES 

The effects of global sea-level rise will not be experienced consistently across the globe. Certain 
areas in the higher northern latitudes, including Hudson Bay (and Churchill, Manitoba), are likely to 
continue to experience sea-level decline throughout the 21st century as a result of isostatic adjustment 
(glacial uplift) (Bush et al., 2014). Therefore, Churchill is likely to be one of the few ports in Canada not 
adversely affected by sea-level rise and more severe storm surges. At present, Churchill experiences 
3 m tides. Increased mean temperatures are likely to result in a shorter sea-ice season, extending 
Churchill’s shipping season (currently about 14 weeks). However, sea-level decline along Hudson Bay’s 
western coast could increase navigational challenges for large vessels attempting to take advantage 
of the extended season.

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

132
132

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
