4.0 TRANSPORTATION VULNERABILITIES TO CLIMATE CHANGE 

Although the projected climate outlook shows that all regions of Quebec can expect rising 
temperatures and heavier precipitation events, the consequences will affect each economic activity 
differently, including transportation infrastructure and mobility. Extreme weather events are likely one 
of the greatest risks for all regions of Quebec. In addition, the built environment in Quebec is aging, 
and certain transportation infrastructure is reaching the end of its useful life or needs considerable 
refurbishment (Canadian Infrastructure Report Card, 2012). It may therefore be more vulnerable to 
the impacts of climate change.

The following sections present the main climate vulnerabilities identified for road, marine, rail and air 
transportation in Quebec. One section also deals with the telecommunication networks on which 
these modes of transportation depend. The vulnerabilities described are those of infrastructure, but 
also, more generally, those of transportation services operations and management. More information 
is available on road transportation, which underscores the importance of this mode in terms of modal 
share, as well as current research and development efforts. 

4.1 GROUND TRANSPORTATION

4.1.1  VULNERABILITIES OF ROAD TRANSPORTATION IN SOUTHERN QUEBEC AND ALONG 

THE ST. LAWRENCE 

In the area that extends to the east of Québec City to the lower North Shore (covering the Lower 
St. Lawrence, the Gaspé Peninsula and the Magdalen Islands), roads and villages are located along 
the coast. One third of the population in this region and close to 60% of national roads are located 
less than 500 metres from the shoreline (Drejza et al., 2014; Boyer-Villemaire et al., 2014). Some portions 
of Route 132 that follow the entire south shore of the St. Lawrence, from the United States border west 
of Montréal to Gaspé, are located anywhere from a few meters to a few dozen meters from the shore 
(McHugh et al., 2006). 

In the 20th century, this proximity to the river was seen as favourable for transportation, due to the 
supply of natural resources and marine exploitation. However, the establishment of roads and facilities 
along the St. Lawrence now appears to be a factor that exacerbates their vulnerability (Drejza et al., 
2015). The rise in annual average temperatures and especially rising winter temperatures recorded since 
the 1980’s (Bernatchez et al., 2008, Bernatchez, 2015; Savard et al., 2008) have various consequences 
such as a reduction in ice cover, a relative rise in sea level and an acceleration of cryogenic processes, 
which contribute to erosion (Bernatchez et al., 2011; Bernatchez et al., 2015; Boyer-Villemaire et al., 
2014). More than half of the St. Lawrence estuary and gulf coastlines are prone to erosion (Drejza et 
al., 2015). Along the estuary and gulf coastal zone, 294 kilometers of roads are considered to be at risk 
by 2065 (Bernatchez et al., 2015). The growth in the built environment along the St. Lawrence estuary 
increases the magnitude of the impact (Bernatchez and Fraser, 2011; Bernatchez et al., 2015; Ouranos, 
2015).  The impacts of climate change are already being felt on road infrastructure (Drejza et al., 2014). 
Several studies have found that erosion problems have required considerable investment to move roads 
or build remedial works (Ouranos, 2015; Bernatchez et al., 2015).

Freeze-thaw cycles are also causing the erosion of several rock cliffs in the St. Lawrence estuary 
and gulf, in southern Quebec (Bernatchez et al., 2014) (see box on coastal erosion in the Magdalen 
Islands), especially in the middle of the cold season by contributing to the continuous expansion of 
water in the ground, in cliffs or in road surfaces, which can cause cracks, splitting and detachment of 
cliffs or mud slides (Boucher-Brossard and Bernatchez, 2013; Drejza et al., 2015).  Although surfaces are 
usually designed to resist frost for approximately four months and to withstand large quantities of snow 
and melt, rapid snow and ice melt renders these surfaces more vulnerable. Mild temperature periods, 
which are projected to rise in frequency (Ouranos, 2015) also increase and intensify roadway damage 
(Chaumont and Brown, 2010; Doré et al., 2014). Roadways currently have a reduced useful lifespan 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

198
198

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
