…

The risk assessment suggested that the cost-optimized solution was to rebuild the causeway’s breakwater in 
two phases. The design included:

•  An increase in the height of the breakwater; 

•  A 600 mm-by-2.5 m concrete core;  

•  4-to-8-tonne armour stone on the outer face of the breakwater; 

•  A breakwater crest approximately 9 m wide; and

•  A seaward slope (two blocks horizontal for one block vertical). 

Each phase included completion of approximately half of the breakwater length, and the design allowed 
for the increase in wave height anticipated under future sea-level and storm-surge conditions. The project 
was tendered in 2012, and Phase 1 was awarded with a budgeted construction cost of $670,000 (Davies et 
al., 2010; Halifax Regional Municipality, 2012). Phase 2 was completed in 2013. 

While the new breakwater has not yet dealt with a major hurricane event, local practitioners suggest that 
the infrastructure has been successful in mitigating the effects of heavy storms and wave action to date 
(David Hubley, Halifax Regional Municipality, personal communication, 2016).

Written by Eric Rapaport with input from David Hubley (Halifax Regional Municipality). 

STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PRACTICES

Throughout Atlantic Canada, cities are reducing risks to roadways from flood events by improving 
stormwater management practices. These include: 

•  using future climate projections to update design flows in stormwater management networks to 

account for increased precipitation. Examples include the City of Fredericton, New Brunswick 
(Arisz, n.d.), the City of Corner Brook, Newfoundland (City of Corner Brook, 2012), and the Town of 
Stratford, Prince Edward Island (CBCL Ltd., 2012).

•  using the Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee’s (PIEVC) risk assessment 
protocol to assess the climate change vulnerability of roads and stormwater management 
systems. Examples include Sandy Point, Nova Scotia; Miramichi, New Brunswick; and, Placentia, 
Newfoundland and Labrador (Municipality of the District of Shelburne, 2011; City of Miramichi, 
2013; Engineers Canada, 2014). In response to PIEVC recommendations, Sandy Point is investing in 
new pumping stations to reduce infiltration and flows onto infrastructure, and both Miramichi and 
Placentia are considering larger culvert sizes along the road corridors that were assessed (City of 
Miramichi, 2013; Engineers Canada, 2014).

Additional stormwater management practices identified in the literature may also be relevant 
to Atlantic Canada.  These include building rain gardens/retention ponds; using permeable 
pavement materials; planting trees (to increase infiltration and reduce water pooling on roads), and 
coordinating stormwater management at the watershed-scale (i.e. maintaining natural river channels 
and wetlands) (Marsalek and Schreier, 2010; Kessler, 2011).

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

235
235

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
