Figure 11: Test section of high-albedo (light-toned) surface treatment. (Source: Paul Murchison)

The most common methods to extract heat from the ground during winter include: 

⑤	 Air convection ducts are located under embankments to allow for heat extraction though natural 

convection (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). These may be oriented in the 
direction of the prevailing wind or constructed horizontally (Transportation Association of Canada, 2010).

⑥	 Thermosyphons are passive cooling devices used to extract heat from the ground in winter and 

preserve the foundations of roads and buildings in ‘warm’ permafrost (see Figure 12). These systems, 
which have been used in the territories and northern Quebec, have been shown to cool the 
ground, raise the permafrost table, and stabilize foundations over time (Montufar, et al. 2011). While 
there have been problems with poorly functioning thermosyphons in the territories, these have 
been attributed to poor installation and maintenance. Figure 12 presents the mechanics behind this 
technology, and Figure 13 illustrates a thermosyphon in use at Inuvik Airport.

 

All varieties of thermosyphons (e.g., thermopiles, sloped-pipe thermosyphons, and flat-loop 
evaporator pipe thermosyphons) work on the same principle: a two-phase convection device 
extracts and discharges heat from the ground, cooling the permafrost. In winter, when the air is 
colder than the ground, thermosyphons cause gas in the above-ground pipe to condense and 
move to the base of the underground pipe. The cold air then drops the pipe’s fluid pressure, causing 
evaporation and completing the exchange of heat. During summer, low ground temperatures are 
maintained by a layer of insulation (Holubec, 2008). 

Figure 12: Illustration of heat exchange in a 
thermosyphon. (Source: Igor Holubec) 

Figure 13: Flat-loop thermosyphon foundation 
at an airport maintenance garage in Inuvik, 
NT. (Source: Igor Holubec)

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

48
48

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
