 

2
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 2: DEFENSIVE ADAPTATION IN COW BAY 
(HALIFAX, NOVA SCOTIA)

The Cow Bay Causeway is a 350 m stretch of road built over a beach of cobble and boulder. For many 
years, despite protection by a breakwater, the road was susceptible to damage from wave overwash. 
Three specific problems were identified with the existing breakwater:

1. 

The breakwater was not high enough in some areas to prevent waves from overtopping. 

2.  Most of the existing armour stone was not of sufficient size to resist the force of waves during a major 

storm; the causeway was closed at least twice a year for safety reasons. 

3.  Voids between the existing armour stones allowed small stones and seaweed to wash through the 

breakwater and be deposited on the roadway.

As a result, the causeway often experienced extensive damage from storms, and required repairs every 
three to five years. The severity and impacts of recent storms (including Hurricane Juan in 2003, post-
tropical storm Noel in 2007, and a January 2010 storm) and risks of future impacts prompted the Halifax 
Regional Municipality to commission a study and recommendations for the redesign of the causeway and 
its breakwater. The study employed a statistical risk assessment model known as the Coastal Infrastructure 
Adaptation Planning System (CIAPS) to analyze the interaction of future tidal and storm-surge conditions 
along the coast with the anticipated performance of the existing breakwater, as well as to determine the 
appropriate elevations for more resilient infrastructure (Davies et al., 2010). Four adaptation alternatives 
were identified:

1.  Erosion-proofing the causeway by replacing gravel shoulders with articulated concrete mats;

2.  Erosion-proofing, plus elevating the roadway to minimize overtopping risks;

3.  Rebuilding the barrier in its entirety (including impermeable technologies); or

4.  Rebuilding the barrier in prioritized phases (Davies et al., 2010).

Figure 7: Cow Bay Causeway experiencing a storm. (Photo of Cow Bay Causeway taken January 
26th, 2010 by M. Davies, Coldwater Consulting Ltd) 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

…

234
234

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
