 

1
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

2
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 1: MONITORING THE THERMAL BEHAVIOUR OF 
THE SALLUIT AIRPORT ACCESS ROAD AND TESTING A 
METHOD TO DETECT PERMAFROST DEGRADATION ALONG 
LINEAR STRUCTURES IN THE CONTEXT OF CLIMATE CHANGE

A section of the Salluit Airport access road in Nunavik is built on permafrost made up of ice-rich marine 
deposits. Since the early 2000’s, researchers have observed significant degradation linked to permafrost 
thaw in this section. In 2012, the MTMDET proceeded with the reconstruction of this section of road in order 
to maintain safe land access year-round, in the context of a changing climate. The embankment design 
was adapted by integrating it with new design criteria that aimed to promote a rise in the permafrost 
table. Within the framework of this project, two technological innovations were tested: the use of fiber optic 
cable to detect sectors at risk of deterioration along the road, and the implementation of an embankment 
with a large scale heat sink as an adaptation solution. This project was undertaken by the MTMDET, in 
collaboration with the Center for Northern Studies and the Laval University surface engineering research 
group. http://www.mddelcc.gouv.qc.ca/changementsclimatiques/bilan-2012-2013/adaptation.htm 

Monitoring the state of the environment and infrastructure is important and several management measures 
(e.g., snow removal along roads; more frequent cleaning of culverts; identification of alternative routes) 
and design measures (e.g., lessening the slope of the dyke; replacing culverts) can be implemented to 
reduce the impact of climate risks (Transportation Association of Canada, 2010). See the chapter on the 
Northern Territories for additional information on maintenance, monitoring and construction practices 
aimed at maintaining the integrity of infrastructure built on permafrost.

CASE STUDY 2: DAM BREAK AND FLOODING OF THE 
SAGUENAY

In 1996, heavy rains hit the Saguenay region of Quebec.  A series of floods forced the evacuation of 16,000 
people and destroyed several roads and bridges, isolating some populations.

Following these events, the Centre de géomatique du Québec (Quebec Geomatics Center) and the 
Ministère de la Sécurité publique (Department of Public Safety) implemented an interactive on-line 
mapping tool (GéoRISC portal) to guide dam managers and limit the consequences of dam breaks and 
flooding in the region. This management system (SCORE) has been online since 2008, providing continuous 
access to descriptive data for dams in Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean. Among other uses, modelling with 
this data makes it possible to consider the consequences of a dam collapse, recognize the impact that 
precipitation has on the road system, and plan alternative routes.

A research chair in coastal and fluvial engineering was created in 2013 (Gouvernement du Québec, 
2012b). This chair, created within the Institut national de la recherche scientifique (INRS), with the 
collaboration of the MTMDET and MSP, has conducted various research projects on the adaptation of 
design criteria for coastal remedial works (Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement 
et de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques, 2014). In addition, studies on the vulnerability of 
road infrastructure in eastern Quebec were conducted by the chair in coastal geoscience at the 
Université du Québec in Rimouski (Drejza et al, 2014; Drejza et al, 2015.).

Ongoing efforts to model the hydrology of the St. Lawrence drainage basin are helping to plan for the 
impact of climate change on hydrological systems influencing marine transportation (Bouchard et 
Cantin, 2015). However, port authorities and marine industry representatives appear less equipped to 
anticipate extreme weather events such as storms, hurricanes, etc., that will have a greater effect on 
their operations in the coming years (Slack and Comtois, 2016). 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

208
208

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
