Adaptation Activities

Smart technologies

Provinces are using Road Weather Information Systems (RWIS) to inform operations 
and maintenance, trucking firms are monitoring real-time weather events in their 
networks to enable efficient re-routing.
Wind sensors are being installed on some rail bridges, allowing rail operators to 
delay passage or adjust speeds, in the Greater Toronto Area, Metrolinx and GO 
Transit have installed flood sensors in transit corridors. 
Railway companies are actively monitoring weather events, climate risks, and 
asset health by installing washout detectors and laser movement detection 
systems, using fiber optics to detect slope movements, measuring track stability 
with radar interferometer, and installing warning systems for extreme weather.
Marine ports, such as Port Saint John, are using real-time weather and wave 
forecasting tools, including the “SmartAtlantic” inshore weather buoy, to support 
planning and navigation.
Vessel operators in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway System are using 
Onboard Draft Information systems and other electronic navigation services to 
support operations in low water conditions, in Arctic waters, vessels are using 
radar and satellite technology to provide near real-time ice charts, images and 
forecasts.
The Quebec Geomatics Centre and the Ministry of Public Security have 
implemented an online interactive mapping tool (GéoRISC portal) for the 
Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean region, to allow decision-makers to limit and reduce 
flooding impacts and ultimately plan for alternative road routes.

Operations and maintenance requirements and practices

To maintain the integrity of winter roads in Northern Canada, operators are 
spraying roads and bridges and are constructing snow caches at key points along 
the winter roads, for repair purposes.
The City of Toronto is more regularly monitoring and clearing drainage culverts to 
prevent issues during extreme precipitation events.
The Quebec Ministry of Transportation has introduced a thermal monitoring 
program for 13 airport runways in Nunavik. They are built on land sensitive to 
permafrost thaw.
Some jurisdictions are using combination ploughing and salting vehicles to better 
react to freezing rain conditions.
Carriers at northern airports have developed portable de-icing mechanisms to 
more flexibly address aircraft icing requirements.
Trucking firms are using technologies to reduce fuel consumption that also enhance 
climate resilience. Aerodynamic devices (fairings and trailer skirts) can improve the 
stability  of  trucks  during  wind  events,  and  auxiliary  power  units  (APUs)  can  help 
truckers respond to increased frequency of cold snaps or heat waves.

Chapter 

Reference(s)

Prairies 
Ontario

Prairies  
Urban

British Columbia

Atlantic 

Northern 
Ontario 

Quebec

Northern  
Ontario

Urban 

Quebec

Urban 

Northern  
Prairies
Prairies

 
CHAPTER 2: SYNTHESIS 

24
24

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
