6.0 CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION PRACTICES FOR URBAN TRANSPORTATION

Reducing the vulnerability of Canadian urban areas to a changing climate and extreme weather 
requires effective governance and collaboration within and between governments, transportation 
agencies, and other municipal sectors. In Canada, federal, provincial and territorial policy 
frameworks and funding programs can support municipal adaptation efforts, while both public and 
private transportation agencies are responsible for providing safe and efficient services in the face of 
more variable weather and climate conditions.

Sharing knowledge about resilient infrastructure and operational practices is also critical. At the 
municipal level, there are a number of networks for climate adaptation knowledge-sharing, including 
ICLEI Canada (Local Governments for Sustainability). ICLEI Canada’s Building Adaptive and Resilient 
Communities (BARC) initiative (Box 2) is an interactive web-based tool designed to help local 
governments identify and adopt climate adaptation strategies. Member municipalities receive one-
on-one staff support for using the tool (ICLEI, 2010), and transportation is a key aspect of this program.

BUILDING ADAPTIVE AND RESILIENT COMMUNITIES (BARC) INITIATIVE 

BARC operates through a five-step “milestone” process: 

• 

Initiate, in which stakeholders are identified and council resolutions made to address adaptation; 

•  Research, which involves determination of likely climate changes and risk assessment; 

•  Plan, in which adaptation objectives, actions, and budgeting are undertaken; 

• 

Implementation, in which actions are put into motion and political support is solidified; and

•  Monitor/Review, in which the effectiveness of action is determined, successes are communicated, and 

revisions are made (ICLEI, 2010). 

Adaptation strategies can be placed into the following five categories according to their style of 
intervention, as per the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2014).

DISASTER RISK-MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES

These strategies are familiar to municipalities, and have helped many cities successfully reduce 
the impacts of severe weather events in the past (e.g., Halifax and Hurricane Juan, Slave Lake and 
wildfire). Examples include changing emergency-management procedures in light of experienced 
or expected climate-related impacts, and assessing organizational risk through programming and 
software applications; and others. Calgary and Toronto have recent experience with climate-related 
disaster response, as both cities experienced severe weather events in the summer of 2013 (Davison 
and Powers, 2013). Examples include updating flood-, fire-, tsunami-, and hurricane-preparedness 
plans, and updating floodplain maps.

SPATIAL AND LAND-USE ADAPTATION 

This category of strategies includes changing procedures for land-use control and infrastructure 
design in certain areas to take into consideration past or expected climate impacts. Low-impact 
roadway designs include standards that aim to reduce total runoff and runoff rates, and natural 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

289
289

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
