Seiche impacts (which result from temporary changes in lake levels caused by fluctuating 
atmospheric pressure) also pose significant risks to marine infrastructure and operations in the Great 
Lakes. For instance, a recent Seiche event in Lake Michigan changed water levels by more than 3 
metres in under an hour, leaving marinas completely dry before flooding them suddenly, destroying 
vessels and infrastructure (International Joint Commission, 2014a). 

The changing climate also creates opportunities for the marine transportation sector. These include: 

•  A longer float plane season in some areas of the province (Andrey and Mills, 2003) (most notably 

the central and northern sub-regions in Ontario); 

•  A longer spring and summer shipping season; 

•  Less ice accumulation on vessels and rigging (Transportation Research Board, 2008); and, 

•  Possible new shipping routes (including the potential opening of shipping routes through the 

Arctic, although these face limitations – see Section 2.4) (Prowse et al, 2009).

7.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

A number of adaptations for marine transportation are identified in the literature. In cases where lower 
water levels affect navigability, shippers may shift freight to road or rail (Savonis et al., 2008). Other 
responses to lower inland water levels include changing navigation procedures; investing in flow 
augmentation technologies; and increasing dredging of channels (Andrey and Mills, 2003). The St. 
Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation (SLSMC) is taking an adaptive management approach 
to changes in climate, which includes monitoring water levels and ice patterns (see Case study 4).  
Commercial shippers operating in the Great Lakes also possess a degree of adaptive capacity and 
flexibility; operators take water levels into account when loading vessels, typically three to four weeks 
before arriving in Canadian waters (for international transits). 

A cost-benefit analysis of flow-regulation alternatives for portions of the St. Lawrence Seaway 
found that the most cost-effective solution involves constructing a series of sills, or speed bump-
like structures, in the Upper St. Clair River that would reduce the speed at which the river flows. This 
would yield net economic benefits upwards of $250 million (Dorling and Hanniman, 2016). Plan 2014, 
a flow-management plan for Lake Ontario and the Seaway developed by the International Joint 
Commission (2014b), aims to reduce damages for property owners, including ports and harbours by 
controlling the possible range of water levels. Largely, these planning initiatives attempt to reduce the 
risks associated with uncertain future water levels (International Joint Commission, 2014b; Dorling and 
Hanniman, 2016).

E-Navigation (electronic navigation) refers to modern navigation technologies and services that may 
help operators adapt to periods of lower water levels in Ontario. Potential improvements to these 
systems include establishing internet connections to provide basic ship-to-shore communication 
channels along navigable waterways. Modern “under-keel optimization systems” have also been 
implemented in some locations between Quebec City and Montreal along the St. Lawrence Seaway 
(Canadian Coast Guard, 2015), allowing operators to adjust speed (and draft) in order to pass 
through constrained channels, better managing the risks of fluctuating water levels (Galor, 2007). 
This system has also been proposed for parts of the Seaway passing through Ontario, including the St 
Clair-Detroit River, and the St. Mary’s River. 

Addressing the possibility of ice-jam flooding during early spring thaws, may require more frequent use 
of ice-breaking vessels. Practitioners in Ontario suggest that the past two winters have demonstrated 
the need to account for increased hours of operation for these vessels. For ports at risk of flooding 
(such as in those on the Great Lakes vulnerable to Seiche events), investments in some flood-proofing 
infrastructure (i.e. breakwaters and dikes) may be prudent (Savonis et al., 2008).

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

171
171

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
