Storm surges can cause coastal erosion and flooding, affecting roadways close to shore (Province of 
Nova Scotia, 2009b). The structural integrity of one major bridge in Corner Brook, Newfoundland, has 
nearly been compromised on multiple occasions by storm surges. City officials have been forced to 
close the bridge at times for safety (Rayna Luther, City of Corner Brook Infrastructure and Public Works, 
personal communication, 2015). The segment of Trans-Canada highway in the Chignecto Isthmus is 
also sensitive to storm-surge inundation (see Case Study 5).

In Prince Edward Island, where no point is more than 16 km from the sea, infrastructure is especially 
vulnerable to high-water damage.   For example, a severe storm surge in December 2010 resulted 
in several bridge closures and significant washouts at various locations including Oyster Bed Bridge, 
Corran Ban Bridge and Rustico Bridge (Figure 6).  Additionally, the predominantly sandstone 
composition of Prince Edward Island’s coastline is inherently susceptible to erosion resulting from 
storm surge and high water events.  In Prince Edward Island, at least two coastal public roads have 
been abandoned in recent years, due to erosion (Brian Thompson, Government of Prince Edward 
Island, personal communication, 2016).  This results not only in disruptions to property owners, and 
the traveling public, but in unscheduled government expenditures to secure land and construct 
alternate routes where applicable (Brian Thompson, Government of Prince Edward Island, personal 
communication, 2016).  Coastline erosion rates have been increasing in P.E.I.  The average rate of 
erosion grew from 28 cm per year between 1968 and 2010, to 40 cm per year between 2000 and 2010 
(Webster, 2012).  Without taking into account rising sea levels and increasing storms associated with 
climate change, an assessment of coastal infrastructure in the province identified over 40 kilometres 
of roads at risk from coastal erosion by 2100 (Fenech, 2014).  

The frequency and magnitude of storm-surge flooding will increase over the 21st century in areas that 
experience sea-level rise, including most of Atlantic Canada.  This in turn increases risks to coastal 
roads and bridges.

Figure 6:   Flooding of Oyster Bed Bridge during a storm in December, 2010. (Source: Don Jardine)

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

232
232

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
