Figure 5: Atlantic Canada’s road network.

3.2 MARINE TRANSPORTATION 

Each Atlantic province has specialized marine transportation infrastructure. The Port of Halifax is the 
most significant marine hub in Nova Scotia and the third-largest container port in Canada. Its deep, 
ice-free harbour provides services for both international and short-sea shipping, and contributed 
$1.6 billion to the Atlantic economy in 2013 (Port of Halifax, 2015; Cirtwill et al., 2001). The Port also 
features significant intermodal infrastructure, transferring goods to railcars and trucks bound for the 
U.S. Northeast and Midwest, Quebec, and Ontario (Canada’s Atlantic Gateway, 2010). It recently 
completed a $35 million expansion to host wider, post-Panamax6 containerships (Power, 2012).

The Ports of Saint John in New Brunswick and Placentia Bay in Newfoundland also move significant 
volumes of freight, and handle more crude oil and refined petroleum products than Halifax (Canada’s 
Atlantic Gateway, 2010). These products make up the majority of Atlantic Canada’s marine freight, 
much of which originates in Newfoundland. Ferries also play an important role in moving freight (as well 
as people). Marine Atlantic, a crown corporation providing ferry services, accounts for approximately 50 
percent of all goods shipped to and from Canada’s mainland to Newfoundland via Port aux Basques 
and/or Argentia to North Sydney crossings (Marine Atlantic, 2015). 

Marine tourism is another important contributor to the region’s economy, operating at peak capacity 
in summer. The cruise industry is growing in Atlantic Canada, accounting for 31 percent of Canada’s 
total marine passenger traffic in 2012 (Cruise Lines International Association, 2013; Transport Canada, 
2014). The Charlottetown Harbour Authority reports an increase in cruise ship passenger traffic of 
approximately 400% between the years 2007 and 2015 (Corryn Morrissey, Charlottetown Harbour 

6 

  Post-Panamax describes ships that do not fall within the current allowable dimensions for passing through the Panama Canal. 
Operators of the Panama Canal are currently constructing a new lock system, designed to handle these larger “post-Pana-
max” ships.

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

229
229

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
