TEMPERATURE AND PRECIPITATION CHANGES

Freeze-thaw cycles are taxing on road systems, particularly when temperature changes are rapid. 
When the frequency of freeze-thaw cycles increases, the potential for rapid road deterioration 
and higher maintenance costs rises as well. For example, by the end of approximately three weeks 
of fluctuating winter conditions in February 2015, Halifax had over 1,000 outstanding potholes – 
approximately 300 were more than two inches deep and therefore assigned a “priority” designation 
(Bradshaw, 2015). These cycles are expected to become more frequent throughout most of the 
Atlantic region over the short term. Freeze-thaw frequency is expected to decline over the long term 
as average winter temperatures rise (Boyle et al., 2013).

Rain-on-snow events also affect Atlantic Canada’s roads. In 1962, approximately 180 mm of rain 
on heavy snow on Prince Edward Island’s southern coast caused extensive washouts and damage 
to paved highways (Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association, 2011). A similar event in 
December 2014 caused $9 million in damages to bridges and roadways in Prince Edward Island 
(McCarthy, 2014; Wright, 2015). Rapid snow melt can also cause problems for municipal drainage 
systems. When temperatures ranged from -27°C to 7°C in the span of a month in Corner Brook, 
Newfoundland, mass snow-thaws resulted in the infiltration of large water volumes in short periods 
of time, overloading the capacity of stormwater management infrastructure (Rayna Luther, City of 
Corner Brook Infrastructure and Public Works, personal communication, 2015). 

Warmer winters are associated with more frequent freezing rain and black-ice conditions, affecting 
traffic flow, accident rates, maintenance costs, and the use of anti-icing chemicals (Andrey et al., 
2013).  Warmer winter temperatures also affect the safety and usability of informal seasonal ice routes 
in northern Labrador and New Brunswick that provide access to and from communities across frozen 
bodies of water (CBC News, 2012; Nalcor Energy, 2014). 

Extreme temperatures also have negative effects on road infrastructure. Interior regions of New 
Brunswick and Nova Scotia have already experienced an increase in the frequency of hot days, and 
this trend is expected to continue (Steeves, 2013), increasing the risk of road damage and adding 
stress to bridge joints. While extreme cold is not likely to increase in frequency, abnormally cold days 
will continue to occur (Gao et al., 2015), reducing the fuel-efficiency of vehicles and contributing to 
icy conditions. 

4.2 ADAPTATION PRACTICES 

In light of these impacts, governments and private operators are using a number of strategies to 
enhance the resilience of road infrastructure. Flood risks are a particular focus of these efforts.

PHYSICAL PROTECTION MEASURES

Some Atlantic municipalities are constructing seawalls, breakwaters, and dykes to protect roads 
against sea-level rise and higher storm surges (Liverman et al., 1994; Batterson et al., 1999; Halifax 
Regional Municipality, 2012). These buffers protect low-lying infrastructure from overtopping 
(which occurs when water rises higher than a dyke or levee). The construction of higher dykes and 
breakwaters may mediate the impacts of unpredictable flows of water in parts of Atlantic Canada 
(Graham and Musselman, n.d.). Case Study 2 discusses an example of this type of adaptation in 
Halifax, Nova Scotia.

In areas of extreme concern, such as the Chignecto Isthmus corridor, “hardening” of the surrounding 
land by means of a dyke system has protected the roads to date, although further efforts (hard, soft 
and hybrid engineering approaches) to protect infrastructure and communities under projected 
climate scenarios have recently been investigated (see Case Study 5). 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

233
233

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
