2.0 CLIMATE

British Columbia’s diverse landscape, including major mountain ranges, and proximity to the Pacific 
Ocean, strongly influence climate regimes in different parts of the province (Pacific Climate Impacts 
Consortium, 2013a). An important aspect of British Columbia’s climate is a phenomenon known as 
“atmospheric rivers” that are associated with very heavy precipitation, and have had significant 
impacts on transportation systems. Atmospheric rivers are long narrow streams of high water vapour 
concentrations in the atmosphere that move moisture from tropical regions towards the poles across 
the mid latitudes.  Pineapple Express is a term used to characterize an atmospheric river with origins 
in the western Pacific, east of Hawaii, flowing to and affecting the West Coast of North America 
between British Columbia and California (Figure 4). Atmospheric rivers are typically several hundred 
kilometers wide and thousands of kilometers long, and contain between 3 cm and 6 cm of water 
vapour in the middle of the stream (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, 2013a).  

Atmospheric rivers occur most frequently in the fall and winter in British Columbia. Their impacts are 
greatest on coastal areas when the moist water vapor laden air rises over the Coast Mountains, resulting 
in intense precipitation. The impacts have been significant, for example, the January 2009 extreme 
event shown in Figure 4 lasted two days and cost nearly $16 million, while another two-day event in 
June 2011 resulted in flooding and cost more than $85 million. In 2012, 15 registered flooding events 
affected over 100 communities in British Columbia (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, 2013a). 

Figure 4: Atmospheric River striking British Columbia on January 8, 2009. The colours in the image 
below represent “water vapour” in the middle to upper layers of the atmosphere. The shades of 
white to green are moist to cloudy and the shades of blue to yellow indicate increasingly dry areas. 
(Source: Cooperative Institute for Meteorological Satellite Studies / University of Wisconsin – Madison)

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

72
72

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
