5.0 ADAPTATION MEASURES

Climate change affects all regions of Quebec without concern for administrative limits or shared 
jurisdictions, and depends on the collaboration of various levels of government and Quebec’s civil 
society (Ouranos, 2015). 

Climate change will have both positive and negative effects on construction costs and the lifespan of 
land-based infrastructure (Doré et al., 2014). Several actions can contribute to making infrastructure 
more resilient. Above all, it is important to consider a set of complementary measures. Changing 
design can improve (or maintain) structural performance. However, increased maintenance activities 
and methods to detect early failure can help significantly reduce vulnerability. It is also important to 
pursue work that evaluates the technical, economic and environmental performance of potential 
adaptation measures (Doré et al., 2014; Ouranos, 2015).

This section reviews plans and projects implemented over the last several years by the Quebec 
government, regional and local organizations and authorities, and transportation companies. There 
is relatively little documentation on actions planned or implemented by the private sector to adapt 
Quebec’s transportation infrastructure, management and planning systems to climate change. 

5.1  ADAPTATION MEASURES PLANNED AND IMPLEMENTED BY THE QUEBEC 

GOVERNMENT

In 1996, the Quebec government developed its first Climate Change Action Plan (CCAP), which 
equipped government authorities to better understand climate risks in Quebec. The CCAP developed 
for 2006-2012 ($99 million) aimed to provide government stakeholders, the scientific community 
and non-governmental organizations the means to implement actions to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions and to adapt to climate change (Ministère du Développement durable, de l’Environnement 
et de la Lutte contre les changements climatiques, 2015). Among the 26 measures of this action 
plan, Measure 23 was specifically related to transportation, and gave the MTMDET the mandate of 
evaluating and conducting research that helped better understand phenomena that could affect 
the Quebec transportation system. Studies conducted during this period improved understanding 
of the coastal environment and how it might change due to the effects of climate change, and 
considered the challenges of erosion and flooding within the long-term management of exposed 
infrastructure. Other studies helped better define issues concerning permafrost thaw and integrate 
appropriate strategies for the design, repair and management of infrastructure. 

In 2012, the Quebec government adopted a Government Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation 
20132020 (Gouvernement du Québec, 2012a). The Strategy aims to raise public awareness of climate 
change and mobilize several departments and partners, including the MTMDET, regarding the 
sustainability and adaptation of transportation infrastructure. To improve services offered to the public 
and to adapt transportation, the 2013-2015 MTMDET strategic plan for MTMDET supports diversifying 
modes of transportation. Consideration of climate change is a major part of the plan (MTQ, 2012).

The importance of transportation is also recognized in the current action plan on climate change 
entitled « Le Québec en action vert 2020 » “Quebec Green Action 2020” (Gouvernement du 
Québec, 2012a). This plan, based on the Government Strategy for Climate Change Adaptation 
(Gouvernement du Québec, 2012a), supports crosscutting actions specific to health, the economy, 
infrastructure and the natural environment. Land-use planning is a key element of the plan, aimed 
at strengthening community resilience. Urban densification is identified as a tool for reducing future 
infrastructure needs, including roads (Gouvernement du Québec, 2012a; 2012b). Communication 
among residents and public and private stakeholders is also identified as a cross-cutting action to 
support climate change adaptation. Moreover, the plan provides for “specific training, awareness-
building, knowledge transfer and decision support tools, and technical assistance [...] to targeted 
audiences” (Gouvernement du Québec, 2012a). Efforts on this element have already been launched, 
specifically for government employees. 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

206
206

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
