…

SUMMARY

Overall, the results of this study are good news for Ontario highways. It was concluded that MTO’s existing 
design standards for highways are resilient to overtopping within the projected range of precipitation, and 
increases pose no serious risks to road safety. Specifically, 40 per cent of the pipes demonstrating excess 
capacity were sized to meet regulatory minimums, rather than to deal with expected rainfall levels. Thus, 
no infrastructure should need replacing before the end of its lifecycle to account for rainfall increases.

This analysis was limited to possible climate change impacts on the rainfall intensities used in design. Areas 
that could be considered in future include the impacts of increasing precipitation intensity and duration on 
foundational materials, and changes to the classification of “regulatory storms” in Ontario (as defined by 
the Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry).

Despite these findings, many roads throughout the province remain vulnerable to flood events, including 
rare occurrences that exceed design capacity. The impact of such disruptions to roads may be reduced 
via redundancies in the road network (i.e. alternative routes on nearby municipal roads). (See Chapter 9.) 

Written in collaboration with Hani Farghaly (Ministry of Transportation Ontario). 

5.0 RAIL TRANSPORTATION IN ONTARIO

5.1 PAST IMPACTS

Examples of past climate events resulting in impacts on rail transportation include: 

•  A July 5-17, 1936 heat wave, exceeding 44˚C in parts of Manitoba and Ontario, resulted in steel 

rail lines buckling, and bridge girders twisting (Environment Canada, 2013a).  

•  A December 1942 freezing rain storm in Eastern Ontario coated telephone wires, trees, and 

railway tracks with thick ice, forcing 50,000 workers in Ottawa to walk to work for five days 
(Environment Canada, 2013a).

•  Hurricane Hazel (1954) caused considerable damage and disruption to rail transportation 

throughout Southern Ontario (Environment Canada, 2013b).

• 

The 1998 North American Ice Storm disrupted rail service within and between major cities 
(Environment Canada, 2013a).

•  Severe rain events in 2013 in Toronto flooded rail lines in the Don Valley and in one case stranded 

GO Transit passengers (CBC News, 2013).

5.2 FUTURE RISKS

Rail transportation faces a variety of unique risks due to changing climate conditions and more 
extreme weather. Changes to the range of experienced temperatures present challenges for the 
integrity of rails – this risk is particularly pronounced in Southern Ontario where extreme temperatures 
will be highest. For example, buckling may occur in extreme heat, increasing travel times (as a result 
of slower train speeds) and enhancing the potential for derailment, track-sensor malfunction, and 
hazardous-material spills (OFCM, 2002). High temperatures also result in overheated cargo (Andrey 
and Mills, 2003). In the North, permafrost thaw weakens rail embankments (Caldwell et al., 2002); in 
combination with heavy precipitation, washouts and embankment failure may increase in Northern 

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

162
162

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
