1.0 INTRODUCTION

In Quebec, transportation plays a major role in supporting the vitality of regions, the distribution of 
goods and services, and the exploitation of natural resources. Most transportation infrastructure (road, 
rail, marine and air) was designed with a stable climate in mind, but climate change is affecting both 
the lifespan and condition of the infrastructure. The size of the province, the remote nature of certain 
Quebec communities, and the limited redundancy of the transportation system,4 in the regions most 
affected by climate change, are also factors that increase its vulnerability.

For nearly 20 years, the Quebec government, carrier associations, expert panels, and companies 
have been making greater efforts to adapt transportation systems to climate change and thus 
strengthen its resilience. These efforts have enhanced knowledge about the impacts and potential 
solutions to improve the management of transportation infrastructure. 

This chapter describes the organization of transportation in Quebec by mode and by region, and 
identifies its main vulnerabilities to climate change, based on existing literature and studies. The 
chapter also identifies adaptation practices that could be used to address these challenges. 

1.1 REGIONAL PROFILE 

DEMOGRAPHICS AND SOCIO-ECONOMIC CONTEXT

Quebec covers more than 1.6M km2 (Institut de la statistique du Québec, 2014) and has 
approximately 8,263,600 residents (Institut de la statistique du Québec, 2015; see Figure 1), making this 
province the second most populated in the country.  More than half (60%) of the Quebec population 
is concentrated in an area 10 km wide on either side of the St. Lawrence river (Institut de la statistique 
du Québec, 2014). 

More specifically, the Quebec population is concentrated in a few large urban areas in the southern 
part of the province (Montréal, Québec City, Gatineau, Sherbrooke, Trois-Rivières). In other regions, 
the population is more dispersed. For example, Nunavik makes up a little less than one-third of the 
territory and has approximately 12,700 residents in 14 northern villages and the Cree community of 
Whapmagoostui.

Population growth is expected in 13 of the 17 administrative regions of Quebec by 2061 (Girard, 
B-Charbonneau and F-Payeur, 2014). The regions which are expected to see this population growth 
will be those supported by international migration (Montréal and Laval), inter-regional migration 
(Outaouais), internal migration (Laval, Lanaudière), and a rising fertility rate (Nunavik).

As shown in Table 1, the urban areas of the National Capital,5 Montréal, Montérégie, Laval and the 
Outaouais are characterized by their significant industrial diversity, and account for 67.4% of the Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). The proximity of these areas to waterways and international transportation 
infrastructure is vital to their success. Other regions depend more on the extraction of raw materials 
or tourism. The area of the gulf and estuary of the St. Lawrence is home to close to 5% of Quebec’s 
population and accounts for a similar share of the province’s economy (Beaulieu, 2014).

4 

5 

 The redundancy of a transportation system refers to the alternatives the system provides, ensuring additional routes and services 
if the first option is disrupted. A system with little redundancy provides few options.
Québec City region

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

184
184

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
