OPPORTUNITIES

There are also opportunities for road transport associated with climate change. In southern cities, for 
instance, construction seasons are likely to be longer, and winter road-maintenance costs are likely to 
be lower in warmer winters, despite an increasing proportion of freezing rain (Andrey and Mills, 2003; 
Fu et al., 2009). It remains to be seen, however, what impact increased freeze-thaw cycling might 
have on these cost savings.

4.0 URBAN RAIL TRANSPORTATION 

Urban rail systems include subways, LRT, and streetcars. They also include urban freight systems, 
although information on the regional and national rail system can be found in the regional chapters 
of this report.

Ongoing and planned rail-transit projects, including those identified below, complement existing and 
well-used LRT and subway systems in Vancouver, Calgary, Edmonton, Montreal, and Toronto. Other 
jurisdictions with smaller populations are also beginning to recognize the benefits of investment in 
rapid transit. For example, the City of London is in the public consultation and mode-selection phase 
for rapid transit, and Victoria is in the planning stages of bringing LRT to its metropolitan area. These 
projects demonstrate renewed public interest in, and support for, rapid transit in general and rail-
based modes in particular.

• 

Toronto: Eglinton Crosstown LRT and Scarborough subway extension (construction phase);

•  Kitchener-Cambridge-Waterloo: ION LRT (construction phase);

• 

The Greater Toronto and Hamilton area:  Electrification of the GO Transit network (planning phase); 
and,

•  Ottawa: Confederation Line LRT (construction phase).

PRECIPITATION 

Many urban rail systems rely on municipal electricity grids; therefore, locomotives and signals are 
vulnerable to power outages in extreme weather conditions (i.e. rainfall and snow). Track beds are 
also subject to a number of the same climate impacts as urban roadways, including reduced stability 
during flooding and erosion during extreme precipitation events (Mills and Andrey, 2002).  

As with roads, precipitation can overload the stormwater management infrastructure that protects 
underground, surface, and elevated rail transit. Extreme weather events can result in flooding and 
inundation of rail systems, as was the case in Toronto in the summer of 2013 (Wooler, 2004). Extreme 
precipitation in Montreal during May 2012 (discussed in Section 3) also resulted in tunnel closures and 
the evacuation of several metro stations (City of Montreal, 2015).

TEMPERATURE 

Rail infrastructure is prone to buckling in extreme heat, increasing the potential for sensor 
malfunctions, scheduling delays, speed restrictions, and – in extreme cases – derailment (Savonis et 
al., 2008). Tunnels used in underground rail transit systems can also experience operational challenges 
during extreme heat, including mechanical issues with ventilation. As a result, operators need to 
sufficiently consider passenger comfort, health, and safety (Office of the Federal Coordinator for 
Meteorological Services and Supporting Research (OFCM), 2002). 

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

283
283

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
