With respect to possible temperature extremes, Manitoba Infrastructure and Transportation currently 
requires that bridge and large-culvert construction materials be designed to withstand a temperature 
range of 80°C (-40°C to +40°C). To mitigate impacts of freeze-thaw cycles, highly durable and 
impermeable concrete mixes are required for bridge decks and curbs/barriers, reducing moisture 
infiltration and expansion (Government of Manitoba, 2015c).

Alberta’s provincial government has undertaken climate risk assessments for road infrastructure. In 
June 2012, Alberta’s Ministry of Transportation released its “Climate Change Risk Assessment and 
Adaptation Report for the Ministry of Transportation,” a high-level assessment of risks posed by a 
changing climate to the province’s transportation sector. It also identifies potential adaptation 
measures, developed in accordance with ISO 31000 Risk Management Principles and Guidelines. 
During the department’s enterprise risk-management and business-planning processes, long-term risks 
(based on climate scenarios for the next 50 years) were considered along with risks in the near (2 -to 
10-year) term. Plans also exist to review climate risks as new and updated climate change scenarios 
become available, and identify potential options to reduce the severity of impacts (ICF Marbek, 
2012). 

In June 2013, Southern Alberta experienced heavy rainfall followed by catastrophic flooding. Five 
people were killed, more than 100,000 were displaced, and damage exceeded $5 billion (see 
Chapter 9). In terms of insurable damages, it is the costliest disaster in Canadian history (Environment 
Canada, 2014). In response, Alberta announced several risk-mitigation actions. In November 2013, the 
provincial government announced $110 million (2014-2016) for a Flood Mitigation Program, providing 
funds to upgrade, retrofit, or replace road and bridge infrastructure at high-risk sites in advance of 
scheduled end-of-life replacement. Specific repairs and upgrades to damaged sites were expected 
to account for $40 million, with the remaining $70 million dedicated to high priority sites susceptible 
to flood damage (Government of Alberta, 2013). Additional adaptive measures undertaken are 
discussed in Case Studies 1 and 2.

In addition to these long-term planning initiatives, Alberta government representatives indicate that 
a case-by-case approach to infrastructure adaptation is being taken in the province. Calgary’s 2013 
flood is often cited as motivation for efforts to reduce extreme-weather risks; however, most damage 
occurred in known floodplains. While changing climate factors may have contributed to high water 
levels, development in vulnerable areas was a factor contributing to the magnitude and costs of the 
damage (Alberta Government Staff, personal communication, 2015). 

Saskatchewan’s provincial government is attempting to build climate risks into asset-management 
processes, although budget realities often make the final determination (Kim Graybiel, Saskatchewan 
Ministry of Environment, personal communication, 2015). In response to extreme weather events, 
Saskatchewan’s culvert program alters design requirements for National Highway System infrastructure 
from 1-in-25 year flood-event thresholds to 1-in-50 year events. For vulnerable communities, standards 
are being changed from a 1-in-50 year event to a 1-in-100 year event (Transportation and the 
Environment Task Force, 2014). The objective of this strategy is to facilitate more efficient overland 
movement of water, to reduce incidences of water being held back by road or rail beds to the point 
where washouts occur.

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

119
119

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
