All regions of northern Canada have also shown increases in precipitation since 1948, with very 
high variability from one year to the next (Prowse et al., 2009). While the region is dominated by 
cold air masses in winter, increased variability in the jetstream in recent years (Francis and Vavrus, 
2012) has resulted in more winter warm-air advection events in the North (winds blowing from 
warmer regions) (Wang, 2006). This can bring freezing rain, fog and melt events, which cause 
problems for transportation systems. Climate projections indicate that precipitation will continue 
to increase under all scenarios, with the greatest increases in fall and winter. Winter precipitation 
increases greater than 25 percent are projected for parts of the eastern and central Arctic by the 
year 2050 (Bush et al., 2014). 

There is strong evidence that the frequency and intensity of storms in the Arctic is increasing (Manson 
and Solomon, 2007). Increasingly-large areas of open water result in more intense cyclonic storms 
– these storms will grow larger and stronger as sea-ice extent is projected to decrease even further 
(Simmonds and Keay, 2009). Storms are most common in the eastern Arctic, associated with the Baffin 
Bay storm track. There are many recent examples of severe wind events, including a 2006 event in 
Pangnirtung, Nunavut, where winds reaching 125 km/hr destroyed a building and broke windows 
(Hanesiak et al., 2010). During a similar 2007 event in Iqaluit, Nunavut, winds reaching up to 140 km/hr 
tore sections off the roofs of multiple buildings (Hanesiak et al., 2010). Storm surges, where water levels 
exceed predicted tide levels due to atmospheric pressure and winds associated with storms, are of 
particular concern along the Beaufort Sea coast due to its shallow depth. Several sites in that region 
have recorded storm surges in excess of 2 m (Forbes and Frobel, 1985), with impacts extending 30 km 
inland on the Mackenzie Delta (Kokelj, et al., 2012). When storm surges occur during periods of full ice 
cover, “pressure ridges” can result that alter the sea floor near the shore, potentially affecting access 
to coastal facilities.

3.1.2 CRYOSPHERE

Dramatic changes have been observed in all elements of the cryosphere, and the rate of change 
has been accelerating in recent years (Derksen et al., 2012). These changes include decreases in 
the extent and duration of snow cover over the past 40 years, and a strong shift towards negative 
mass balance (loss of ice volume) in Arctic glaciers and ice caps since 2005 (Derksen et al., 2012). 
Of particular relevance to northern transportation are changes in sea ice, permafrost, and river 
and lake ice cover.

Sea ice is one of the most defining features of Canada’s North (Ford et al., 2016). In winter, when ice 
cover is essentially complete, the coast is protected from wave action, and ice permits transportation 
between communities and access to hunting and fishing areas. When ice is in motion, wind and 
currents can cause ice flows to collide and form pressure ridges, making travel both through the water 
and over the ice more difficult. Thick multi-year sea ice associated with the break-up of ice islands 
and icebergs generated by calving glaciers also present significant hazards for marine shipping 
(Prowse, et al, 2009). 

For the Arctic as a whole, the average extent of sea ice in the month of September is decreasing 
at a rate of 13.3 percent per decade, while March extent is decreasing at a rate of 2.6 percent per 
decade (National Snow and Ice Data Centre, 2016) (Figures 4a, b, c). In the Canadian Arctic, the 
rate of loss ranges from 2.9 percent per decade in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago (CAA) (although 
areas within the CAA have much higher rates) to 10.4 percent per decade in Hudson Bay (Tivy, et 
al., 2011). This decline in sea-ice cover has resulted in a lengthening of the open-water season by an 
average of five days per decade Arctic-wide since 1979 (Stroeve, et al., 2014), and by 3.2–12 days 
per decade in the Canadian North. For example, in Resolute Bay, Nunavut, the melt season has 
increased by close to 30 days over a 30-year period, driven primarily by a delay in freeze-up (St-
Hilaire-Gravel et al., 2011). The decrease in the extent of sea ice means that larger and more powerful 
waves are reaching the coast (Overeem et al, 2011). This in turn, leads to increased erosion and 
flooding (Solomon et al., 1994). The greatest increase in fetch (length of open water) generally occurs 
in September, which is often also the stormiest period of the year (Atkinson, 2005).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

37
37

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
