 

2
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 2: PREPARING FOR HIGHER TEMPERATURES AND 
RAIL BUCKLING AT GO TRANSIT

Metrolinx is a provincial agency responsible for public transportation in the Greater Toronto and 
Hamilton Area (GTHA). Its authority extends to capital investments, strategic decision-making, and 
operational planning for GO Transit (Canada’s highest-volume commuter rail and bus service), as well 
as improving, coordinating, and integrating these services with municipal transit and other modes. 
Metrolinx and GO Transit have begun to broadly identify threats to the organisation posed by changes 
in climate and extreme weather events, and to assess vulnerabilities and risks to facilities, practices, 
and protocols. A corporate climate adaptation policy is also being developed, due to be completed 
in 2018 (Metrolinx, 2015).

In the near-term, the organisation is responding to the most immediate climate-related concerns with 
available resources and expertise. These “low-hanging fruit” mainly fall under the operational umbrella, 
since disruptions to front-line services and road and rail infrastructure pose risks to the quantity and quality 
of commuter service Metrolinx is able to provide. 

For instance, the Railway Corridors division of GO Transit is preparing for the extreme summer temperatures 
projected for Southern Ontario by the middle of the 21st century. There is a tendency for rail lines to expand 
and “buckle” in temperatures exceeding 27˚C, which poses risks to operating speed, safety, and line 
capacity. Minor buckling has been observed along select network segments on hot summer days over 
the past 10 years. GO engineers have opted to proactively lessen buckling risks to rail lines and service by 
increasing the preferred rail-laying and rail-distressing temperatures for Southern Ontario from 32.2˚C to 
37.8˚C (90 to 100 degrees Fahrenheit). This simple adaptation involves no extra cost – only minor equipment 
adjustments – yet it has yielded maintenance benefits. Rail buckling has decreased significantly in affected 
areas since this change was made. While no organisational standards have been changed (largely due to 
the time and resources required) the practice has been adopted beyond Railway Corridors. For instance, 
GO Transit is using this higher rail-laying and rail-distressing temperature in the construction of the Union-
Pearson Express. This represents an example of a “no-regret” adaptation strategy, referring to actions 
involving few additional costs, produce co-benefits, or prevent future damage and costs (see Chapter 9). 

Practitioners also suggest that updated rail-laying and -distressing temperatures have not significantly 
affected the tolerance of GO rail infrastructure to colder temperatures. While extreme cold has caused 
rail contraction in more northern jurisdictions, GO Transit rail lines have not been significantly affected. 
Practitioners do not expect rail contraction in winter to be as much of a problem in coming decades, given 
that on average, Southern Ontario is expected to experience warmer winters in the 21st century. 

Written in collaboration with Mel White (GO Transit), and Quentin Chiotti (Metrolinx).

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

165
165

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
