 

3
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 3: INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS AT IQALUIT 
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

Iqaluit International Airport is extremely important to communities in Nunavut given the region’s lack of road 
access. When the airport was constructed in 1942, little was known about the underlying permafrost and its 
importance to the safety and viability of airport operations. However, many problems related to permafrost – 
including runway stability issues stemming from thaw settlement of ice-rich soils – have occurred at the airport 
over its lifespan. In tandem with the need for expansion and facility replacement, permafrost issues prompted 
the development of an improvement plan by public and private partners.

In  2013-2014,  the  Iqaluit  International  Airport  Improvement  Project  was  initiated;  by  then,  the  importance 
of  understanding  the  nature,  location  and  influence  of  permafrost  degradation  on  infrastructure  was  well-
understood. A number of research projects were undertaken, employing a variety of techniques – including 
ground-penetrating radar, permafrost core analysis, surficial mapping, and remote sensing – to generate site-
specific  knowledge  about  permafrost  properties  and  model  interactions  among  permafrost,  climate,  and 
airport infrastructure (both existing and proposed). A key finding of this work is that permafrost tends to be 
subject to greater warming under pavement than embankments (and other “naturalized” surfaces).  

The data collected has been used to inform infrastructure decision-making. Maps were produced to identify 
potentially-problematic  locations  for  existing  and  proposed  infrastructure  (e.g.,  thaw-sensitive  soils  and/
or difficult terrain for construction); a taxiway was relocated with an insulated barrier to reduce permafrost 
damage; the importance of removing thick snow cover in key areas was recognized; thermosyphons were 
installed  beneath  airport  buildings;  and  drainage  was  improved  to  reduce  the  infiltration  of  surface  water 
into permafrost. Overall, informed engineering and operational decisions have been made at the airport with 
respect to the integrity of the underlying permafrost.

Written  by:  Art  Stewart  (Transportation  Policy  and  Planning,  Government  of  Nunavut);  Anne-Marie  LeBlanc 
(Geological Survey of Canada, Natural Resources Canada); and Sharon Smith (Central and Northern Canada 
Branch – Geological Survey of Canada, Natural Resources Canada).

7.0 MARINE TRANSPORTATION

7.1 CLIMATE IMPACTS ON MARINE TRANSPORTATION (INCLUDING LAKES AND RIVERS)

Climate factors affecting marine transportation in northern Canada include: changing patterns of sea 
ice; precipitation events; strong and variable winds; and changing water levels. 

As discussed in Section 4, recent decades have seen dramatic changes in the Arctic sea-ice regime 
(Bush et al., 2014; Dawson et al., 2014). While decreases in the extent and duration of sea ice present 
potential economic opportunities in terms of increased marine traffic and shipping-season length, 
several barriers remain for Arctic shipping expansion. For example, the high year-to-year variability 
of ice in the Canadian Arctic has significant impacts on marine insurance, investment, and ship 
construction standards (Ellis and Brigham, 2009). Few year-round commercial navigational vessels 
currently operate in the Canadian Arctic (with the exception of nuclear icebreakers) (Ellis and 
Brigham, 2009).

Sea ice changes are also associated with coastal erosion, navigation problems, and infrastructure 
damage. Changing distributions of multi-year ice have led to ice detaching and migrating into 
unexpected areas, creating obstacles and hazards for cargo vessels (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). 
This has implications for search and rescue capacity, winter shipping, passenger safety, and coastal 

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

53
53

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
