 

4
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 4: WATER LEVELS, ICE REMOVAL, AND ADAPTIVE 
MANAGEMENT AT THE ST. LAWRENCE SEAWAY MANAGEMENT 
CORPORATION

A changing climate is likely to produce significant impacts for transportation operators in the Great Lakes-
St. Lawrence Seaway. The Seaway is an important international marine shipping route spanning 3,700 km 
over many jurisdictions. Critical stretches include the Welland Canal (connecting Lakes Ontario and Erie) 
and the segment from Lake Ontario to Montreal. The St. Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation 
(SLSMC) is the Canadian agency responsible for ensuring marine traffic moves safely and efficiently through 
13 of the waterway’s 15 locks.

There is much uncertainty regarding water levels throughout the Seaway, as they tend to vary year-to-
year. Some studies suggest lower water levels will be the norm through the 21st century (Shlozberg et al., 
2014). Other studies suggest that increased precipitation may cause periodic fluctuations in these levels 
(MacKay and Seglenieks, 2013). Either way, strategies to deal with uncertainty are recommended.  For 
shippers, lower water levels pose risks to shipping capacity and efficiency, reducing the volume of freight 
that can be moved. Andrey et al. (2014) suggests that for each centimetre of water lost, the capacity of 
an average ship decreases by six containers (60 tons). 

Over the short-term, significant ice formation has been problematic for shippers and infrastructure 
operators in the Seaway, including the SLSMC. Ice build-up delays seasonal opening and increases 
removal, break-up, and flushing requirements. While flow-management infrastructure upgrades are 
considered too costly and difficult to implement (Andrey et al, 2014), the SLSMC has adopted a number of 
adaptive procedures in light of observed and projected impacts.

For instance, the SLSMC collects extensive climate data to determine how environmental conditions will 
affect infrastructure performance over the short and long term. It also monitors water levels, temperature 
and wind conditions, and ice patterns. The organization uses this data to predict seasonal Seaway opening 
and closing dates, secure requisite ice-breaking services and assets, and rent an appropriate volume of 
ice-management equipment for channels and locks. 

However, practitioners have observed increased variability in weather along the Seaway in recent years, 
making it difficult for the SLSMC to accurately predict opening and closing conditions and associated 
processes. During the navigation season, the SLSMC has procedures to deal with extreme (short-term) 
events, including wind causing low water levels. These include: 

• 

Suspending navigation and temporarily redirecting vulnerable vessels to safe anchorage areas until 
conditions become acceptable again. 

•  Activating “no-meet zones” when required (prohibiting two-way marine traffic), 

•  Restricting speed and draft to reduce navigational risks (i.e. striking bottom).  

Reduced maximum permissible shipping draft6 is an especially problematic impact of declining water 
levels, since the costs of reduced efficiency are transferred to shippers and businesses further down 
the supply chain. To increase safety for deep-draft vessels, many vessels have installed onboard Draft 
Information Systems. This software application provides graphical representations of the anticipated under-
keel conditions for a vessel given its position, speed, and heading in relation to surrounding water levels 
and bathymetry. The system allows vessels to take proactive, draft-altering measures to ensure safe transit 
by adjusting speeds. In 2014, 39 inland commercial ships used this application in the Seaway, though there 
is potential for greater uptake.

Ice is another major consideration for the SLSMC, and caused delays opening the Montreal-Lake Ontario 
Seaway section in 2014, increasing removal, break-up, and flushing requirements. Ice management 

6 

 Draft refers to the vertical distance between the waterline and the bottom of a ship’s hull. This affects the  
depth of a ship in the water.

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

…

173
173

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
