4c - Comparison of mean monthly sea ice extent for to September 1981 and September 2010, with 
magenta line depicting median September ice extent for the period of record (National Snow and 
Ice Data Center, 2016).  The decreases in minimum ice extent have been much more dramatic than 
have changes in maximum ice extent.

Permafrost – which is permanently frozen ground – underlies virtually all of Canada’s northern territories. 
It can be continuous or discontinuous, or occur only in patches (Smith and Burgess, 2004). Permafrost 
can be up to several hundred metres thick, but may be only tens of metres thick or less in more southerly 
parts of the permafrost zone. Above the permafrost, a surface layer (known as the active layer) thaws 
in summer and refreezes in winter. The active layer can range from tens of centimetres to several metres 
in thickness. Climate (including air temperature and snow cover) is the main factor controlling the 
occurrence and thermal state of permafrost. Changes in climate can result in permafrost warming and 
thaw.  Warming of permafrost reduces the structural integrity of infrastructure that relies on permafrost 
for a stable foundation, while thawing of ice-rich permafrost leads to surface subsidence (sinking), 
hydrological changes and slope instability. This presents risks to infrastructure, roads, airstrips, and railways. 

A number of comprehensive overviews of the state of permafrost in Canada (Burn and Kokelji, 
2009) indicate that, with few exceptions, permafrost temperatures are increasing. Generally, colder 
permafrost situated further north has seen greater increases in temperature than warmer permafrost. 
Multi-decadal trends show warming of ground temperatures of between 0.2˚C per decade in the 
southern and central Mackenzie Valley to 1.2˚C per decade in the eastern Arctic (Figure 5). These 
rates appear to be increasing, with data for the period 2008 to 2013 showing average warming of 
1.5˚C per decade for 10 sites spanning a range of Arctic environments (Smith et al., 2013). Ground 
warming is also associated with an increase in the thickness of the seasonal active layer. 

These trends are projected to continue as the climate continues to warm (Woo et al., 2007). 
Regions that experience the greatest thermal responses, however, are not necessarily the ones 
that exhibit the greatest physical impacts (Smith and Burgess, 2004). For example, where there is 
a large increase in ground temperature but very low ground ice content, the physical impacts of 
permafrost warming will be minimal.

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

39
39

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
