7.2 MARINE INFRASTRUCTURE AND OPERATIONAL ADAPTATIONS

Transition measures were put in place to help the port adjust to the end of the Canada Wheat Board 
in 2012. Capital improvements funds were designed to encourage some diversity in port operations, 
expanding port capacity beyond its traditional focus on outbound bulk-grain handling to include 
other movement systems, including intermodal operations (Transportation and the Environment Task 
Force, 2014). Although these improvements are unlikely to be explicitly linked to climate change 
adaptation, a shift in short-sea shipping capacity may have implications for an extended marine 
resupply season.  The owner and operator of the Port of Churchill reports that water levels at the 
wharves have been trending downwards, suggesting the only adaptation that would be required is 
dredging of the harbour (Jeff McEachern, OmniTrax Canada, personal communication, 2015).

The Port of Churchill’s capacity to load vessels has been idle for much of each year, as the shipping 
season normally covers about 14 weeks from mid-July to late October. If the ice-free season is 
extended, more activity could be supported without substantial infrastructure improvements. 
Challenges remain for the Port of Churchill, although these are primarily inland, and deal with surface 
access to the port from southern shipping distribution points (discussed in Case Study 5). 

Case Study 7 describes the results and recommendations of a recent PIEVC assessment completed 
for transportation infrastructure connecting Manitoba and Nunavut, including Churchill’s marine 
components.

7
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 7: CLIMATE CHANGE VULNERABILITY AND THE 
MANITOBA-NUNAVUT SUPPLY CHAIN

A recent study (Duguid et al., 2015) examined key infrastructure supporting the supply of goods and 
services between Northern Manitoba and Nunavut’s Kivalliq region. The project aimed to identify potential 
vulnerabilities associated with a changing climate, northern economic development, and growing 
populations. Climate change is likely to put direct physical stress on this northern supply-chain infrastructure, 
while simultaneously increasing demand and performance expectations. The study’s recommendations 
included:

1.  Development and use of an integrated supply chain model that supports a systematic understanding 

of how decisions could affect the supply chain as a whole. 

2. 

Integrated governance for transportation infrastructure supporting the North. 

3. 

Integrated planning and strategic investment strategy for northern transportation infrastructure. 

The study analyzed the engineering vulnerability of the Port of Churchill, the Thompson Freight Services 
Hub, and the Rankin Inlet Airport to current and future conditions via the Public Infrastructure Engineering 
Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC) protocol. The assessment determined that none of the assets are at high 
risk of impact, although all three had numerous medium risks. It was recommended that medium risks 
be closely monitored and that most of these risks would affect operations, while very few would affect 
infrastructure. While some risks may be managed by increasing materials, labour, and costs, others cannot 
be controlled and in these cases, preparedness for interruptions and delays and regular maintenance of 
infrastructure were recommended.

However, while individual transportation facilities themselves may be relatively robust, the overall system 
may be vulnerable. The infrastructure – built with reference to historic levels of demand and climate trends 
– has been expanded on an ad hoc basis and focused on local needs, often without consideration for the 
impacts on the broader system and the communities it supports. 

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

…

133
133

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
