A changing climate also affects the mobility of local populations in Nunavik. In winter, frozen lakes 
and streams offer various possibilities for travel by all-terrain vehicle, snowmobile and dog sled. As 
the frost period shortens, these possibilities are reduced (Tremblay et al., 2006; Nickels et al., 2005; 
Bernier et al., 2014). Changes in ice conditions and the shortening of the period when ice is present 
complicate access to natural resources and to subsistence activities (Clerc et al., 2011; Tremblay 
et al., 2006). Access to hunting, gathering, and fishing territory is essential to northern communities, 
and their local economy. Alternative trails can be used, but this change in traditional land reduces 
possibilities to exploit quality nutritional resources (Barrett, 2013). Moreover, local know-how and 
experience no longer allow snow and ice conditions to be predicted as reliably to plan and organize 
travel (Nickels et al., 2005; Samson et al., 2013). These consequences are likely to affect the cultural 
identity and health of northern populations, in addition to their economic development.

4.1.3 EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS AND ROAD TRANSPORT

Extreme weather events will affect road transportation in all regions. Events such as heavy 
precipitation, storms and temperature variations (e.g., freeze-thaw cycles) cause accelerated 
wear of road infrastructure (Auld and MacIver, 2005; Case, 2008; Larrivée, 2010). Moreover, when 
infrastructure nears the end of its useful life it becomes more vulnerable to extreme weather events 
(Ouranos, 2015). This could increase road maintenance requirements. The integrity and performance 
of culverts and bridges may also be affected. 

In Nunavik, an increase in the occurrence of extreme weather events will have an impact on 
transportation. Some events (e.g., blizzards, wind, heavy snow) reduce visibility, affecting driving conditions 
and the safety of travel on land, causing delays and isolating communities from essential services.

Extreme weather events can also isolate communities, particularly those that depend on a single mode 
of transportation. The absence of alternative transportation services contributes to the vulnerability 
of populations in these regions. For example, the strong waves and storm surges produced by strong 
winds that hit the shores of the Lower Saint-Lawrence, Gaspé, Magdalen Islands and the North Shore on 
December 5th and 6th, 2010 generated tides 5.54 meters above chart datum in Rimouski, an exceptional 
height (Quintin et al., 2013). The storm flooded several roads, including Routes 132, 199, 299, 198, rendering 
them impassable to traffic.  The assault of the waves and strong rains damaged roadways, certain 
retaining walls, and the area surrounding walls and culverts (see Figure 11). On the basis of replacement 
costs per kilometer and taking into account the existing geographical situation and means of coastal 
protection (Bernatchez et al., 2015), damage was estimated at several million dollars and several 
hundred people had to be evacuated (St-Amour, 2011). This winter storm demonstrates the effects that a 
combination of factors, such as a reduction in ice cover, a relative rise in sea level, and wind direction and 
storms, can have on natural and built environments.

Figure 11: Major deterioration of the Route 132 roadway in the Gaspé Peninsula, in December, 2010. 
(Source: Ministère des Transports, de la Mobilité durable et de l’Électrification des transports du Québec) 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

201
201

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
