6.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

While air operators in Ontario are already applying some adaptive practices, others could be applied 
under future conditions. For example, remote airports in Northern Ontario have long used portable 
forced air heaters to combat ice build-up on aircraft (Transport Canada, 2004). To cope with a 
projected increase in extreme winter weather and freezing rain events, operators could also adopt 
changes to engine and wing de-icing procedures in future. This could include a greater use of glycol-
based de-icing and anti-icing agents (Transportation Research Board, 2011).  

Increasing average temperatures over the long term may also offer benefits to Ontario operators, 
such as by reducing de-icing requirements in southern locations (Andrey and Mills, 2003). As 
temperatures increase, however, airports may use more heat-resistant pavement materials for 
runway construction (similar to asphalt roads) (Andrey and Mills, 2003). Over the longer term, future 
temperatures may need to be considered when determining runway length requirements. 

To enhance the braking and handling ability of aircraft on wet surfaces during periods of heavy 
precipitation, Ottawa International Airport grooved one of its runways in the summer of 2013. 
Grooving minimizes the potential for hydroplaning when landing, and construction is relatively non-
disruptive. (The runway remained in use during the day while construction was completed over ten 
nights).  After a year of operating on this new surface, pilots reported improved control.  The airport 
then moved forward with plans to groove its longest runway in the summer of 2015 (Schwanz, 2014).  

Runways experiencing issues associated with permafrost thaw are common in Northern Canada 
(Transportation Association of Canada, 2010) (see Chapter 3), although these issues were not 
identified in literature specific to Ontario.  Should permafrost issues arise in future, relevant adaptations 
include relocating damaged or unusable infrastructure or reconstruction with geosynthetic barriers to 
enhance stability (Savonis et al., 2008; Transportation Association of Canada, 2010). Thermosyphons – 
mechanical systems designed to transfer heat from the ground away from infrastructure – also reduce 
the impacts of thawing permafrost on runways, although the installation costs may be prohibitive for 
small airports (Transportation Association of Canada, 2010). 

Table 5 provides an overview of the impacts and adaptations identified in this section.

Table 5: Climate risk factors discussed in relation to their impacts on air transportation. 

Climate /environmental 

risk factors:

Impacts and benefits

Adaptation actions

Warmer air temperature 
(summer and winter; more 

variability)

-  More runway length and fuel 

required due to decreased air 
density

-  Delays due to extreme cold and 

heat (impacts to engines)

-  Runway buckling

Precipitation (changing 

seasonal patterns, 

increasing intensity and 

extremes)

-  Service disruptions and delays; 
reduced on-time performance

-  Consideration of future temperature 

when determining runway length 
requirements

-  Change to engine and wing de-

icing procedures (reduced de-icing) 

-  Heat-resistant pavement material 

selection 

- Runway grooving to enhance 
aircraft braking and handling; 
reduces risk of hydroplaning 

Changing patterns of lake 

-  Increased risk of runway flooding in 

and sea ice

vulnerable locations 

-  Improvements in stormwater 

management infrastructure

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

167
167

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
