5.2 RAIL ADAPTATIONS

A common adaptation to extreme rain events in the Prairies is to enhance culvert capacities. For 
example, the Canadian National Railway (CN) is planning to install main-line culverts with a capacity 
for 1-in-100 year rain events and enhance the capacity for branch lines culverts to a 1-in-50 year 
threshold. Some municipalities promote a 1-in-500 year threshold when negotiating culvert upgrades 
with railways (Mario Ruel, Canadian National Railway, personal communication, 2015). Geotechnical 
engineers indicate that while decisions are made on a case-by-case basis using the project 
engineer’s best professional judgment, a shift in perspectives is underway. While 1-in-100 year events 
have been the standard in the past, 1-in-200 year criteria are becoming a more common benchmark 
(Tom Edwards, Canadian National Railway, personal communication, 2015).

In some parts of the Prairies, rail and rail bridges are also being raised to higher grades in response 
to seasonal flood risks (Manitoba East Side Road Authority Representatives and Manitoba Floodway 
Representatives, personal communication, 2015). For example, along Winnipeg’s Red River Floodway, 
rail (and road) bridges have been raised to a 1-in-700 year event threshold (see Case Study 6).

In response to the increasing frequency of high-intensity wind events (both experienced and 
projected), wind sensors are being affixed to some rail bridges in the Prairies, particularly on the 
highest structures (Mario Ruel, Canadian National Railway, personal communication, 2015). With 
advance warning of high-intensity wind, train operators can delay passage over rail bridges, or adjust 
speeds accordingly. 

BNSF reports a greater use of snow fences on its network (Amiro et al., 2014). These assist in keeping 
tracks clear of snow drifts in the winter.

6
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 6: ROAD AND RAIL CONSIDERATIONS IN THE RED 
RIVER FLOODWAY EXPANSION PROJECT 

The Red River Floodway is designed to protect the City of Winnipeg, including its transportation 
infrastructure, from spring runoff flooding along the Red River, although it can be utilized during other 
times in response to extreme precipitation events in the watershed. Since 1968, it is estimated that the 
artificial floodway has prevented more than $40 billion (in 2011 dollars) in flood damage to Winnipeg. The 
structures and systems associated with the Floodway are collectively recognized as a National Historic Civil 
Engineering Site and considered one of the world’s 16 engineering marvels (Government of Manitoba, 
2011).

While the Floodway has operated well since its completion in 1968, recent severe flood events have 
caused planners to rethink the expected frequency of flood-disaster potential. The structure was designed 
to handle 60,000 cubic feet per second (cfs) of water, considered sufficient to protect Winnipeg from 
a 1-in-90 year event. Later upgrades brought the channel capacity to 90,000 cfs. A major flood in 1997 
reinforced concerns about the future frequency of extreme flooding, and planners began to consider that 
events formerly referred to as 1-in-200 year events may become 1-in-20 year events. In response, floodway 
capacity was further increased to 140,000 cfs to provide protection for a 1-in-700 year event, a capacity 
beyond the river’s largest flood on record (which occurred in 1826).

Expected shifts in climate and extreme weather were the main drivers behind the expansion of the Red 
River Floodway, but these changes were made for economic reasons as well. In the absence of road 
and rail bridge upgrades over the floodway channel, east-west road and rail movements and access to 
the Mid-Continent Corridor could be stopped or seriously curtailed during a flood event. This would have 
serious economic implications beyond Manitoba. A significant percentage of Alberta, Saskatchewan, and 
(to a lesser extent) Ontario trade destined for U.S. markets is routed through the I75/I29 portal.

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

…

129
129

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
