While reduced sea ice may result in greater marine activity over the long term, marine infrastructure 
and operations will remain vulnerable to decreasing sea ice and changes in sea level throughout the 
21st century. Despite rising sea levels globally, most of northern Canada is projected to experience a 
decline in relative sea level due to glacial isostatic adjustment (introduced in Section 4). As a result, 
some areas of northern Canada could face navigation issues such as reduced under-keel depths, as 
well as difficulties accessing coastal infrastructure due to lower water levels (Mudge et al., 2011). Trip 
cancellations and lower load capacities as a result of unsafe vessel keel depths affect the delivery of 
critical supplies from regional distribution centres to rural communities (White et al., 2007).

Exceptions to this trend include Tuktoyaktuk and Sachs Harbour (in the Northwest Territories), which 
will experience sea-level rise (James et al., 2014). The risks associated with higher sea levels include 
greater coastal erosion, more intense wave action/sea spray, increased exposure of dock decks, 
and higher waves (affecting structures) (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). 
Issues associated with wave erosion and storm surge will increase in these areas as well, as a result of 
decreased sea-ice cover (creating larger stretches of open water) and sea level rise (Case study 5).

Increased coastal erosion will necessitate more frequent and costly maintenance and replacement 
of shoreline and coastal infrastructure (Couture et al. 2015). Examples of additional risks from sea 
level rise include increased wave height (resulting in structural impacts) and increased corrosion of 
infrastructure designed to withstand specific sea level conditions (Mudge et al., 2011). Conversely, 
increased under-keel depths in these regions may present opportunities for greater vessel capacity. 

In short, the opportunities associated with opening transportation routes also come with challenges 
related to safety (i.e. greater risks associated with wind, wave, and ice action) and environmental 
protection (i.e. greater shoreline erosion).

7.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

Adaptation approaches for marine transportation can be categorized into practices for vessels and 
navigation, and those for coastal infrastructure. 

7.3.1 ADAPTATIONS FOR VESSELS AND NAVIGATION

Commercial shipping in the Arctic over the near term will be mainly limited to seasonal passages 
using vessels suitable for ice conditions that are variable and unpredictable from year to year (White 
et al., 2007; James et al., 2014; IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). To mitigate 
the risks posed by changing ice conditions, many companies have carried out winter-operation risk 
assessments and ship-specific winterization procedures (Patterson, 2012). In many cases, damage 
to vessels can be prevented by careful route planning and operational prudence (Deton’Cho-
Stantec, 2013). Vessels are often outfitted with additional navigation and communications equipment 
to monitor ice conditions; these include iceNav systems incorporating advanced marine radar, 
enhanced target detection radar, and satellite communication technologies for acquiring ice 
charts and electronic chart viewers (Patterson, 2012). Ships can also be retrofitted with ice-breaking 
equipment (Journeaux, Assoc., 2012). If sea ice has accumulated in a docking area, a tugboat or 
the ship can maneuver back and forth to break the ice (Journeaux, Assoc., 2012). However, the 
availability of tugs can be an issue. Risks to propellers and rudders in shallow waters (e.g., during 
community re-supply) can be mitigated by using larger and more durable cargo vessels, and 
offloading to smaller and lighter vessels along problematic stretches of coastline (a process known as 
“lightering”) (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

The Sea-ice Monitoring and Real-Time Information for Coastal Environments (SmartICE) system is an 
innovative example of an enabling technology that can be used to provide ships travelling through 
Arctic waters with accurate and timely information about ice conditions (Fournier and Caron-Vuotari, 
2013). Developed by the Nain Research Centre, SmartICE combines remote sensing and traditional 
Inuit knowledge to provide relevant and accessible information on sea-ice thickness, concentration, 

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

56
56

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
