…

This case study demonstrates how communities can successfully incorporate rigorous climate analysis 
into vulnerability assessments, shifting discussion from a general recognition of risks to the identification of 
explicit actions (Picketts, 2013). Achieving greater teamwork and the adoption of common goals within 
the municipal organization were also considered critical to sustaining the momentum this initiative has 
generated.1

Written with input from Dr. Ian Picketts (University of Northern British Columbia).

1 

 An academic journal article summarizing the transportation work in Prince George is in the final stages of review for inclu-
sion in a forthcoming issue of Regional Environmental Change.

 

5
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 5:  ACCOUNTING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS 
AT TRANSLINK

TransLink is metropolitan Vancouver’s regional transportation authority, with a system of assets and services 
that incorporates bus, commuter rail, cycling and walking paths, and roads. This network provides about 
1.2 million trips per day.  

The organization considers managing climate change risks important to service delivery and infrastructure 
maintenance/development, particularly given that it builds infrastructure to last 100 years. Projected 
population growth in the region is expected to compound these risks – Metro Vancouver is expected to grow 
by one million people over the next 30 years, placing greater demand on the region’s transportation system. 

TransLink began considering climate change impacts in 2010 and conducted a climate change 
vulnerability assessment of its assets in 2012 in support of its Asset Management Plan. Through this process, 
the organization identified the following key climate change risks to its services:

• 

Sea level rise, that could:  

 -

 -

 -

Flood assets now within “expanded” floodplains, 

Reduce clearance under bridges

Impair operations of the SeaBus (ferry) terminal.

• 

Increased precipitation that could cause temporary flooding of TransLink’s assets, such as bus loops, 
tunnels, transit stations and trolley electricity conversion (“rectifier”) stations.  

•  Warmer temperatures, and more frequent and severe heat waves, that could affect passenger health 

and comfort on parts of the fleet without air-conditioning.

TransLink has also ensured that its Finance department and accountants play a core role in its adaptation 
efforts. The Chief Financial Officer (CFO) is responsible for seeing that climate change risks are considered 
in TransLink’s decision-making process. TransLink considers this structure effective as it embeds climate 
change throughout the organization, with links to risk management, strategic sourcing, capital planning 
and review processes, and reporting.

Written by Kathy Palko, adapted from Chartered Professional Accountants Canada (2015) Adaptation 
Case Study #22

2 

 CPA (2015) Adaptation Case Study #2: TransLink Sector: Transportation. Retrieved from: https://www.cpacanada.ca/en/
business-and-accounting-resources/other-general-business-topics/sustainability/publications/translink-climate-change-
case-study-2

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

301
301

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
