1.0 INTRODUCTION

Urban transportation systems are vulnerable to both extreme weather events and the incremental 
impacts of a changing climate. Extreme weather disrupts and delays urban travel by washing out 
roadways and transit routes, and by damaging the electrical and communications systems upon 
which these modes rely. Increased temperatures cause pavement rutting, buckling of rail lines, and 
damage to infrastructure built on permafrost in Northern communities. These and other climate risks 
can affect the cost, efficiency, and safety of urban transportation in Canada.

In this chapter, urban transportation refers to all modes of transportation that carry people and 
goods within cities and, more broadly, metropolitan areas. This includes infrastructure and vehicles 
(automobiles, buses), rail transit (including metros, light rail transit [LRT], and commuter rail), and 
active modes, such as walking and cycling. Note that airports, regional and national rail systems, 
marine ports, and ferry services3 are discussed in regional chapters of this report.  

The focus of this chapter is on the vulnerability 
of urban transportation to the impacts of both 
gradual changes in climate and extreme 
weather events, taking into account the 
interactions between cities’ concentrated 
infrastructure, services, and populations. The 
chapter also explores current efforts Canadian 
municipalities are making, and those planned 
for the future, to increase transportation 
resiliency. While some of these adaptations can 
be costly, many can be classified as “no-regret” 
or “low-regret” actions – strategies which involve 
few additional costs, produce co-benefits, 
or prevent higher future costs. Integrating 
climate considerations into decision-making 
processes (i.e. mainstreaming), for example, 
in the development of Official Plans, financial 
management processes, and infrastructure 
investment decisions, makes it easier to identify 
this type of adaptation.

Statistics Canada has recently replaced the term 
“urban centre” with “population centre.”  There 
are three categories, including: 

• 

Small population centres (with populations 
between 1,000 and 29,000); 

•  Medium population centres (between 

30,000 and 99,000); and,

• 

Large population centres (populations 
exceeding 100,000) (Statistics Canada, 
2011a). 

This chapter primarily focuses on the last two 
categories, although “urban centres” and 
“population centres” are used interchangeably.

Recognizing that research examining climate impacts on urban transportation is limited in Canada, 
this chapter also draws upon relevant research from the United States, to supplement domestic 
content where appropriate.

1.1 TRENDS IN URBAN CANADA

Canada is growing increasingly urban. In the 2011 national census, 81 percent of Canadians 
indicated that they lived within medium or large population centres.  Population trends suggest that 
the nation’s largest urban areas – known as Census Metropolitan Areas (CMAs) – are growing rapidly, 
largely as a result of their ability to attract economic generators such as financial services, research 
and development agencies, and tourists, as well as newcomers to Canada (Filion and Bunting, 2010). 
Figure 1 presents the population growth in Canadian CMAs from 2006-2011.

3 

 Ferries provide important transit services only in a few urban centres in Canada (e.g., Halifax and Vancouver).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

267
267

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
