Extreme precipitation events have also affected roads and bridges.  For example, heavy rains and 
flash flooding in Pangnirtung, Nunavut washed out a major community bridge, stranded 200 residents, 
and blocked access to important municipal services (CBC News, 2008). Field investigation determined 
that heavy rains, warmer-than usual-temperatures, the presence of ice-rich materials, and frost 
cracking were the main contributing factors (Hsieh et al., 2011).

4.1.2 WINTER ROADS

Higher temperatures also have a negative impact on winter roads, which may be constructed 
overland, across lake and river ice, or (in a few cases) sea ice fastened to the shore. While operating 
windows have always varied by location and year, recent increases in surface air temperature and 
decreases in snow cover have reduced operating season length and maximum load capacity 
in many locations (Furgal and Prowse, 2008). This resulted in a costly adjustment in 2006, when 
approximately 1,200 loads had to be transported by air during the summer and fall following a 
shortened winter-road season on the Tibbitt to Contwoyto Winter Road (Andrey et al., 2014). 

Drainage issues can also intensify in periods of extreme weather, as water flow can reduce the 
integrity of winter roads, bridges at stream crossings, and culverts. For example, sections of the 
Mackenzie Valley and Tlicho Winter Roads have experienced flooding and closure in recent years, 
and the Tlicho Winter Road has experienced shut downs in sections due to flooding (Deton’Cho-
Stantec, 2013). 

4.2 FUTURE RISKS

4.2.1 ALL-WEATHER ROADS

A significant threat to the integrity of roads throughout most of the territories is the continued 
degradation of ice-rich permafrost. This is expected to continue to cause issues related to ground 
settlement and road-embankment subsidence – over the long term, permafrost degradation may 
contribute to the failure of highway side slopes, increased sloughing (referring to the movement of 
supporting material downhill and away from the roadway) (Alberta Transportation, 2003), as well as 
the sinking and cracking of road shoulders (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013).

More frequent extreme rainfall events would exacerbate the potential for flooding in some areas, 
leading to road and bridge washouts, reduced friction, and drainage issues related to inadequate 
culvert sizing. High-volume snowmelt may also result in flooding and increase pore water pressure 
and erosion, damaging permafrost (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). This 
will have implications for roads, bridges at stream crossings, and slope stability. Territorial governments 
are aware of these risks and have been taking steps to increase the structural integrity of the ground 
underlying transportation infrastructure (discussed further in Section 4.3). In addition, snowfall and 
winter storm events limit visibility for drivers, and may result in road closures.

4.2.2 WINTER ROADS

As the climate warms, winter roads in the Canadian North, both public and private, are at risk due 
to shortened operating seasons and increased costs. Thinner lake, river, and marine ice will have 
a negative impact on the seasonal duration and stability of winter roads (Bush, et al., 2014), while 
changing permafrost conditions could impact the viability and structural integrity of some routes 
(McGregor et al., 2008).

The trend towards shorter operational seasons is already evident. For example, the average opening 
date for light traffic on the Mackenzie River Ice Bridge Crossing has been delayed, on average, 
by more than 3 weeks since 1996 (Frugal and Prowse, 2008). In the future, some winter routes 
may become impractical, although timing and locations have yet to be determined. Alternative 
transportation routes or modes will need to be considered in advance of reaching such thresholds 
(Frugal and Prowse, 2008) (see Case study 1).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

42
42

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
