KEY FINDINGS:

•  Flooding associated with extreme precipitation events has been driving climate adaptation efforts 

for transportation in the Prairies, and increasing frequency and intensity of such events is a key 
future concern.  Flood-control strategies (e.g., expanded and enhanced culvert programs to 
reduce washouts, impermeable runway treatments) represent key adaptations for rail operations, 
airports (particularly in the northern Prairies), and roadways in the region to date.

• 

The high variability inherent in the climate of the Prairies means that adaptation in the 
transportation sector is likely to involve both reactive and proactive measures.  Given climate 
uncertainties and cost challenges in the transportation sector, decision-makers in the Prairies tend 
to view operational adaptations on a case-by-case basis. The importance of long-term planning 
for infrastructure (including zoning requirements), however, is illustrated by damage sustained in 
recent flood events in southern Alberta and Manitoba. 

•  Efforts are underway to address the vulnerability of winter roads to increasing temperatures in the 
Prairies.  While routing changes and technical adaptations have contributed to longer operating 
seasons in recent years, further projected warming may require more significant adaptations (i.e. 
the construction of all-weather roads).

• 

Thawing of permafrost in the Hudson Bay Lowlands will continue to challenge the operational 
viability of rail in the region. Since the track was laid in the 1930s, geotechnical engineers have 
made costly efforts to stabilize the rail bed.   Over the long term, thawing permafrost is likely 
to increase stabilization challenges, although disappearing permafrost could also improve the 
viability of some techniques. 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 

A changing climate and extreme weather present both challenges and opportunities for Canada’s 
Prairies, including the region’s extensive transportation infrastructure and operations. One objective 
of this chapter is to identify what is known about the nature of climate impacts (both positive 
and negative) occurring now and in the future in Canada’s three Prairie provinces – Manitoba, 
Saskatchewan, and Alberta. The chapter also aims to identify and describe efforts made by 
governments and transportation operators to adapt practices and improve infrastructure to enhance 
the resilience of the region’s transportation network.

While referred to as “the Prairies” for simplicity in this chapter, the three provinces are quite distinct. 
The following section reviews some of the key geographic and economic characteristics of Alberta, 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba. More specific regional context is provided, where appropriate, 
throughout the chapter. Subsequent sections focus on climate impacts and associated adaptation 
practices for each major mode of transportation – roads, rail, aviation, and marine based on 
available information and practitioner experiences.  

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

107
107

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
