of position, causing it to crash into and damage a private floating dock (CBC News, 2013). However, 
to date damage to physical infrastructure systems arising from weather related events has been 
relatively rare.

7.2 FUTURE CLIMATE RISKS

While wind is a key parameter in climate change forecast work, predicting the nature and intensity 
of short duration wind events is technically difficult and models are not good at simulating surface 
winds (Engineers Canada, 2008; Griffin et al., 2010). Specific studies aimed at assessing the impact of 
changes in high wind intensity and frequency on marine sector operations have not been identified. 
Existing practices that utilize a sophisticated network of weather monitoring and forecasting facilities 
may be sufficient to address future risks. Nonetheless, a changing climate may result in an increase in 
cancellations and delays, with economic implications. This is an area for further study.

Preliminary analysis (see Section 2.2) indicates a likely increase in the frequency of atmospheric river 
events by 2041-2070, with the largest increases on the coast.  The average number of atmospheric 
river days per year is projected to approximately double at most locations, including the interior. 
Specific marine sector studies or activities to assess the impact of changing precipitation intensity and 
frequency on marine sector operations in British Columbia were not identified.

Studies are underway to examine flooding scenarios based on spring snow melt, coastal storm surge, 
king tides and sea level rise flooding for areas around the Fraser River, where a number of port facilities 
are located.  These studies are being developed under a Lower Mainland Flood Management 
Strategy that involves a number of entities including municipal and provincial governments, the 
Fraser Basin Council and others such as Port Metro Vancouver (Kerr Wood Leidal, 2015). As part of this 
Strategy, the Fraser Basin Council is proposing to examine the vulnerability of key infrastructure, such 
as ports, rail, airports, highways, emergency or major road networks, and BC Hydro substations, to 
flooding.

Previously, the province completed studies assessing the impact of flooding from sea level rise and 
climate change on the Fraser River (Fraser Basin Council, 2014), and also published guidelines for 
the management of coastal flood hazard land use and sea dykes (Ausen Sandwell, 2011). As well, 
the British Columbia Professional Engineers and Geoscientists have published professional practice 
guidelines for flood assessments in a changing climate (Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of British Columbia, 2012). The Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations 
provides coastal flood hazard maps that indicate the impact of sea level rise for the entire provincial 
coastline for the year 2100 (Government of British Columbia, 2016b). The maps clearly indicate that 
by 2100, the region around Port of Vancouver will be a high flood hazard area, presenting risks to port 
infrastructure facilities that may disrupt the flow of goods and services into and out of the southern 
Pacific Gateway Corridor.

7.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

The extensive network of weather monitoring stations and forecasting services for the marine sector 
in British Columbia represents a primary response to reducing climate risks.  The sector adjusts 
practices to accommodate inclement weather and may benefit from adjusting future practices 
to accommodate weather changes. The longer term risks to coastal infrastructure including ports, 
associated with sea-level rise are recognized by the provincial government. It has implemented a 
concrete plan of action that includes monitoring, and specific requirements for maintaining and 
upgrading sea dykes.

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

97
97

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
