…

The Port is also undertaking long-term planning for its infrastructure as part of a port modernization plan. A 
preliminary engineering study in support of these efforts explicitly accounted for future sea level rise, based 
on high-resolution models for the Upper Bay of Fundy (Dupont et al., 2005). 

Written with input from Chris Hall (Port Saint John) with additional information provided by Tyler O’Rourke 
(Port Saint John). 

7.0 AIR TRANSPORTATION

7.1 PAST IMPACTS AND FUTURE RISKS

Practitioners suggest that on the whole, airports in the Atlantic region are well-equipped to function 
during difficult weather conditions. However, extreme weather events and storms, including heavy 
rain, snowfall, and strong winds, can result in flight delays and cancellations, associated economic 
losses, and passenger inconvenience. Flight delays are especially problematic for Newfoundland 
(CBC News, 2015b, 2015c), which relies on aviation (as well marine transportation) for connectivity. 

Airports aim to keep facilities open in all weather conditions, especially for medical emergency 
services that require the use of runways and airport facilities. The challenge for airports is to provide 
efficiency of service while ensuring safe operations during extreme weather conditions. Atlantic 
airports are particularly concerned with rising operating costs accompanying more variable 
and severe weather conditions (Helen MacInnis, J.A. Douglas McCurdy Sydney Airport, personal 
communication, 2015; Andrew Isbill, Fredericton Airport Authority, personal communication, 2015). 

PRECIPITATION AND STORMS

Precipitation, including rain, snow, and freezing rain on runways can compromise the friction and 
visibility necessary for planes to take off and land. Operational costs can also rise significantly in 
response to freezing rain events and extreme snowfall (Helen MacInnis, J.A. Douglas McCurdy Sydney 
Airport, personal communication, 2015). 

Increasingly frequent storm events (and associated precipitation and flooding) in the 21st century 
could lead to further losses in revenue due to operational disruptions. These types of delays could also 
increase operating costs, associated with requirements for more aircraft, facility maintenance and the 
improvement of supporting infrastructure, such as access roads and drainage facilities (Transportation 
Research Board, 2008). 

While storm surges, erosion and sea-level rise pose risks to regional coastal infrastructure, most airports 
in Atlantic Canada are built on relatively high ground, which reduces vulnerability to coastal flooding. 

Drainage systems are usually effective in reducing flood risks to runways. However, extreme 
precipitation events have, in some instances, flooded airport service/access roads and parking lots in 
Atlantic Canada. In some cases, these floods have delayed and cancelled flights, as was the case at 
Halifax Stanfield International Airport during a strong nor’easter in December 2014 (CBC News, 2014c). 

Increased frequency of lightning storms and hurricanes are also a concern for some airports in Atlantic 
Canada, given their potential to disrupt operations and pose safety risks (for instance, by reducing 
visibility during landing and take-off). While data to support the increasing frequency of these storms are 
not captured in the historical record, Sydney airport has documented an increase in frequency over the 
short term (Helen MacInnis, J.A. Douglas McCurdy Sydney Airport, personal communication, 2015). 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

246
246

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
