KEY FINDINGS 

• 

The climate risks of greatest concern to transportation operators, provincial governments, and 
municipalities in Atlantic Canada are extreme weather events and storm surges. Hurricanes, high 
winds, heavy precipitation, and extreme snowfall have resulted in costly damage and shipping 
disruptions for marine ports, delayed flights and ferry services and washed-out roads and railways. 
As storm frequency and intensity increases, these impacts will likely continue to be severe. 

•  While most actions to enhance the climate resilience of transportation systems have been taken 
in response to past impacts from extreme weather, future climate risks (such as sea level rise) are 
increasingly spurring planning and investments. Coordinated partnerships and initiatives suggest 
Atlantic provinces are actively engaged in adaptation planning. Risk assessments and regional 
cost-benefit analyses, which include transportation systems within their scope, will help inform 
future decision-making.

• 

Transportation practitioners are accounting for projected climate changes in the planning and 
operation of some roads, bridges, railways, and marine ports in Atlantic Canada, but actions 
related to airports are less well-documented. While this is reflective of the dominance of road and 
marine transportation in the region, significant research gaps exist regarding adaptation strategies 
for all modes. 

•  A number of strategies are being specifically used to enhance the resilience of transportation 
infrastructure to flood risks. These include constructing physical barriers (seawalls, breakwaters, 
and dykes), improving stormwater management (updating design flows, enlarging culverts) and 
relocating and/or elevating infrastructure.

•  Regionally-focused weather- and climate-monitoring technologies are helping transportation 

operators identify and adapt to climate risks in Atlantic Canada. Examples include SmartAtlantic 
monitoring buoys to inform extreme-weather preparedness and better understand changes in 
ocean climate, and the Coastal Impact Visualization Environment (CLIVE) tool, which allows 
users to visualize changing coastlines in Prince Edward Island. These technologies assist with risk 
assessment and help practitioners communicate the magnitude of short- and long-term impacts 
to decision-makers.

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

220
220

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
