3.3 UNCERTAINTY CONCERNING WINDS

Average observed wind speeds for the great majority of weather stations varies only slightly from 
one season to another. With the exception of a few stations that show minor increases, most stations 
in Québec show downward trends in average wind speed throughout the year over the 1953 to 
2006 period. 

Projections of future winds remain uncertain since very few studies exist on this subject. Additional 
analyses based on a greater number of climate simulations at finer resolutions would be required.

3.4 FLUCTUATING AVERAGE RIVER FLOWS 

Average river flows are expected to increase in winter throughout Québec by 2041-2070. Conversely, 
for the same time period in the south of Québec, decreases in average flows are likely to occur in the 
summer, spring and fall seasons although consensus between model outputs is not as high. Figure 8 
shows expected changes in spring freshet, the spring thaw resulting from snow and ice melt in rivers. 
More information on future changes to watersheds in southern Québec can be found in the “Atlas 
hydroclimatique du Québec méridional” (Centre d’expertise hydrique du Québec, 2015).

Figure 8: The hydrological indicator Q14max20p provides an indication of the volume of spring freshet 
for the 20-year return period. (Source: Centre d’expertise hydrique du Québec)

3.5 RELATIVE SEA LEVEL 

Changes to relative sea level vary at regional scales because of several factors including marine 
currents, atmospheric circulation, seawater density (itself affected by surface temperatures, 
freshwater supply through waterways or glacier melt), the proximity to ice sheets and glaciers 
(gravitational effects) and other geophysical phenomena (rotational effects). Some of these 
phenomena occur in combination and cancel each other out or fluctuate in time over inter-annual 
or decadal scales, making it difficult to detect significant trends. As a result, rising relative sea levels 
will affect the marine estuary and Gulf of the St. Lawrence. In the Hudson Bay, a drop in relative sea 
level is expected due to postglacial isostatic adjustment in this area diminishing the effect of sea level 
rise.  More information on this can be found in Chapters 3 and 8.

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

196
196

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
