Figure 16: Sandspit runway from December 
2011. The end of the runway was subject to 
severe wave overtopping during a 
significant storm event, with a sea surge 
approximately 1 metre above runway 
elevation.  A 250 m section of damaged 
riprap needed to be re-constructed. 

SANDSPIT AIRPORT

Transportation infrastructure and operations 
at Sandspit Airport, Haida Gwaii, are 
susceptible to winter storms and associated 
storm surges with potential increases and 
attendant issues as sea levels rise over time.  
The runway is located across the ‘spit’ and 
heavy and frequent winter storms have 
caused severe wave damage to riprap 
revetment, which is a sloping structure made 
of rocks or other material, protecting the 
shore. Overtopping of the revetment has 
become more frequent in recent years, with 
damage and repairs occurring on an annual 
basis, including marine debris and driftwood 
on the runway and damage to airfield lights 
and pavement (Figure 16). The airport is also 
located within the Pacific Flyway, a route 
for migratory birds. Airport operators have 
observed changes over the last decade in 
migratory and resident birds that also affect 
management of the airport.  

In light of these changes, the airport needs 
to continuously adapt its operations to 
ensure continued safety. The vulnerability of 
Sandspit Airport may need to be further assessed, along with new management approaches 
and practices, as the frequency and magnitude of storm surge events will increase as a result of 
sea level rise.

Written with input from Transport Canada staff, Pacific Region Office.

6.2 FUTURE CLIMATE RISKS

While visibility is an ongoing concern for British Columbia airports, it is presently unclear how climate 
change will affect the situation. The vulnerability assessments of highways by the British Columbia 
Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure noted that current climate models cannot project 
changes in visibility conditions in the complex landscape of the British Columbia Interior Mountains. 
This issue has been identified by the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium as a topic for further work, 
specifically to address transportation risks in the British Columbia interior.

Warmer and wetter winters in future might suggest a decline in snow-related air travel delays: 
however, projections of changes in the frequency and intensity of snowfall events over a shorter 
winter season remain uncertain. This represents another area where additional modeling work to 
assess the nature, form, frequency and intensity of future snowfall events for major British Columbia 
airports would be valuable.

Sea-level rise, and associated increases in storm-surge flooding, is a threat to operations at both 
Vancouver International Airport and Sandspit Airport (plus river flooding at Vancouver International 
Airport).  As part of the Vancouver International Airport Authority’s work to support the Airport 
Master Plan 2057, the Airport Authority is assessing climate change impacts on airport operations. 
The objective of this work will be to review and gain a better understanding of anticipated climate 

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

95
95

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
