Transportation plays a critical role in the movement of goods and people in Canada, supporting 

all sectors of the economy and Canadians’ quality of life. The effects of a changing climate and 

extreme weather present both risks and opportunities to transportation infrastructure and operations. How 
Canadians adapt to these changes will be important to ensure the continued prosperity of our nation.   

This Synthesis summarizes findings from the seven core chapters of the report Climate Risks and 
Adaptation Practices for the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016, and presents examples of 
regional climate impacts, specific modal impacts (e.g., road, rail, marine, air and urban systems), 
and adaptation approaches being undertaken across Canada. (References for the examples 
presented in this chapter appear throughout the report.)

The following present high-level conclusions from the report:

• 

Transportation infrastructure, essential to Canada’s domestic and international trade, is 
vulnerable to damage and disruptions from a changing climate and extreme weather, and 
this can pose risks to other sectors of the economy. Studies are underway to better understand 
these vulnerabilities, and adaptive practices are being undertaken to reduce future impacts. 
Regional chapters provide further details on initiatives related to the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence 
Seaway, the Chignecto Isthmus (highway and rail), Port Metro Vancouver, Port Saint John, and 
other trade infrastructure. 

•  Climate and weather-related delays and disruptions to passenger travel could become more 

frequent in future. These events can temporarily isolate remote communities in northern regions, 
which may rely on a single highway or airport for connectivity, and lead to costly damages 
and travel disruptions for large urban areas. Redundancies in transportation systems (allowing 
multiple methods of travel) are one method to reduce these impacts. 

•  Northern transportation systems are experiencing some of the greatest impacts from warming, 

and temperatures will continue to increase at a faster rate than any other region in Canada.  
Degrading (thawing) permafrost has caused damage to roads, railways, and airport taxiways 
and runways, and will continue to pose risks to transportation safety, efficiency, and maintenance 
budgets in the North. The operating windows and capacities of some winter (ice) roads have also 
shortened in recent years, resulting in the need for alternative methods of shipping.  

•  A changing climate is expected to result in some opportunities for Canadian transportation. 

Potential benefits include longer marine navigation and construction seasons, reduced winter 
maintenance, greater operating efficiency for rail, and improved fuel efficiency for all modes.  
Melting sea ice is also slowly opening up arctic waters to new navigation routes, however, 
the increased mobility of summer sea ice, as well as increased coastal erosion and storm 
surge flooding, present ongoing difficulties for shipping, exploration, and associated coastal 
infrastructure.

•  Reactive approaches to managing climate risks (e.g., responding to past impacts or events), 
remain common in Canada’s transportation sector. At the same time, examples can be found 
in all regions, and for all transportation modes, of actions being taken in anticipation of future 
climate conditions. Many owners and operators, both public and private, have adapted 
their operations based on investigations and lessons learned from past weather-related 
events. Transportation decision-makers are also more frequently engaging in pro-active planning.

• 

Transportation decision-makers are increasingly adopting a risk management approach to 
reduce climate risks to their infrastructure and operations. A variety of specific practices are 
being used to enhance climate resilience of transportation systems, including integration 
of climate considerations into organizational planning, policy and design changes, risk 
and vulnerability assessments, structural and physical adaptations, smart technologies and 
operational and maintenance changes. 

 
CHAPTER 2: SYNTHESIS 

13
13

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
