shipping (particularly near Newfoundland). Currently, large icebergs are tracked using satellite and 
aerial surveys to limit potential complications (National Snow and Ice Data Centre, 2016). 

Decreasing sea ice also creates larger expanses and longer durations of open water, which worsens 
the impacts of storm and wind events, disrupts shipping routes, and increases the difficulty of 
maneuvering through narrow channels (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental Consulting, 2012). 
Changing ice conditions can also increase the vulnerability of northern communities: recent ice 
conditions in the Canadian Arctic have held up the annual resupply of fuel and goods in some 
communities in Nunavut, for example (CBC News, 2015a).

For port operations, storm surge and extreme rain events can lead to flash floods, disrupt shipping and 
present risks to human safety. For example, storm surges have flooded port facilities in Tuktoyaktuk, 
temporarily suspending operations (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). Strong winds associated with storms 
can also cause navigational challenges, especially in narrow channels and dockings, due to ice 
jams, ice choke points (i.e. a point of congestion created by ice), and wave action (IMG-Golder 
Environmental Consulting, 2012).  

For river transportation, lower water levels have required the use of lighter barges or smaller loads 
to maintain safety standards, in some cases disrupting operations (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). For 
example, low water levels in the Mackenzie River have delayed the shipment of goods to northern 
communities in recent years, leaving residents without access to necessary goods and materials until 
shipments could be secured through more costly alternatives (such as air or road transport) (CBC 
News, 2015b and 2015c). Permafrost degradation along river banks and sides of valleys has also 
caused slumping and route obstructions in some locations, forcing river transporters to adjust their 
routes (Deton’Cho-Stantec, 2013). 

Figure 14: Northwest Passage routes and ice 
choke points (Mudge et al., 2011). The deepest 
route is presented in red, shallow in green, 
and the least-travelled in yellow. In addition, 
navigation choke points are shown in blue.  
POWS is Prince of Wales Strait. (Source: ASL 
Environmental Sciences Inc.) 

7.2 FUTURE RISKS AND OPPORTUNITIES

The Northwest Passage is not expected to 
become a viable route in the near future due 
to “seasonality, ice conditions, a complex 
archipelago, draft restrictions, chokepoints, 
lack of adequate charts, insurance limitations, 
and other costs” (IMG-Golder Environmental 
Consulting, 2012) (see Case Studies 4 
and 5). Throughout the northern region, 
destination shipping is anticipated to increase 
to accommodate expanding resource 
development, growing communities, and 
increasing tourism. However, operational costs 
will remain high due to the presence of ice and 
associated expenses (Ellis and Brigham, 2009). 

Over the longer-term, climate projections 
forecast that by midcentury, changing sea 
ice conditions will enable new routes for ice-
strengthened ships over the North Pole and 
new routes through the Northwest Passage 
(Smith and Stephenson, 2013). If and when the 
Northwest Passage becomes a viable shipping 
route, services such as re-fueling stations, tugs, 
and emergency repair will need to be carefully 
considered. Figure 14 identifies various routes 
through the Northwest Passage. 

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

54
54

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
