Following a study by INRS (Mailhot et al., 2014), as of 2015 the MTMDET has applied a new loading 
factor of 18 or 20% for watershed flows of 25 km2, depending on the region of Quebec, to account for 
climate change (MTMDET 2015).  This adjustment factor was 10% until recently. The use of the GéoRISC 
portal also contributed to dam management (see Case Study 2). 

On a more local level, several studies (see summary in Savard et al., 2008) led jointly by the Ministère 
de la Sécurité publique, the Université du Québec à Rimouski, Ouranos and the City of SeptÎles, 
contributed to a better understanding of the causes and factors associated with coastal erosion. 
The municipality of Sept-Îles then zoned its territory to better control usage along the shoreline and 
performed a cost-benefit analysis of various solutions for structures already threatened by the loss 
of coastal terrain. The City of Sept-Îles, where roads are seriously affected by bank erosion, has 
implemented a sand refill strategy for those beaches that are most threatened by erosion. It has also 
prohibited riprap in several areas. 

Although it is included on a list of remedial works to prevent road erosion, riprap may be less 
advantageous from an economic and structural perspective than alternative protection options 
depending on the nature of the coast (Bernatchez and Fraser, 2012). Similarly, because sand refill, 
riprap and oversizing alone cannot ensure the resilience of coastal areas to heightened erosion and 
an increased frequency, duration and intensity of extreme weather events, the City of Sept-Îles is 
working with the SeptRivières RMC and the Quebec government to come up with a plan for coastal 
procedures (Natural Resources Canada, 2015). This plan will help determine the sectors most at risk 
and consider various scenarios for transferring equipment and infrastructure. 

The procedural plan for emergency management in the Magdalen Islands identifies buildings and 
roads at risk of erosion. It presents scenarios for interventions as well as transferring infrastructure and 
equipment, and identifies potential partners, including the MTMDET. The plan also highlights municipal 
willingness to integrate an “appropriate city regulation” into the city plan (Municipality of the 
Magdalen Islands, 2010).

With respect to fires and their impact on roads, a study on lightning was conducted in Quebec by 
the Canadian Forest Service (Morrissette, 2009). It made it possible to localize events and determined 
that lightning density is higher in the southern and western regions of the province. In 2005, a drought 
resulted in numerous forest fires, forcing the emergency evacuation of nearly 1,000 residents in the 
City of Chibougamau  (Gouvernement du Québec, 2005). The MTMDET collaborated with the Société 
de protection des forêts contre le feu and municipalities in central Quebec to improve knowledge 
regarding climate hazards, including forest fires, and associated transportation vulnerabilities; to 
develop decision-making tools; and, to prepare land-use plans aimed at ensuring the sustainability of 
transportation infrastructure and services.

6.0 CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH NEEDS

Transportation networks play a critical role in supporting economic competitiveness and quality of life. 
However, the high level of interdependence among systems renders the challenges associated with 
climate change more complex (Ouranos, 2015). 

Climate change will modify the natural environment in all areas of Quebec. Most of Quebec’s coastal 
areas will experience an increase in erosion, in addition to flooding in areas that were minimally 
affected until now. 

In Nunavik, thawing permafrost contributes to the collapse and cracking of roads and airport 
infrastructure, which are essential to serving the communities (Transport Canada, 2015). Maintenance 
techniques and rehabilitation, as well as the frequency of interventions, must be modified resulting 
in significant additional costs and challenges for planning. In this region of Quebec, changes in ice 
cover and changes in storm regimes also significantly affect winter mobility.  Management of runoff 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

209
209

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
