2.2 MARINE TRANSPORTATION 

Marine transportation is closely tied to a number of key sectors of the Quebec economy, and plays a 
major role in the movement of goods along the St. Lawrence corridor. Marine transportation activity, 
including shipping, port and cruise tourism services, has been increasing in Quebec since 2000. In 
2011, these activities represented sales of more than $2.3 billion. 

Ports along the St. Lawrence primarily move mineral ore, forestry products, agricultural and food 
products, manufactured goods, fuel and chemical products, and machinery (St. Lawrence Economic 
Development Council, 2015), in addition to supplying industries and communities (see Figure 2). 

Nunavik, the coastal communities in the Eeyou-Istchee James Bay region and several municipalities 
along the North Shore are also equipped with marine infrastructure consisting of breakwaters, access 
ramps, beacons, or floating pontoons that serve the local population. In most cases, this infrastructure 
is the main supply link for remote communities. Some larger marine infrastructure serves industrial 
activity in these same regions. For example, a private deep-water wharf at Baie Déception in Nunavik 
serves a mining operation, and other private industrial dock projects could be developed in the 
region with increased mining activity.

The main commercial ports in Quebec include the ports under the jurisdiction of Canadian port 
authorities in Montréal, Trois-Rivières, Québec City, Saguenay and Sept-Îles. Other ports and marine 
infrastructure play an important role in supporting recreational tourism activities and other local needs.

The port network in Quebec handled 130.4 million tonnes of goods in 2011, three quarters which 
were international goods (Statistics Canada, 2011). The Port of Montréal is the largest container port 
in eastern Canada (Port of Montreal, 2015), receiving more than one million 20-foot equivalent unit 
containers annually. Playing a pivotal role in the transportation of goods, it is directly connected to rail 
and road networks. Each week 80 trains pass through the port, with 5,000 trucks arriving and leaving 
each day (Port of Montreal, 2015). The ports of Sept-Îles-Pointe-Noire, Port-Cartier, Baie-Comeau and 
HavreSaintPierre on the North Shore are among the ten largest ports in Quebec in terms of tonnage 
of goods handled (Ministère de l’Énergie et des Ressources Naturelles, 2011). The deep water port in 
Québec City that specializes in transshipment serves as a true intermodal hub for trade in the Great 
Lakes – St. Lawrence River corridor. The port in Sept-Îles is the third largest port in Canada in terms of 
bulk tonnage handled. 

Ferries managed by the Société des traversiers du Québec are linked to the land transportation 
system to enhance people’s mobility. In some urban areas, connections to public transportation 
networks also facilitate intra-regional and inter-regional travel. Ferry activity, however, is subject to 
economic fluctuations (ROCHE-Deluc, 2010). Ferries are also exposed to weather conditions and the 
impact of climate change. On the St. Lawrence, 18 ferries operate year-round and serve more than 
five million passengers and more than two million vehicles (Société des traversiers du Québec, 2014). 

2.3 RAIL TRANSPORTATION 

The Quebec rail network mainly follows the St. Lawrence valley and extends to the north of the 
province toward regions of Abitibi-Témiscamingue, Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean and Chibougamau, the 
North Shore, and Labrador (see Figure 2). Among other services, it transports intermodal containers 
for forestry products, mining products and aluminum. A large number of rail cars run through the 
Montréal and Québec City regions on their way to other Canadian provinces and the United States 
(Ministère des Transports du Québec, 2008).

Several rail freight service companies serve Quebec. The largest are Canadian National (CN), 
Canadian Pacific (CP) and CSX Transportation, which together make up close to 58% of the current 
network in Quebec. A few manufacturing or resource extraction companies, such as Arcelor Mittal or 
Rio Tinto Alcan, also operate some of the province’s railway lines. With a few exceptions, railways with 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

190
190

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
