4.4 ADAPTATIONS FOR TRUCKING OPERATORS

Trucking firms in the Prairies are adapting operations in a number of ways. For instance, truckers are 
adapting to more frequent high winds by choosing single trailer loads rather than doubles more often 
to reduce the potential for blow-over (Bison Transport Staff, personal communication, 2015). Due to 
high winds and bad weather, road tractors pulling double loads are sometimes required to drop off 
the rear trailer at a waypoint along their route, particularly if the second trailer is particularly light or 
empty (Bison Transport Staff, personal communication, 2015).

Truckers are also adopting technologies that enhance operational resilience to changing climate 
variables, although this tends to be a secondary benefit. For example, aerodynamic adaptations 
such as fairings and trailer skirts tend to be used to save fuel, but also enhance stability during wind 
events. Auxiliary power units (APUs) used by trucking firms are being refined and improved to respond 
to increased frequency of cold snaps or heat waves and reduce fuel consumption while idling. APUs 
provide non-idling power for on-board systems during the truck’s “down time” at the side of the road 
or in rest stops. New APU designs are more appropriate for a wider range of environmental conditions, 
although this adaptation represents a major expense for trucking firms. Commercial trucking dispatch 
networks and other third-party “dashboard” providers have also been proactive in forwarding road 
condition information to road-tractor fleets. 

Trucking firms have also devoted greater resources to weather monitoring, in some cases creating full-
time positions for real-time monitoring of weather events throughout a firm’s network. Some estimates 
suggest that there has been a five-fold increase in staff time spent on weather monitoring, with 
real-time linkages to dispatch offices. This enhances trucking firms’ ability to quickly redirect traffic in 
response to traffic disruptions (Bison Transport Staff, personal communication, 2015).

Provincial governments also provide monitoring services to aid traffic flow. In Saskatchewan, the 
Road Conditions Highway Hotline is regularly updated with current information provided by road users 
and Government staff, available through multiple delivery systems (high-speed and low- bandwidth 
internet, RSS feed, and plain text) (Government of Saskatchewan, n.d.). Similarly, the Government of 
Manitoba operates a Road Weather Information System (RWIS), which uses road sensors and cameras 
to supplement staff inspections. This technology primarily focuses on extreme events such as snow 
storms, flooding, and construction delays on high-traffic routes, although some lower-traffic routes and 
winter roads are within its reporting range. Travelers can monitor road conditions via websites, email 
updates, and social media (Government of Manitoba, 2015d). In Alberta, road information (including 
weather and traffic delays) is also available online.

4.5 WINTER ROADS   

Winter roads face a number of unique challenges related to increasing temperatures. While season 
lengths vary by road, most ice roads in the Prairies operate for approximately eight weeks from mid-
January to mid-March. Research suggests that warmer winters are having a negative impact on 
winter-road construction and maintenance costs, as well as reducing the reliability and operating-
season length (Federal/Provincial/Territorial Sub-working Group on Northern Transportation, 2015). 
However, recent data suggest these findings are not consistent throughout the Prairies. In Alberta, the 
Fort Chipewyan road has experienced a slightly longer season in recent years (Federal/Provincial/
Territorial Sub-working Group on Northern Transportation, 2015). In Saskatchewan, the Cumberland 
House road may have experienced slightly delayed opening dates in recent years, but closing dates 
have also been delayed (Federal/Provincial/Territorial Sub-working Group on Northern Transportation, 
2015). Manitoba is also experiencing irregularities in the winter road season (Case Study 3). 

Shorter winter road seasons can result in significant social and economic impacts. Governments and 
businesses use these roads to transport important supplies such as chemicals, fuel, and other daily 
essentials for residents, businesses, and public utilities (CBC News, 2012a). Residents use ice roads to 
access urban areas and purchase supplies in bulk, reducing the household impact of high living-costs 

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

122
122

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
