Arthur uprooted hundreds of trees in Fredericton, New Brunswick, blocking streets until city crews 
could remove the fallen vegetation (Case Study 1). 

High winds also occur independently of tropical storms. For instance, 170 km of highway (from 
Moncton, New Brunswick to Truro, Nova Scotia) through the Chignecto Isthmus has been closed due 
to strong winds and blowing snow (CBC News, 2015a). Also, the stretch of Trans-Canada Highway 
near Wreckhouse, Newfoundland and Labrador often experiences strong winds funnelled from the 
southern end of the Long Range Mountains. Trucking companies in this region use constant-monitoring 
technology to reduce accident risks. One Newfoundland company has reported trucks overturning 
due to high winds in Wreckhouse and the Northern Peninsula (Fleming, 2014). 

 

1
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 1: HURRICANE ARTHUR’S IMPACTS ON 
TRANSPORTATION IN FREDERICTON 

Fredericton, New Brunswick (population 57,000) is located on a broad sweep of the Saint John River. 
Flooding, from spring freshets and heavy rain events has historically been difficult for Fredericton to 
manage. 

On Saturday July 5, 2014, Hurricane Arthur transformed into a strong post-tropical storm and made landfall 
in western Nova Scotia. Fredericton experienced a prolonged period of heavy rain and high winds from 
the storm system, including 150 mm of rain (recorded at Base Gagetown near Fredericton) and 100 km/h 
wind gusts at Fredericton International Airport. The combination of wind and rain saturated the soil and 
caused widespread tree damage and power outages in the city.

The storm affected roads and sidewalks, the public walking trail network, and Fredericton International 
Airport. City crews struggled to remove trees that had fallen across roadways and trails, disrupting traffic. In 
many cases, electrical lines were intertwined with branches, requiring a joint response from New Brunswick 
Power and the City to clear routes for emergency vehicles. The airport also experienced a lengthy power 
outage and relied on generators to maintain operations. 

Hurricane Arthur was not typical in that it was an early-season tropical storm, hitting Fredericton when 
trees were at their heaviest due to the weight of new leaf growth (and before branches and trunks had 
strengthened to support this growth). More intense and unusual weather events, such as Arthur, have the 
City rethinking standard business practices, including:

•  Planting different tree species and varieties in public rights- of-way to ensure resilience and minimize 

tree failure, which will reduce impacts to the street, trail, and sidewalk system;

• 

Implementing an intensive pruning program to enable trees to withstand severe weather; and

•  Reviewing and upgrading staff training and equipment in anticipation of future storms.     

The City is also working jointly with the University of New Brunswick Forestry program to undertake a street-
tree inventory. Prior to replanting trees, characteristics such as height, root system, canopy, and resilience 
of various species will be assessed to ensure that new trees can better withstand high winds and soil 
saturation. 

This example illustrates the indirect impacts of extreme weather on transportation operations, particularly 
in urban environments. Collaboration across sectors such as electricity, forestry, and transportation is 
important to enhance the resilience of urban systems to climate change.

Written by Ken Forest (Growth and Community Services, City of Fredericton, New Brunswick). 

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

231
231

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
