OTHER CLIMATE RISKS 

Increasing freeze-thaw cycles (a trend expected to continue) are generating more frequent 
rockslides, affecting rail operations in mountainous areas (Middleton, 2000). Freeze-thaw cycling also 
creates problems for track stability, particularly in the region’s northern reaches (Middleton, 2000). 

Extreme snow and wind events can delay rail services, particularly in combination. Strong winds are 
expected to present scheduling challenges in future, requiring trains to reduce speeds or move to 
sidings (Miller, 2014). 

Hudson Bay Railway is uniquely affected by permafrost thaw. This line is critical to operations at the 
Port of Churchill, and also for local residents – grain-car derailments have resulted in passenger service 
cancellations due to the absence of alternate routes (Wang et al., 2016). Reliability may become 
increasingly difficult to maintain if adaptations are not made (Case Study 5).

 

5
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 5: RAIL IN THE HUDSON BAY LOWLANDS: A SPECIAL 
CIRCUMSTANCE

Manitoba’s most northerly rail line (terminating in Churchill) faces challenges associated with thawing 
permafrost and muskeg (Tweed, 2015). Muskeg provides a poor base for rail, primarily due to its low 
compressibility (Lautala et al., 2008). Rail shifts, sinks, or even rises as a result of frost heaves in these 
areas. The Hudson Bay Railway Rehabilitation program, an initiative jointly funded by the governments 
of Manitoba and Canada in partnership with the line’s operator, OmniTRAX, is a 10-year undertaking 
specifically designed to reduce the impacts of permafrost degradation and warmer temperatures on rail 
service, particularly from The Pas to Churchill. This initiative involves stabilization of the rail bed – to date, 
about $50 million has been spent on rehabilitation of the Bay Line since the program began in 2008 (Wang 
et al., 2016).

However, rail-line rehabilitation has not been as successful as initially hoped, due to challenges associated 
with the discontinuous permafrost and muskeg terrain. The rail line (and its original ballast) was laid over the 
winter of 1928-1929 atop frozen muskeg, the season when track stability is greatest. As temperatures warm, 
the ballast has been dissipating into the muskeg, resulting in more frequent remediation.  For example, in 
June-July 2014, OmniTRAX added 40,000 tonnes of ballast under the Gillam-to-Churchill section of the rail 
line (Tweed, 2015), following the previous year’s remediation effort, which added 15,000 tonnes of ballast.  
The company now considers backfilling an operational rather than a capital cost.  Recent research 
(Addison et al., 2015) confirms that stabilization measures have not been effective, and that deterioration is 
accelerating.

Given projections for long-term warming in the Hudson Bay Lowlands, supporting the rail bed will become 
increasingly difficult. In response, geotechnical engineers are developing adaptation strategies. 

As permafrost thaws, some technical efforts to stabilize the railway will increase in costs and difficulty 
(Wang et al., 2016), although others may become more feasible. One proposed measure involves lifting 
the track and adding a layer of gravel to insulate permafrost (enhancing stability), although the continued 
maintenance required makes this option challenging (Wang et al., 2016). Another approach to stabilizing 
muskeg in the rail bed involves mixing cement with the vegetative mat (provided shifting muskeg can be 
controlled); however, this option requires further testing and evaluation given that frozen substrate makes it 
difficult to mix cement into the muskeg (Eddie Choi, Canadian Pacific Railway, personal communication, 
2015). Permafrost thaw may enhance the viability of this stabilization technique, although the long-term 
effectiveness remains uncertain.

Written by Al Phillips and Will Towns

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

128
128

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
