evaporation in the Great Lakes tend toward a possible reduction of levels and flow in the river portion 
of the St. Lawrence (Bouchard and Cantin, 2015). Conversely, in the lower St. Lawrence, in the estuary 
and the gulf, a changing climate would likely result in a rise in water level.

In the Montréal area, where an average of approximately 2,200 vessels pass each year and where 
more than one million twenty foot equivalent unit (TEU) containers are transported annually (Port of 
Montréal, 2015), this reduction could be in the order of 0.5 to 1.0 meter (Croley, 2003; Fagherazzi et al., 
2004; Lefaivre, 2005; Roy and Boyer, 2011). Such a decrease could potentially cause a decline in the 
number of container ships stopping at the Port of Montréal (Slack and Comtois, 2016).

Anticipated changes to flow and water levels will affect marine traffic, as well as the entire 
intermodal freight transportation system organized around the Port of Montréal. At the same time, 
rising temperatures could provide a business opportunity to the Port of Montréal, due to a longer 
commercial navigation season upstream.  The navigation season currently extends from the end of 
March to the end of December. 

Tidal and ice movements associated with a rise in temperatures also affect sediment transport and 
silting.  This could require adjustments in the management and maintenance of waterways and 
marine infrastructure.  Sediment transport will likely affect navigation throughout the St. Lawrence 
corridor. In some strategic areas, the accumulation of sediment can reduce water levels and become 
an obstacle to navigation, which could increase the need to dredge channels and other areas 
surrounding marine infrastructure (Slack and Comtois, 2016). 

Climate projections indicate that in 2040-2070 (compared to the 1982-2011 baseline period), freezing 
will occur 10 to 20 days later in the estuary and the Gulf, and thaw will be 20 to 30 days earlier 
(Senneville et al., 2014). As a result, the period of time when ice traditionally covers the St. Lawrence 
(the months of January, February and March) could be considerably shortened. Ice protects the 
coasts against wave and storm erosion. Although a reduction in the freeze-up period benefits 
navigation, an absence or decrease in ice cover will cause waves and storms to erode the coastline, 
even in the winter (Bernatchez et al., 2015; Bernatchez et al., 2010; Savard et al., 2010). Also, ice 
pile-up near marine infrastructure, caused by strong winds and sea currents, could contribute to the 
deterioration of these facilities. 

The movement of ferries is also restricted by ice formation. When ice forms rapidly, icebreaking 
services may be needed from the Canadian Coast Guard, or services to some communities must be 
provided by air transport (Société des traversiers du Québec, 2014).  See Chapter 6, case study 4: 
“Water levels, ice removal and adaptive management at the St. Lawrence Seaway Management 
Corporation”.

4.2.2 MARINE TRANSPORTATION IN NUNAVIK

Climate change will affect storm systems and ice cover in Hudson Bay and, consequently, wave 
systems, extreme water levels and the moisture balance of coastal drainage basins (Clerc et al; 
2012; Savard et al., 2016). The main cause of damage to marine infrastructure is the occurrence 
of strong waves associated with the passing of storms. Damage often occurs during extreme 
conditions, which are rare but very intense, and result in the combination of several phenomena 
(e.g. strong waves and extreme water levels) caused by the overlapping of spring tides and storm 
surges (Ouranos, 2015). Studies are underway to precisely quantify the vulnerability of Nunavik 
marine infrastructure to climate change.

4.3 RAIL TRANSPORTATION

In general, climate change vulnerabilities for rail transportation in Quebec are poorly documented. 
The rail management system, which involves private stakeholders and representatives from different 
levels of government (local, provincial and federal) interacting within an international institutional 
framework (Canada and the United States), contributes to the complexity of identifying vulnerabilities 

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

203
203

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
