 3.0 URBAN ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE

Urban road infrastructure includes roads for vehicles, (i.e. trucks and buses, whether electrified trolleys 
or diesel); electricity for traffic signals, signage, and lighting; bridges; and stormwater management 
infrastructure (culverts, ditches, etc.). While per capita vehicle-km travelled (VKT) in Canadian cities 
is modestly declining (Perl and Kenworthy, 2010), roadways remain critically important to urban 
economies for the movement of both freight and passengers. This is particularly the case in cities 
without strong transit links between urban centres and outlying suburban communities. 

PRECIPITATION 

Precipitation affects urban roads and bridges in a variety of ways. Washouts (due to soil/slope 
instability when water infiltrates a roadway’s substructure) and flooding often result in delays, 
detours, and closures that reduce mobility and increase travel times for both automobiles and bus 
transit (United States Federal Highway Administration, 2015; Andrey and Mills, 2003). High-intensity 
precipitation events disrupt power to traffic signals and other supporting infrastructure, cause 
roadway disruptions when runoff volumes exceed the capacity of culverts and runoff ponds, and 
overwhelm the permeability of construction materials, reducing road safety (increasing the risk of 
accidents), and increasing the risk of bridge scour (Andrey and Mills, 2003; Transportation Research 
Board, 2008; Revi et al., 2014). For example, on May 29, 2012 in Montreal, 45 mm of rain fell in under an 
hour, resulting in flash flooding and closing streets. 

While the proportion of snow as winter precipitation is likely to decline throughout Canada over the 21st 
century (Bruce, 2011), extreme winter storms producing heavy snowfall will continue to disrupt roadways 
and transit operations. This can result in significant service delays, as was the case in Ottawa, in 2013 
when heavy snowfall caused buses to lose traction and become stuck (CTV News, 2013). 

Freezing rain is likely to become more frequent in many parts of Canada (Cheng et al., 2011), causing 
ice build-up, road blockages, and power outages due to fallen tree branches and utility lines, and 
posing risks to road safety in urban areas (Andrey, 2010; Andrey et al., 2013). Increased salt usage to 
combat icy road conditions corrodes concrete infrastructure, and carries negative implications for the 
well-being of roadside ecosystems and urban water supplies (McLeod and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014).

TEMPERATURE 

Climate-induced stress to pavement mixtures is a growing issue for road operators. While most asphalt 
and concrete used in Canada is designed to withstand temperatures between -20˚C and 30˚C, 
projected temperatures for many Canadian cities in the 21st century exceed this range. In extreme 
heat during summer months, softening, rutting, flushing, and bleeding of asphalt are expected to 
increase in frequency and severity (Mills and Andrey, 2002). Softening and rutting occur when vehicles 
depress hot pavement (Mills et al., 2009). Bleeding refers to asphalt moving above a pavement’s 
surface treatment (the waterproof layer upon which vehicles drive); flushing refers to the upward 
movement of asphalt to the fringe of the surface treatment, though not beyond the aggregate 
seal. While bleeding leads to more serious roadway damage, both phenomena reduce pavement 
integrity (Texas Department of Transportation, 2006). Softened pavement also leads to reduced 
maximum loads on municipal roadways, reduced ride quality and vehicle performance, increased 
maintenance costs, and reduced lifespan of roads, bridges, and culverts (McLeod and Stevanovic-
Briatico, 2014). In extreme heat, trucks and buses wear more heavily on roads than automobiles due 
to their more substantial chassis and passenger loads, exacerbating pavement rutting and shearing 
issues (Savonis et al., 2008). 

Extreme heat also produces heat stress for construction workers (Transportation Research Board, 
2008); on especially hot summer days, it may not be safe or possible to carry out construction work 
during peak daytime hours (United States Federal Highway Administration, 2015).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

281
281

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
