KEY FINDINGS

• 

Transportation systems in British Columbia have demonstrated vulnerability to extreme weather 
and changes in climate.  Impacts of particular concern include those associated with: 

 -

 -

 -

 -

Extreme precipitation, such as atmospheric river (Pineapple Express) events, affecting road 
and rail networks, marine transportation lanes, and airport facilities;

Sea level rise and storm surge, increasing the risks of flooding and damage to fixed coastal 
infrastructure, including Vancouver International Airport, Sandspit Airport on Haida Gwaii, and 
the Port of Vancouver;

High winds, affecting marine transportation lanes; and,

Visibility issues, affecting airport operations, particularly in the British Columbia interior.

• 

Land transportation routes within British Columbia often occupy restricted corridors through 
mountains and along coastlines. In these settings, flooding (associated with extreme precipitation 
or snowmelt) and slope failures have resulted in infrastructure failures to road and rail systems in 
the past. Events that have affected one of these modes have typically also affected the other. 

•  While previous efforts to reduce climate risks to transportation systems were often reactive, and 

based on historical information, there is indication that this is changing. Transportation entities 
are now inclined to become involved in broader future focused climate change studies and to 
incorporate these finding into their systems.

•  Climate change vulnerability assessments and revised and updated infrastructure design criteria 

can improve planning and adaptation efforts for British Columbia’s transportation infrastructure. 
The provincial government has conducted vulnerability assessments for highway systems and 
continues to monitor and assess sea level rise.  The British Columbia Ministry of Transportation and 
Infrastructure is one of the first jurisdictions to require infrastructure design work for the ministry to 
include climate change implications.   

•  Given the interconnectedness of transportation networks in British Columbia, there is opportunity to 

share research, risk analysis, and adaptation best practices across modes. 

1.0 INTRODUCTION

British Columbia is Canada’s third-largest and most westerly province, encompassing more than 95 
million hectares of land and freshwater (10% of Canada’s land surface) and 27,200 km of coastline 
(KnowBC, 2016). Its geography is rugged – vast, snow-covered mountain ranges stretch along the 
coast and through eastern and southern regions of the province, while the central interior and 
northeast are characterized by valleys and broad plains. Provincial transportation systems must 
contend with many shoreline inlets, tight corridors traversing mountain ranges with few major passes, 
and long distances between population centres. Economic activity and opportunity is distributed 
across the province, as are populations and transportation networks.

As part of the Pacific Rim, British Columbia’s transportation network provides a key link between 
North America and Asia and facilitates the movement of people and goods to support provincial, 
national, and international trade. In this context, British Columbia requires aviation, marine, road, 
and rail infrastructure that is resilient, effective, and efficient. While infrastructure in British Columbia is 
designed to withstand certain types of weather and climate conditions, building and maintaining a 
viable transportation system in the context of projected changes in climate – including temperature, 
precipitation, patterns of extreme weather, and other variables – is essential. Transportation systems 

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

68
68

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
