4.4 AIR TRANSPORTATION

Meteorological conditions, including localized events such as strong winds, thunderstorms and heavy 
precipitation, influence flying conditions throughout Quebec. Combinations of multiple events, such 
as freezing rain followed by strong winds, complicate take-offs and landings.

In southern Quebec, air transportation involves multiple national and international connections 
for passengers and goods. As a reduction in the duration and frequency of freeze-thaw events is 
expected in southern Quebec, runway and aircraft maintenance needs and associated costs could 
be reduced (Mills, 2004), which would be positive for air transportation in the region. 

Nevertheless, an increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events could increase the 
frequency of flight delays and cancellations, limiting the mobility of passengers and goods.

Villages in Nunavik, those on the Magdalen Islands, and those in the far east of the North Shore are 
particularly vulnerable to disruptions in air transportation, as they rely heavily on this mode for inter-
regional travel. 

Airport infrastructure in Nunavik was designed between 1984 and 1991 for a stable climate with 
no special measures to protect against permafrost thaw (Guimond et al., 2010). However, rising 
temperatures, and in some cases increased precipitation and runoff, are contributing to permafrost 
thaw, resulting in differential soil settlements, and premature damage to infrastructure. Snow 
accumulation along runways and embankments serves as an insulator and warms the ground, also 
contributing to thaw (Savard, 2006; Guimond and Boucher, 2013). Some infrastructure is showing signs 
of deterioration attributable to permafrost thaw (Guimond et al., 2010). Access roads and landing 
strips in this region could see their lifespan diminish and thus compromise emergency management 
and services, and require additional maintenance work. Freeze-thaw events in this region further 
complicate de-icing and increase maintenance costs for landing strips.

Extreme weather events also contribute to the vulnerability of air transportation in Nunavik. Although 
few studies have been done on wind, the Quaqtamiut note [translation] “[...] a worsening of strong 
winds and storms in past years” (Clerc et al., 2011). In addition, flight time and, consequently, fuel 
consumption, fluctuate based on winds (Morris, 2011).

Finally, the Société de protection de la forêt regularly flies over central Québec as well as other 
commercial airlines that have connecting flights between the south and north of the province. 
Air transportation is sensitive to extreme weather events. A projected increase in the occurrence 
of such events would increase runway maintenance needs and, as a result, costs associated with 
labour, rental, machinery and products needed to address them. In addition, forest fires and smoke 
considerably reduce visibility for planes, which must adapt their flying methods to ensure safety 
(Transport Canada, 2015, p. 211).

4.5 DISTRIBUTION AND TELECOMMUNICATION NETWORKS

Transport and mobility depend greatly on information technology and communications systems.  
Information and telecommunication networks can be affected by strong winds, thunderstorms, 
lightning, and ice. Although it is difficult to know how climate change will modify the frequency or 
intensity of specific conditions, breaches and breakages caused by these events are likely to affect 
the entire transportation system. The ice storm in southern Quebec in 1998 illustrates the cascading 
effects a disruption due to extreme weather can have on various networks (telecommunications, 
services, electricity, etc.) and thus on the entire transportation system ( Dupigny-Giroux, 2000).

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

205
205

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
