In April 1987, an ice jam caused the collapse of the Perth-Andover railway bridge, during a severe 
spring flooding event in New Brunswick. Loaded rail cars had been placed on the bridge to 
hold back the ice jam and prevent flooding downstream, a practice that had been successfully 
employed during a less-severe spring flood event in 1976; however in 1987, the pressure of the ice and 
floodwaters caused the bridge to fail (Environment Canada, 2010). In future, the likelihood of ice-jam 
flooding may increase as the timing of seasonal change becomes more variable from year to year 
(Government of New Brunswick, 2014). 

TEMPERATURE 

Increasing average air temperatures and changing extremes pose uncertain risks to rail transportation 
in Atlantic Canada. Hot and cold temperature extremes cause rail tracks to expand or contract, and 
can lead to train derailments (Dobney et al., 2008; Peterson et al., 2008; Nova Scotia Department of 
Transportation and Infrastructure Renewal, 2014). Extreme summer heat can result in rails buckling as 
they expand beyond reasonable design limits (Dobney et al., 2008), causing “sun kinks”. Historically 
this has not been a common problem in the Atlantic provinces (Stephen Newson, Province of Nova 
Scotia, personal communication, 2015). However, the region has experienced incidents caused by, 
or exacerbated by, rapid temperature changes. For example, the investigation into a derailment in 
Pictou County, Nova Scotia in June 2014 indicated that track buckling “produced by a sudden and 
unusual fluctuation of rail temperature and accumulated steel stress” was a significant contributor 
(Province of Nova Scotia, 2014). Extreme temperature change is also considered to have been a 
major factor in a main-track derailment in Milford, Nova Scotia in 2002 (Transportation Safety Board of 
Canada, 2003). The frequency of these events – and the probability of a serious accident – is likely to 
increase as temperatures rise in the 21st century (Dobney et al., 2008).

5.2 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

While documented examples are limited, rail operators in Atlantic Canada have made efforts to 
reduce future climate risks. For example, an emergency culvert and aboiteaux9 system in Hantsport, 
Nova Scotia was constructed to accommodate increased water flow through culvert systems under rail 
tracks (Figure 11). The overflow openings allow excess water during extreme precipitation or flooding 
situations to drain from the culvert via an alternate route. This prevents culvert blowouts during periods 
of heavy flow (Stephen Newson, Province of Nova Scotia, personal communication, 2015).

Figure 11: Overflow aboiteaux at Hantsport, Nova Scotia. (Source: Danika Van Proosdij)

9 

 This refers to a series of protective dykes around low-lying farmland to prevent tidal inundation (Hatvany, 2002).

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

240
240

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
