3
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

Climate /environmental 

risk factors:

Impacts and benefits

Adaptation actions

-  Increased incidence of foreign 

objects present on runways, 
taxiways, and maintenance facilities

Wind (changes in average 
wind speeds and extremes)

-  Maintenance of airplanes  

(especially high on the body) 
impeded

-  No adaptations identified in literature

-  Impeded snow removal/de-icing 

procedures

Changes in water levels 
(lakes, rivers, ocean) and 
patterns of lake and sea 

ice

-  Inundation of airport facilities

-  Relocation and flood protection of 

facilities 

Permafrost degradation

-  Runway stability issues

-  Use of geotextiles for reinforcement; 

thermosyphons for ground cooling

CASE STUDY 3: ASSESSING THE VULNERABILITY OF 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT INFRASTRUCTURE AT PEARSON 
INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT

In 2012, the Greater Toronto Airports Authority (GTAA) assessed the vulnerability of selected stormwater 
infrastructure at Toronto Pearson International Airport to climate change, using Engineers Canada’s Public 
Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee’s (PIEVC) Climate Vulnerability Assessment process. 
The assessment was chiefly motivated by potential threats to infrastructure under future conditions.  These 
include: 

• 

Flooding of runways, taxiways, and manoeuvring areas; 

•  Wind damage to terminals and navigational equipment; 

• 

Stormwater runoff exceeding drainage capacity; 

•  Disruption of operations and ground access; and 

•  Changing requirements for plane de-icing and snow removal. 

The PIEVC protocol gives infrastructure operators a method to assess the vulnerability of their assets in 
relation to historic, recent, and projected climate parameters. It operates in five stages. 

Stage 1 involves project definition. The GTAA chose to focus on selected stormwater infrastructure and the 
Spring Creek Triple Box Culvert (see Figure 7). The GTAA selected a total of 27 climate variables for impact 
assessment, including temperature fluctuations, precipitation intensity, duration, and frequency, freeze-
thaw cycles, fog, wind, and major storm events, among others (GTAA, 2014b). Stage 2 involved collecting 
historical climate data for these variables. 

Stage 3 assessed risk. GTAA staff determined risk scores by multiplying the probability of an impact by 
its severity. According to this assessment, the risk-probabilities of 90 per cent of climate-infrastructure 
interactions did not increase from current to projected climate conditions. GTAA staff also analyzed 11,640 
climate-infrastructure interactions, and 27 per cent scored high enough to merit further technical inquiry.  

…

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

168
168

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
