Towards	
  Effective	
  Dialogue	
  between	
  Engineering	
  Practitioners	
  and	
  Climate	
  Scientists	
  -­‐	
  A	
  Primer	
  to	
  Define	
  Common	
  Language	
  

	
  
 
 
The key to solving this dilemma rests in professional dialogue and the application of robust 
professional judgment.  The engineer will provide the intimate knowledge of engineering design 
to the dialogue and the scientist will provide the robust background in climate modelling. 
 
The engineer must step away from applying simple statistical approaches and apply a 
considerable level of professional skill and experience to synthesizing the information into a 
format that is relevant within the context of the current project or assessment.  The scientist must 
provide the insight into the nuances, strengths and weaknesses of each model projection to guide 
the engineer’s professional judgment.   
 
For example, in some cases the team may decide that the most appropriate parameter would be 
from the high end of an ensemble of projections while in other cases the team may choose 
parameters more in the mid-range of the ensemble.  As well, as certain models project more 
robust results for particular climate parameters, the team may assign more weight to the 
projections from those models with respect to those parameters. 
 
The professional judgment of the team must guide these deliberations.  In the end, it is critical 
that the teams document the basis for their judgment and, in some cases, the ranges of parameters 
that were considered.  It may be necessary to conduct sensitivity analysis to finally resolve a 
parameter, or in some cases, identify additional work outside of the current project or assessment 
that will be necessary to finally resolve the issue. 
	
  
3.8  Conservative	
  

Potential	
  Source	
  of	
  Confusion	
  
	
  
Typically, when an engineer is talking about conservative estimates, they are looking at the 
situation from the frame of reference of the infrastructure.  That is, has the design provided 
sufficient safety margins to ensure that the infrastructure does not fail, even if operating 
conditions approach the design threshold?  On the other hand, the scientist will typically discuss 
conservative from the frame of reference of the data.  That is, can they be reasonably 
comfortable that the data that they provide is within the range of reasonable outcomes? 
 

Rev	
  6	
  –	
  Jun	
  4,	
  2014	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  

	
  	
  	
  	
  	
  Page	
  18	
  of	
  33 

	
  

More	
  Applied	
  	
  

	
  

A design or estimate that contains an explicit 
or implied factor that ensures that a system will 
perform according to specification under all 
reasonable conditions.	
  

More	
  Theoretical	
  

	
  

Selecting a value that is somewhat less than the 
highest point in a data range.  A conservative 
estimate will ensure that the value is covered 
by entire range of data quoted. Where a 
scientific basis does not exist for an estimate, 
the scientist will tend to exclude that 
information.  
	
  


