All three provinces have temperate climates, with generally higher temperatures and precipitation 
levels in the south, although the Rocky Mountains create localized variations in climate. Altitudes 
generally rise east to west. Churchill, Manitoba, is located at sea level on the shore of Hudson Bay and 
represents the Prairies’ only access to tidewater. Almost all road and rail infrastructure is concentrated 
in the Prairies ecozone, which also encompasses the region’s five largest cities.

East of the Rocky Mountains, there are few physical limitations to surface transportation in the Prairies. 
The mountains constitute an evident barrier, although corridors through the Rockies have existed 
for many years. One of the most significant is Crowsnest Pass, which acts as a conduit for rail and 
roadways between Alberta and British Columbia (Babaian, 1985). Other major mountain routes 
include the Yellowhead, Kicking Horse, Howse, Athabasca, and Vermillion Passes. The potential 
for bottlenecks in these high-elevation passes represents one of the main surface transportation 
challenges in the Prairies.

Muskeg – “a living vegetative mat [overlying] peat in the presence of a very high water table” 
(Lautala et al., 2008) – in the Hudson Bay Lowlands presents another transportation challenge. 
Permafrost contributes to the terrain’s low compressibility (Lautala et al., 2008). As a result, stable road 
and rail beds are difficult to maintain in these environments.

1.2 ECONOMY

The Prairies economic strength derives from natural resource extraction. From 2010 to 2011, the gross 
domestic product (GDP) of the three provinces collectively rose 11.1 percent to $429.5 billion, nearly 
doubling the national growth rate. By 2014, the region’s contribution to Canada’s GDP totaled 25.6 
percent. In 2014, Alberta contributed the largest share to the Prairies’ combined GDP, due primarily 
to its extensive oil and gas reserves and large population. In 2013, Alberta contributed 72 percent 
of regional GDP, followed by Saskatchewan (14.7 percent), and Manitoba (13 percent) (Statistics 
Canada, 2014a).

The Prairies’ share of GDP from transportation and warehousing remained stable from 2009 to 2013, 
ranging from 4.3 to 4.4 percent (Statistics Canada, 2014a). While the North American Industrial 
Classification System’s transportation and warehousing designation represents the most direct 
measure of transportation’s economic contributions, transportation indirectly enables many other 
forms of economic activity and growth (Ebert, 2000). 

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

109
109

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
