…

depends heavily on coordination with the Canadian and U.S. Coast Guards for support from their ice-
breaking vessels. The SLSMC also contracts tugboats with scrapers and excavators for ice management 
when needed. 

Ice does not typically delay opening of the Welland Canal. However, at the beginning of the 2014 season, 
ships travelling through the passage from St. Catharines to Port Colborne had nowhere to go because of 
ice on Lakes Erie, Superior, and Huron. Ice was also blown into locks, causing temporary delays.  

Ice is a more significant concern from Lake Ontario to Montreal, due to greater geographic diversity and 
more severe conditions overall. Ice curtains and air bubblers are used to keep locks free from ice where 
and when it is feasible to do so. Increasing ice-management capacity has proven useful for adapting to 
changing patterns of winter weather extremes, but may become less costly as winters gradually warm 
throughout the Seaway.

Written in collaboration with Shari Grady (St. Lawrence Seaway Management Corporation).

8.0 A MULTI-MODAL APPROACH TO TRANSPORTATION AND ADAPTATION

A changing climate will affect Central and Northern Ontario differently than the South, and 
adaptive capacity varies considerably among municipalities within these sub-regions. Compared 
to the South, these two sub-regions encompass a larger area, and have fewer data and resources 
available to support adaptive decision-making for transportation (Chiotti and Lavender, 2008). The 
provincial government has taken steps to determine appropriate climate adaptation strategies for 
transportation in these regions, and has initiated a multimodal study of Ontario’s “near north” and 
“far north” (approximating the central and northern sub-regions) (Caroline De Groot, Ministry of 
Transportation of Ontario, personal communication, 2015). 

This study will identify short-, medium-, and long-term improvements for all modes of transportation. 
It will also provide transportation users and service-providers with tangible adaptation solutions and 
decision-makers with a foundation for action, by identifying:

•  Strong analytical evidence (i.e. rigorous, scientific climate data) to support anecdotal evidence 

of climate change (i.e. shorter winter-road access seasons); 

•  Possible effects of climate change on Northern Ontario’s construction, operations, and 

maintenance standards for roads, railways, airports, and marine infrastructure; and, 

•  Best-practice alternatives and strategic directions to address the challenges mentioned above.

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

174
174

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
