KEY FINDINGS

•  Recent extreme weather events (in both summer and winter) demonstrate the vulnerability of 

Ontario’s transportation networks to climate-related impacts. The flooding of roads and rail 
lines in July 2013 and the ice storm of December 2013 in Southern Ontario resulted in significant 
damage and travel disruption, but also spurred greater organisational awareness of the region’s 
vulnerability to more frequent extreme weather. Multiple resilience-enhancing initiatives have 
been undertaken in the wake of these events by public agencies, particularly for roads and rail.

•  Warming temperatures and changing precipitation patterns are expected to contribute to altered 

(increased or decreased) water levels in the Great Lakes basin, with implications for shipping 
capacity in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway. Fluctuations over the past 20-30 years make it 
difficult to predict the direction of long-term change; however, freight transportation may shift to 
other modes should trends toward lower water levels throughout the Great Lakes occur again.

• 

The access period for winter roads in Northern Ontario is likely to decrease as a result of warming 
temperatures. This carries economic impacts for remote northern communities; a modal shift from 
truck to air transportation is likely to be necessary if significant investments are not made in more 
resilient road infrastructure in Northern Ontario. 

•  Practitioners in Ontario have begun to assess the vulnerability of their assets, and in some cases, 

adapt their infrastructure and operations in preparation for changing climate conditions. Efforts 
made by the Ontario Ministry of Transportation (roads and bridges), Metrolinx (rail), the Greater 
Toronto Airport Authority (aviation), and the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence Seaway Management 
Corporation (marine shipping) reflect a diversity of adaptive practices employed in Ontario. 

1.0 REGIONAL INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW

Ontario is Canada’s second-largest province in terms of area, and largest in terms of population. 
While its population density (14.1 persons per km2) is significantly higher than the national average 
(3.7 persons per km2) (Statistics Canada, 2012), many areas of the province are remote, isolated from 
employment centres, urban markets, and international transportation hubs. Maintaining efficient and 
effective surface, marine, and air transportation systems for passengers and freight in this context 
is complex. A changing climate makes these challenges greater. Temperature and precipitation 
patterns are projected to shift considerably by mid-century, and projected increases in the frequency 
and intensity of severe weather events present serious risks for Ontario’s transportation system (e.g. 
flooded roadways, lower water levels) and potential socioeconomic consequences (e.g., costs, 
disruptions), in the absence of effective adaptation action. 

Not all effects of a changing climate will be negative. Most research has focused on the potential 
negative impacts of climate change, and positive impacts may not be well-understood (Chiotti and 
Lavender, 2008). While this chapter identifies potential opportunities and benefits as applicable, the 
primary focus is on transportation-related risks.

Ontario’s transportation network will be discussed with reference to three distinct sub-regions 
(northern, central, and southern [see Figure 1]) in order to capture the province’s geographic, 
social, and economic diversity; different capacities for climate change adaptation; and the unique 
adaptive measures required. While Ontario’s adaptive capacity is relatively high due to its aggregate 
economic wealth, education levels, infrastructure, social capital, and institutions, this capacity is not 
evenly distributed throughout the province (Chiotti and Lavender, 2008). Each sub-region is described 
briefly in the following section in terms of environmental, social, and economic characteristics. 
Note that while this chapter recognizes the importance of urban transportation networks in Ontario, 
municipal climate impacts and adaptation practices are discussed in Chapter 9.  

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

141
141

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
