For land-based corridors, more accurate mapping of geographic sensitivities (e.g., slope stability) 
and hazards would support more appropriate infrastructure.5 As surface transportation becomes 
more costly and difficult to construct and maintain in warmer temperatures, new transportation 
technologies may also need to be considered for northern Canada. Air ships have been studied 
as an alternative to surface transporting for many goods (including food) to northern communities 
and resource extraction sites – prototypes with 10- and 70-tonne load carrying capacity are being 
developed, with testing underway for specific applications (including use in remote northern regions) 
(Canadian Shipper, 2013). However, timelines for the uptake of this technology remain uncertain. 
Finally, while information on adaptation techniques and practices for roads (both winter and all-
weather) in northern regions is readily available, further risk and adaptation research for other modes 
would be useful.

5 

 See: Blais-Stevens and Behnia (2015)

9.0 CONCLUSIONS

Given the degree of climate change observed and projected for Canada’s North, significant 
research has been undertaken to assess opportunities and challenges for transportation in the region. 
This chapter has documented some key findings emerging from this growing body of work. While 
existing research can help governments, communities, and practitioners prepare for future conditions, 
gaps remain to support the efficient and reliable movement of goods and people in the North, now 
and in future.

This chapter has described the vulnerabilities of northern transportation infrastructure and operations 
to the impacts of climate change. It has also identified adaptation actions (both existing and 
potential) to address these issues. Underlying themes include the implications of permafrost 
degradation for transportation infrastructure (including all-weather roads, winter roads, and runways/
taxiways); challenges to northern shipping resulting from greater sea-ice movement, storm surges and 
coastal erosion; and the difficulties of dealing with climate change given the region’s vast size and 
limited human and financial resources. 

As discussed throughout this chapter, numerous practices – including adaptive maintenance 
practices, technological investments, and construction techniques – have been implemented by 
both the public and private sectors to reduce the impacts of a changing climate on people and 
supply chains. Adaptive maintenance requires constant and consistent information-gathering (such 
as ensuring snow removal equipment is in place and monitoring weather conditions). Technological 
investments can range from relatively simple (e.g., pavement grooving to improve traction on 
runways/taxiways) to more significant investments (e.g., installing thermosyphons). Adaptive 
construction requires identifying the nature of the risk (e.g., thawing permafrost) and choosing the 
appropriate technique (i.e. reinforcing embankments with geotextiles). Regardless of the approach, 
it is clear that the transportation sector in Canada’s North will be faced with significant changes to 
operating conditions over both the short and long term, and that it has begun to adapt accordingly.

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

59
59

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
