…

Examples of infrastructure vulnerabilities (“medium risks”) that could have significant implications for the 
supply chain include:

• 

the rail line between Thompson and Churchill, which has been heavily and repeatedly affected by 
permafrost degradation and is vulnerable to delays and disruptions; and

•  Highway 6 into Thompson, which may be vulnerable to closures due to forest fires or flooding. 

Written with input from Naomi Happychuk (Northern Sustainable Prosperity Initiative, University of Winnipeg)

8.0 INFORMATION GAPS AND CONCLUSIONS

This chapter summarizes the state of knowledge on climate impacts, risks, and adaptation 
practices for transportation systems in the Prairies, based on available literature and practitioner 
experiences. Several gaps were identified during the course of research. 

There is a lack of documented information on specific climate impacts and adaptation practices for 
transportation in the Prairies, suggesting few researchers have focused on this topic in the region.

There are gaps in climate data important to transportation operators. While long-term climate 
projections (temperature and precipitation) may be useful for long-term infrastructure planning, 
additional information would be useful on projected changes in the expected frequency and severity 
of extreme weather events. Prairie governments and operators have been investing in weather 
monitoring and communications to reduce risks from extreme weather, but more accurate predictions 
of the locations and timing of these events would be useful for short- and medium-term operational 
planning.  

There are gaps in transportation data that make it difficult to analyze trends, particularly for specific 
modes at the provincial and regional level. For example, data is not reported on the frequency of 
aircraft being redirected to alternate airports, or the frequency of aircraft “go-arounds” (i.e. aborted 
landings), so it is difficult to determine if there have been changes in the impacts of extreme weather 
events on  operational indicators at airports.

Despite these information gaps, governments and operators in the Prairies have been making efforts 
to reduce future climate risks to infrastructure and operations, particularly those associated with 
precipitation. Flood-control strategies, intended to reduce future risks of washout, represent key 
adaptation strategies in all three Prairie provinces.

At the same time, transportation operators in the Prairies have tended to take a reactive, case-
by-case approach to climate and weather adaptation. As information and knowledge improves 
on longer-term climate risks, transportation decision-makers in the Prairies will be able to be more 
proactive in their adaptation efforts.

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

134
134

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
