5.2 ADAPTATION MEASURES ON A REGIONAL AND LOCAL SCALE

Local knowledge and community involvement are also important. Knowledge and stories about 
changes to modes of travel and traditional routes help identify changes to the climate that are 
otherwise difficult to document (Grimwood et al., 2012; Samson et al., 2013). 

Significant progress (action, research, awareness-raising) has been made in the last ten years to 
promote anticipatory adaptation (Cuerrier et al., 2015; Bernatchez et al., 2012; Plante et al, 2015). 
In northern Quebec for example, adaptation measures were implemented when the first signs of 
deterioration to transportation infrastructure were observed, before significant climate impacts were 
felt (Guimond et Boucher, 2013). 

Since 2003, the MTMDET has had a thermal monitoring program for airport infrastructure in Nunavik 
(under its jurisdiction), built on land sensitive to thaw (Guimond et Boucher, 2013). In the last decade, 
mapping of permafrost areas in northern communities has been undertaken to support land-use 
planning (L’Hérault et al., 2013). By using data from geotechnical research, such mapping determines 
which areas to avoid, which require more information, and which require special construction 
techniques to address problem areas identified.  A better understanding of constraints helps prioritize 
procedures for the area, based on existing knowledge (L’Hérault et al., 2013; also see Case Study 2). 

In 2007, 12 communities were the subject of a soil classification project led by the Center for Northern 
Studies, and other more detailed studies are underway (Allard, Calmels, et al., 2007; L’Hérault et al., 2013). 
More specifically, the impact of a changing climate on landing strip stability in Nunavik has been the 
subject of several studies since the early 2000’s (Allard, Fortier, et al., 2007; Doré et al., 2014; Allard et al., 
2013.) Researchers have identified methods of intervention to maintain air operations, including more 
frequent maintenance and improvements to drainage techniques (L’Hérault et al., 2013). 

The MTMDET and the Center for Northern Studies recently collaborated in the development of an 
adaptation strategy for airport structures vulnerable to permafrost thaw (Guimond et al., 2010). 
Temperature monitoring devices were embedded at 13 airports in Nunavik to monitor the condition 
of runways in real-time.  Adaptation techniques were tested on two problem sites (see Case Study 
1). The Kuujjuaq landing strip was the subject of a study by Transport Canada, while more generally, 
regular monitoring is undertaken to verify the condition of transportation facilities (airports, access 
roads and marine infrastructure). 

In addition, each municipality is developing a land-use master plan that identifies the areas suitable 
for building in order to ensure the sustainability of transportation infrastructure and operations 
(L’Hérault et al., 2013). Awareness tools and best practice guides have also been developed by 
municipal authorities in order to inform employees and suggest concrete actions to reduce the 
impact of climate change on infrastructure (for example, drainage and snow management on land 
infrastructure).

 
CHAPTER 7: QUEBEC 

207
207

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
