An important consequence of sea-level rise is the associated increase in extreme water-level events.  
For example, at Tuktoyaktuk, sea-level rise is projected to increase the frequency of an event that has 
historically occurred once every 25 years to once every 4 years by 2100. In other words, the flooding 
level associated with a one-in ten year event at Tuktoyaktuk is expected to increase from 1.1 m at 
present to 2.1 m by 2100 (Lamoureux et al., 2015).

While changes in sea level will have an impact on transportation and associated coastal infrastructure 
in the long term, particularly in the Mackenzie Delta/Beaufort region, near-term changes in sea-ice 
extent and duration will produce far more significant impacts on coastal erosion and flooding (Ford et 
al., 2016). Coastal erosion and related damage to infrastructure is already a significant issue for many 
communities in the western Arctic. For instance, Tuktoyaktuk has experienced such significant coastal 
erosion that several buildings, including the community school and police station, have been moved 
to ensure the safety of residents (Government of Nunavut et al., 2011).

4.0 ROAD IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION 

4.1 CLIMATE IMPACTS ON ROAD TRANSPORTATION

As discussed, roads are critical to the socioeconomic functioning of many northern communities. This 
section summarizes expected impacts on roads associated with different climatic factors.

4.1.1 ALL-SEASON ROADS

Warming temperatures in northern Canada have significant impacts on roads, especially those 
constructed on permafrost (Northern Climate ExChange, 2014b). Permafrost conditions are 
particularly challenging for engineers working at the southern limits of the North, where ground 
temperatures fluctuate between -1°C and 0°C. Warming and thawing of ice-rich permafrost can lead 
to ground settlement, slope instability, drainage issues, and road cracking (see Figure 7) (Montufar et 
al., 2011). For instance, Highway 3 in the Northwest Territories was designed to preserve permafrost, 
but the high volume of melt water due to warming temperatures was not taken into account and 
infrastructure failed as a result (Northern Climate ExChange, 2014b).

Figure 7: Differential settlement associated with permafrost thaw along an abandoned section of 
Northwest Territories Highway 4, east of Yellowknife. (Source: Natural Resources Canada)

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

41
41

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
