 

1
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 1: ALBERTA TRANSPORTATION’S ADAPTATION 
EFFORTS IN THE ROAD SECTOR

Alberta Transportation has developed a number of initiatives that consider climate and extreme weather in 
highway and bridge design processes. Highlights include:

Bridges: Following the June 2013 flood, Alberta Transportation reviewed its standards for sizing, configuring, 
and protecting bridge openings. The Department concluded that existing standards were appropriate, 
and no changes were proposed – most damage occurred at older crossings not designed to current 
standards. Risks to stream crossings associated with increasing frequency and magnitude of storm events 
were also assessed, and were considered low for the following reasons:

• 

• 

• 

Stream crossings are sized to match the capacity of the stream channel. It takes decades (or longer) 
for natural channels to change permanently in response to climate changes. Therefore, there is a low 
risk of sudden change in bridge-opening capacity requirements.

Sizing of bridge openings is not overly sensitive to small changes in design flow (e.g. <20 percent).

The frequency of longer-duration storms that cause flooding in large natural basins is not considered 
likely to change in comparison to the frequency of high-intensity, short-duration, limited-area storms. 
This concurs with the absence of observed significant trends in frequency or magnitude of storms in the 
province’s 150-year historical record.

Bridge-deck drainage design requirements were also evaluated, focusing on sites where drainage 
blockages have occurred and maintenance is commonly required. Localized, high-intensity weather 
events are difficult to predict in timing or magnitude, and are more common than large regional floods. 
As a result, the most cost-effective method to address culvert blockages is to design infrastructure in 
ways that facilitate proper maintenance, a policy reflected in conceptual design guidelines for bridges 
in the province. For instance, a culvert structure at Malcolm Creek (built in the late 1990s) was filling with 
debris almost annually (not due to storms) and costs to clear the opening were significant. The culvert 
was recently replaced by a bridge configured to be more easily maintained (relocation was not feasible). 
Similarly, concrete box culverts at Cougar Creek were prone to blockage, and are now designed to 
be cleared by machinery. Finally, the Drystone Creek Bridge was designed with the knowledge that a 
significant portion of the opening would be filled in periodically. 

Surface engineering: Observed temperatures are considered in two design procedures related to 
roadway-surface engineering. The first is pavement-thickness design – daily ambient temperatures provide 
an input to pavement-response modeling under various traffic loads. The second is the selection of asphalt 
mixes: traffic loadings and summer temperatures are the main inputs in selecting asphalt binders and mix 
types (rutting is a primary concern). In each case, Alberta Transportation considers changes in climate 
factors minor compared to changes in other factors such as traffic loads and changes to allowable axle 
combinations or tire sizes; however, both procedures can be adjusted to reflect future temperature and 
precipitation projections. Note that increasing storm frequency and intensity is not currently considered in 
these procedures.

Geotechnical engineering: On average, Alberta experiences one “debris flood” (differing from hydraulic 
floods by the amount and type of sediment carried) per year. These events are common in mountainous 
terrain when three-day rainfall exceeds 300 mm. During the extreme rainfall in summer 2013, more than 
70 were recorded in a two-day span, blocking roadways and culverts. Alberta Transportation designs 
mountain creek bridges and culverts for hydraulic floods; however, 2013’s events provided an opportunity 
to re-evaluate conventional hydraulic sizing criteria to consider debris flooding, which were not previously 
considered in the risk-management framework. Mountain creeks behave less predictably than rivers in the 
Prairies, and require different design criteria. Alberta Transportation is in the process of determining if risk-
mitigation options are required, feasible, and economically-viable to deal with future debris flow events. 
A less-understood impact is the significant increase in tractive and erosive forces within debris floods and 
the action of these forces on mountain creek beds/banks. Predicting how streams will change course is 
difficult, as is determining the resilience of Alberta’s highways to future debris floods. 

…

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

120
120

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
