5.1 HISTORIC CLIMATE IMPACTS

5.0 RAIL TRANSPORT

Severe weather conditions that affect freight rail services in British Columbia can significantly affect 
the transportation of goods in Canada and potentially international trade. The rail industry in British 
Columbia has a long history of managing the effects of weather conditions on its operations. A review 
of Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) reports reveals an ongoing and evolving pattern of rail 
incidents associated with climate events, in particular high precipitation events in British Columbia’s 
transportation corridors.  The British Columbia rail system has experienced incidents related to extreme 
precipitation, spring runoff and drainage.  These events can undermine railroad beds and are 
significant factors contributing to mud and rockslides that impact rail systems and equipment. 

Three weather-related incidents, associated with varying degrees of infrastructure damage, 
environmental impacts and injuries to railroad personnel, are highlighted here and could be used 
as a foundation to evaluate the potential for climate change to exacerbate conditions that have 
historically led to interruptions in rail services.   All three incidents arose from precipitation and 
drainage issues.

CONRAD – MARCH 1997

On March 26, 1997, a Canadian National (CN) train encountered a large roadbed depression near 
Conrad, British Columbia and derailed.  The CN locomotive engineer and conductor were fatally 
injured, fourteen freight cars and two locomotives were damaged beyond repair and 1,200 feet 
of track and siding was destroyed (Figure 13). Leaking fuel ignited and resulted in a fire that made 
firefighting difficult and required helicopter water-bombing to contain.  

Figure 13: Conrad, British Columbia train  
derailment. Collapse of the railroad subgrade 
was caused by extreme precipitation.  
(Source: Transportation Safety Board of Canada)

The investigation report for this incident 
provides extensive detail about the preceding 
weather conditions that led to this derailment 
(Transportation Safety Board of Canada, 1998). 
The key points from this analysis indicate that 
the period between October 1996 and March 
1997 was the wettest six-month period in 59 
years. March 26, 1997 was the 41st day of runoff 
from melting snow in the region.  However, 
the rate of melting snow suddenly increased 
between March 17 and 19 when a rain on snow 
event occurred.  The report concluded that the 
depression was caused by:

1.  High seasonal runoff that was not managed 

by drainage systems above the adjacent 
Trans-Canada Highway; and 

2.  Water saturating the ground through the 

highway fills, infiltrating and destabilizing the 
railroad subgrade, which then collapsed.  

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

87
87

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
