in the province demonstrate vulnerability to both extreme weather events and incremental changes 
in climate conditions. While difficulties persist in identifying the location and criticality of infrastructure 
vulnerabilities and communicating them to decision-makers, progress is evident in advancing climate 
adaptation broadly. 

This chapter examines the interactions and vulnerabilities of transportation infrastructure and operations 
to changes in weather and climate in British Columbia. It has a strong focus on engineering approaches 
to climate adaptation in the transportation sector.  The science and practice of adaptation is a relatively 
new undertaking in the engineering field, with the consideration of future climate conditions remaining a 
challenge and new way of thinking for engineering professionals (see Box). 

ADAPTING ENGINEERING PRACTICES TO CLIMATE CHANGE 

While engineers have long considered climate related parameters in engineering design work, this has usually 
meant looking back at historic trends. Given the current rate of climate change, this is no longer a reliable 
approach.  Provincial Professional Engineering Associations are responding by adding new professional 
requirements to ensure that potential climate change impacts are taken into account in the design process 
for the service life expected of the infrastructure.  This is a cultural change for agencies responsible for 
infrastructure, consultants carrying out engineering design work and clients commissioning the work. It is 
expected that future engineering work related to new infrastructure design and rehabilitation will reflect such 
action and progress. 

Due to the newness of this field and current limitations of climate models in providing information to engineering 
designers, many questions cannot yet be answered. For example, a particular climate parameter like extreme 
wind will have a significant effect on the future functionality and safety of a bridge being designed today.  
Anticipating how this parameter may behave 75 years from now is a level of uncertainty most engineering 
designers have not had to deal with before. 

It will take time for engineers to develop procedures and processes to adequately deal with climate change, 
and maximize the likelihood that infrastructure being constructed today remains safe and effective for public 
use for the whole of its design life.

1.1 POPULATION

As of October 2014, British Columbia had a population of 4.7 million (Government of British Columbia, 
2015a). The population is growing and becoming more urban, with the greatest growth in Greater 
Vancouver (Government of British Columbia, 2015b). In 1981, 22% of British Columbia’s population 
resided in rural areas and by 2011 this had declined to 14% (Statistics Canada, 2011). While the total 
number of rural residents remained relatively constant over that period, at around 600,000, urban 
population grew from 2.1 million to 3.8 million.

Most of the province’s population is concentrated in southern coastal areas (Figure 1). The Capital City 
of Victoria on southern Vancouver Island has a population of 327,000, while Greater Vancouver on the 
southern mainland of the province has a population of 2.4 million and comprises almost 60% of the 
province’s population (Government of British Columbia, 2015b).  

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

69
69

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
