 

3
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 3: TRANSPORTATION ADAPTATIONS TO CLIMATE 
CHANGE IN THE CITY OF WHITEHORSE, YUKON

Whitehorse is a significant regional transportation hub, with rail, marine, and air transportation all playing 
important roles in the city’s history. The city relies heavily on the Alaska Highway for external connectivity 
and on the automobile for urban mobility, although public transit services are also available. The city’s 
climate is relatively warm (compared to other northern communities) and semi-arid due to its location 
within the range shadow of coastal mountains. In recent years, however, Whitehorse has experienced 
highly variable precipitation, including many winters with above-average snowfall. Climate changes of 
this nature pose a number of risks to the city’s transportation network. Projected increases in wildfires and 
the intensity, duration, and frequency of storm events (and associated flood and drainage concerns) 
create indirect risks to road traffic. Local officials identify highway obstructions and washouts during 
extreme weather events as a key concern, as they can prevent the delivery of food and other essential 
goods. Other impacts to urban transportation include increased frequency of freeze-thaw cycles; strain 
on the road-maintenance budget in high-snowfall winters; and, greater stress on culverts due to increased 
summer and winter precipitation.

To address these concerns, the City of Whitehorse participated in the development of the community-
based Whitehorse Climate Change Adaptation Plan in 2011 (Hennessey and Streicker, 2011). This project 
involved a diversity of community stakeholders. While not legally-binding (the document is policy-relevant, 
but not policy-determinate) the plan has helped to “mainstream” the changing climate into municipal 
decision-making processes, meaning that climate data and projections are incorporated into investment 
and planning decisions. The plan’s broad goals include enhancing transit’s mode share, intensifying 
development, and increasing the region’s share of agricultural production through food security planning 
(including the production of more food in nearby greenhouses, reducing reliance on imports). Suggested 
adaptations for urban transportation include:

• 

Establishing annual budgets aimed at managing climate change concerns, including planning for 
increased snow removal requirements; 

• 

Expanding the use of road monitoring stations; 

•  Conducting exploratory feasibility studies of automatic road de-icing techniques; and

• 

Increasing the porosity of road surfaces to improve re-charge following precipitation. 

These adaptations include both “low-regret” and “no-regret” measures. For example, when road 
improvements are required due to the lifecycle or condition of the infrastructure, the Plan suggests that 
the City upgrade water and sewer systems to accommodate larger stormwater flows. This requires only a 
modest marginal-cost increase to the budget for the project. At the same time, this strategy means only 
those roads nearing the end of their lifespan or in very poor repair will be adapted in the near-term, given 
that the cost of replacing usable infrastructure with larger drainage capacity is prohibitive. For practical 
purposes, this is an adaptation approach that must be implemented in a piecemeal manner. A “no-regret” 
adaptation on the operational side involves proactive early-spring inspections of drainage to identify 
frozen storm drains and reduce flood risks. 

Flooding is also a concern on Whitehorse’s residential roadways, with some older subdivisions having 
experienced localized issues as a result of outdated drainage systems. As a result, stormwater infrastructure 
in new subdivisions is now designed with higher volume thresholds. Additionally, Whitehorse is using 
transportation redundancy as an adaptation solution on a small scale; subdivisions are no longer permitted 
to be built with only one road-access point in case of washouts, flooding, and wildfire hazards. 

Written with input from John Streicker (City ofWhitehorse) and Jocelyn Beatty (University of Waterloo).

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

299
299

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
