Ontario is also home to the country’s largest population of Indigenous people, approximately 242,495 
of Canada’s 1,172,785 First Nations, Inuit, and Métis (Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development 
Canada, 2014). Indigenous populations in the central and northern sub-regions have unique 
vulnerabilities to climate-related impacts. For example, one in four First Nations communities in Ontario 
are accessible only by air year-round or ice- or winter-road seasonally.

1.3 ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS

The economies of Central and Northern Ontario are similar in many respects. While traditional economic 
activities, like mining, remain important in both sub-regions, diversification efforts are being made (Ontario 
Ministry of Infrastructure and Ministry of Northern Development, Mines and Forestry, 2011). 

Central Ontario contains the majority of the province’s 40 operational mines, representing significant 
economic opportunity (Ontario Ministry of Northern Development and Mines, 2013). Thunder Bay 
is a key transportation hub for air, rail, and marine-shipping traffic, while Sudbury’s economic base 
includes mining, resource-processing, tourism, and education. Northern Ontario’s main industries 
include mining and tourism. The province’s Growth Plan for Northern Ontario (Ontario Ministry of 
Infrastructure and Ministry of Northern Development, Mines and Forestry, 2011) covers the geographic 
range of both sub-regions, and proposes actions for further diversification (i.e. enhancing the service 
sector and increasing value-added manufacturing for raw materials destined for export).

Unlike the other two sub-regions, the economy of Southern Ontario is driven primarily by the 
service and manufacturing sectors (Hutton, 2010). Predominantly urban (albeit with many rural 
and agricultural communities on the urban fringe), the economy is influenced in part by provincial 
legislation supporting the concentration of infrastructure, jobs, and residents, as well as its proximity to 
trading partners in the United States. 

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

144
144

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
