Extreme cold also affects urban rail. For instance, the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) subway system 
faced several extreme-cold power outages in the winter of 2015, due primarily to broken water 
mains flooding tunnels (McLeod and Stevanovic-Briatico, 2014). Cold temperatures can also cause 
frozen track signal switches, delaying trains (Canadian Press, 2015b). However, this may become less 
problematic in southern cities if the frequency of cold days and nights decreases as projected (Bush 
et al., 2014).

CHANGING WATER LEVELS AND STORM SURGE

During periods of seasonal ice-jam flooding, railways adjacent to water and their embankments 
may be inundated, washed-out, or eroded. Bridge scour is also a risk for rail bridges, as suggested by 
Calgary’s experience in the summer of 2013 (see Section 2.1).

WIND 

High-intensity wind events also pose risks to rail infrastructure and operations, such as damage to 
overhead cables and tall signalization equipment, and rail-car blow-over (OFCM, 2002). Similar to 
roads, rail lines may also be obstructed by fallen debris causing service delays. 

OPPORTUNITIES

Investment in rail transit can enhance the redundancy of urban transportation networks, providing mass 
transit options when roads are closed, unsafe, or congested (Box 1).  Rail transit projects could also 
benefit from longer construction seasons, as winters shorten (Transportation Research Board, 2008).  

BOX 1: REDUNDANCY IN URBAN TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS

Redundancy is one method to enhance the resiliency of transportation networks to extreme weather and a 
changing climate. A redundant system allows travelers choices so that even when major service disruptions 
occur (e.g., extreme congestion or wash-out), other options are available, and travelers can complete 
their trips and economies can continue to function. For example, in major cities like Montreal and Toronto, 
if localized flooding causes the subway system to stop running,  users can still travel by foot, bicycle, and 
on public buses. An opposite example is the nearly singular reliance of travelers in the Greater Toronto and 
Hamilton Area on Highway 401 for travel between Toronto and points east and west. If Highway 401 were 
closed, the alternative roadway and transit networks would be insufficient to maintain reasonable travel 
times and reliability. 

Improving redundancy does not mean building additional roads, particularly above the level of current 
demand in corridors. In North American history, the construction of extra roads has often stimulated latent 
(hidden) demand for road capacity, and done little to reduce congestion, improve network efficiency, or 
address issues associated with urban sprawl (Duranton and Turner, 2011).  

 
CHAPTER 9: URBAN 

284
284

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
