 

4
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

5
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 4: HAS THE NORTHWEST PASSAGE BECOME 
VIABLE? 

On September 19, 2014, icebreaking bulk-carrier MV Nunavik made history by transporting 23,000 metric 
tons of nickel concentrate from Deception Bay, QC to Bayuquan, China through the Northwest Passage. 
Prior to this historic voyage, only one full cargo ship had ever transited the Northwest Passage, and none 
had ever done so unassisted. In recent years, traffic in the Northwest Passage has increased but has been 
dominated by adventure tourists and private yachts. Full commercial cargo transits have been extremely 
limited, despite the route being touted for its decreased distance, and potential for fuel and cost savings. 
The Nunavik transit took 27 days, about 15 days shorter than a passage through the Panama Canal. The 
DNV-GL Polar Class 4 vessel, powered by a slow-speed diesel engine capable of generating nearly 30,000 
horsepower, is one of the most capable ships globally to withstand ice-infested Arctic waters. The ship is 
equipped with a sophisticated ‘iceNav’ system with virtual marine radar to detect potential ice hazards 
and determine efficient and safe routes. 

This historic voyage, along with the first cargo trip made by the MV Orion in 2013, proves that the Northwest 
Passage has the potential to be a viable shipping route. However, the fact remains that only two cargo 
ships have made the fabled journey – and for good reason. The passage remains extremely risky to 
navigate, considering its highly unpredictable ice and weather conditions, poorly-charted waters, and a 
lack of vessels with sufficient structural and technical capabilities. It is unlikely that the Northwest Passage 
will become a major shipping route in the near-to-medium term (Mudge et al., 2011). 

Written by Jackie Dawson (Department of Geography, Environment and Geomatics; University of Ottawa).

CASE STUDY 5: RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT IN THE BEAUFORT 
SEA REGION

Reduced sea-ice cover as a result of a changing climate has prompted the petroleum and shipping 
industries to view the western Arctic waters with new levels of interest. The Beaufort Sea Region (water north 
of Canada and Alaska) is estimated to contain 10 billion barrels of oil (Houseknecht et al., 2012), and oil 
and gas companies currently hold licenses for nearly $2 billion (CAD) worth of exploration work over the 
next 10 years (Ellis and Brigham, 2009).  

There remain several challenges associated with resource extraction in the Arctic, including a need to improve 
safety (i.e. greater search-and-rescue and disaster-response capacity) and supporting infrastructure, as well as 
issues associated with changing and difficult-to-predict ice conditions (IMG-Golder Corporation Environmental 
Consulting, 2012). There are also other issues relating to the increasing season and extent of open water, 
including more frequent dangerous fog conditions, as well as greater wind, wave, and erosion hazards. These 
issues are problematic for an area lacking complete hydrographic charts.

Coastal erosion is also affecting Tuktoyaktuk Island, which protect Tuk Harbour – the planned supply and 
support base for offshore activity. The island has been receding at a rate of approximately 2m/year. “If the 
island erodes away or is breached, there is the potential for greater negative effects such as erosion of the 
inner harbour coastline or damage to infrastructure during storm surges or normal wave action, especially 
with rising sea levels” (Mudge et al., 2011). Ironically, the climate changes that are opening the Beaufort 
Sea to exploration and shipping are also likely to make exploration challenging.

Written by Doug Matthews (Matthews Energy Consulting).

 
CHAPTER 3: NORTHERN TERRITORIES 

55
55

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
