6.0 AVIATION

6.1 PAST IMPACTS AND FUTURE RISKS

Aircraft operators in the Prairies report several operational challenges associated with changing 
climate conditions and extreme weather, including:

• 

increased de-icing requirements,

•  greater frequency of flight delays occurring because the destination airport is closed,

•  wind events affecting approach-scheduling, and

•  cargo weight restrictions due to soft runways.

Greater frequency and severity of extreme weather (particularly precipitation) events are a major 
concern for aviation in the Prairies. Some air carriers operating in the Prairie provinces have reported 
an increased frequency of flight delays or cancellations, mainly in response to precipitation and fog 
events.  Airport representatives and provincial administrators of non-National Airport System airports 
and aerodromes have similarly cited concerns with a greater frequency of these events.   

Air operators in the northern Prairies have observed more significant changes than have operators 
in the south, and practitioners suggest that the costs of weather variability have been particularly 
difficult for small operators to internalize. The resilience (or adaptive capacity) of southern airports 
is generally higher than their northern counterparts as a result of more readily-available ground 
equipment and system redundancies (Calm Air Representatives, personal communication, 2015). 

Smaller airports in the northern Prairies have experienced specific challenges with standing water 
on runways. Particularly in springtime, precipitation percolates into the runway base, softening 
the surface area. When aircraft land on these softened runways, depressions are formed, 
allowing greater opportunity for the accumulation of standing water. In an effort to minimize 
the formation of depressions, carriers reduce their payloads (Calm Air Representatives, personal 
communication, 2015).

One carrier indicated that over the past few years, their operation had experienced a significant 
increase in delays due to weather variability, particularly in the northern Prairies. This has partly 
contributed to an increased need for aircraft de-icing. Increased variance in temperature has 
resulted in a greater frequency of ideal conditions for ice formation on the control surfaces of aircraft 
(Calm Air Representatives, personal communication, 2015). De-icing stations are rare in northern 
Prairie communities, often resulting in prolonged delays for aircraft departures.

Extreme cold also affects aviation operations. All aircraft have a range of temperature for which 
they are certified. This temperature range varies by aircraft, and by variant within an airframe type. 
An aircraft may be grounded, and prevented from making its return flight if temperatures drop 
quickly during its flight. In the Prairies, low temperatures currently pose a greater operational risk 
than high temperatures. For instance, in the cold winter of 2013-2014, some U.S. carriers’ scheduled 
flights to western Canada were cancelled because the aircraft were only certified to -30°C. Such 
scheduling disruptions have been reported to occur with greater frequency in response to more rapid 
temperature shifts, something to which the Prairies is prone. 

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

131
131

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
