EXTREME TEMPERATURES

The ideal temperature range for freight-rail operations is -25°C to +25°C (Miller, 2014). While thermal 
rail expansion (buckling due to heat) has rarely been cited as an issue in the Prairies, extreme cold 
is a major concern for winter rail operations (Boyle et al., 2013). In cold temperatures, steel tracks 
(continuously welded rail) and wheels become more brittle and susceptible to breakage, and air-
braking systems become more prone to leaks and freezing. A review of Transportation Safety Board 
of Canada rail incident reports suggests that cold weather-related rail fractures have contributed to 
some derailments in the Prairies (Transportation Safety Board of Canada, 2013). Cold temperatures 
also create operational issues by limiting the safe length of trains. According to the Rail Association 
of Canada, the maximum safe length of an intermodal train with distributed power decreases by 15 
percent below 25°C and 39 percent below -35°C. Shorter trains operating in a network near capacity 
with relatively long cycle times results in cascading effects throughout the rail system. Increased 
congestion in terminals limits efficiency, while greater train density in a given area results in more trains 
encountering one another, increasing use of sidings and further reducing average speeds (Miller, 
2014). Extreme cold temperatures were an important contributing factor to delays in grain handling in 
the winter of 2013-2014 (Case Study 4).

While instances of extreme cold are projected to decrease in the Prairies, these periods will still occur 
at unpredictable intervals (Bush et al., 2014). During periods of extreme heat in the 21st century, rail 
buckling risks will also increase (Transportation Research Board, 2008). These impacts illustrate both 
current and future risks posed by temperature extremes to rail-freight transportation. 

4
 
Y
D
U
T
S
 
E
S
A
C

CASE STUDY 4: RAIL-FREIGHT MOVEMENT IN WINTER 2013-2014 

Moving grain to port via rail in the Prairies in the winter of 2013-2014 has been described as a “perfect 
storm” of issues (Cash, 2014). Grain handling in the region is a complex process involving many actors. In 
this particular year, a series of events and conditions complicated the process further, including:

•  an above-average Prairie crop yield;

• 

• 

the removal of the Canadian Wheat Board single-desk marketing mechanism;

increased orders for car placement by grain companies wishing to move product;

•  delayed initial orders for car placement; and

•  an extremely cold winter in the Prairies (Miller, 2014; Atkins, 2014).

As illustrated in Figure 8, most of the Prairies experienced lower-than-average temperatures in winter 
2013-2014 – up to 4.5°C lower in some areas. The following discussion is based primarily upon information 
regarding CN operations during this period.

In the 2013-2014 winter season, trains operated below the -25°C threshold more frequently than normal (Miller, 
2014). Rail companies experienced several difficulties, including air brake hose leaks (compromising braking 
capacity), more frequent rail breaks (200 percent higher than non-winter norms), and more frequent steel 
wheel breaks. 

In response, rail companies reduced train lengths and speeds. Average grain-train length was reportedly 
70 percent as long as it could have been under ideal temperature conditions. This caused a cascading 
effect, primarily driven by increased network congestion.  

Average train speed was also reduced over this period. In winter, trains normally operate at speeds approximately 
8 percent lower than in other seasons. In 2013-2014, this reduction was approximately 13 percent. As a result of 
shorter and slower trains, the car-order fulfillment rate (the ratio of orders filled on schedule to orders placed) 
decreased by over 30 percent compared to non-winter seasons, compared to the winter norm of 15 percent. 

…

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

126
126

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
