change impacts specific to Sea Island. Further work is expected to include the identification and 
quantification of possible risks associated with climate change impacts to airport operations. The 
results of these studies will culminate in adaptation plans from which any infrastructure improvements 
would be incorporated and funded through the Airport Authority’s capital program.

6.3 ADAPTATION PRACTICES

The air sector manages weather conditions on an ongoing basis, adjusting practices as changes in 
weather phenomena are observed.  In this sense, for many airports (with exceptions, such as Vancouver 
International Airport), adaptation tends to be primarily reactive, rather than performed in anticipation of 
future changes.  At the same time, aircraft technology is evolving with more frequent use of instrument 
landing systems and other innovations allowing aircraft to fly safely in less than ideal conditions.

While there is very little information available regarding climate change risk assessment studies for air 
transportation in British Columbia, this does not mean that these studies are not being undertaken, 
as they may not be published or available in the public domain. For example, there has been a 
commitment to undertake a climate change risk assessment for the Vancouver International Airport that 
addresses risks of sea level rise and implications for the ongoing review and renewal of dike systems. 

7.0 MARINE TRANSPORT

As a coastal province, and a major national hub for both passengers and goods, weather events that 
affect British Columbia marine transportation systems can have significant provincial and national 
impacts.  As with aviation, impacts of concern include:

•  Accidents where weather conditions have contributed to the causes; 

•  Service interruptions caused by weather; and, 

• 

Impacts on physical infrastructure systems.

7.1 HISTORICAL CLIMATE IMPACTS

The marine sector has a long history of managing and coping with weather conditions and has 
established standard procedures for accessing weather forecast information and incorporating that 
information into voyage planning.  As a result, impacts of severe weather are normally managed 
through avoidance practices (resulting in delays) and through improvements in technology that 
incorporate advanced weather monitoring and navigation systems.  For example, Environment and 
Climate Change Canada maintains an extensive network of weather forecasting areas, observation 
sites and marine weather radio frequencies for the British Columbia coastline (Government of Canada, 
2016). The system provides ongoing weather information to the marine sector and provides warnings of 
inclement weather that may affect marine transportation systems. This has resulted in weather-related 
marine accidents being relatively uncommon in British Columbia. A limited review of TSB reports suggests 
that any weather-related marine incidents involve strong components of human error.  

Seaports in British Columbia must be able to handle high winds and heavy rainfall, normally at the 
same time.  In 2014, four percent of British Columbia ferry sailings were delayed due to weather.  High 
winds are a common cause of delays, with heavy rain another factor (British Columbia Ferry Services 
Inc., 2016).  While the percentage is not large, it nonetheless represents 6,600 of the year’s sailings 
being disrupted by weather conditions. Severe weather can not only result in delayed or canceled 
sailings, but can also affect physical infrastructure systems. For example, on November 3, 2015, high 
winds pushed the Queen of Nanaimo (ferry service between Vancouver Island and the Mainland) out 

 
CHAPTER 4: BRITISH COLUMBIA 

96
96

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
