4.2 IMPACTS TO TRUCKING OPERATIONS

Precipitation poses issues year-round to truck operators, and standing water on roadways is a 
particular concern in spring (Alberta- and Manitoba-based trucking practitioners; Alberta Motor 
Transport Association Representatives, personal communication, 2015). Increasing instances of 
freezing rain and extreme precipitation over the long term increase the likelihood of accidents and 
reduced travelling speeds (Transportation Research Board, 2008; Andrey and Mills, 2003).  

Wind is also a concern. More frequent high-intensity wind events in recent years have generated 
scheduling challenges and have increased safety concerns for trucking operators, particularly for 
long combination vehicles (LCVs) on highways (Alberta- and Manitoba-based trucking practitioners, 
personal communication, 2015).   

While changing temperatures themselves do not significantly affect trucking operations, increased 
temperatures in the long-term may positively affect road transportation efficiency in the Prairies. To a 
point, higher ambient temperatures improve diesel fuel efficiencies (Lohse-Busch et al., 2013; Natural 
Resources Canada, 2016). 

Additionally, wildfires (resulting from persistent dry conditions) continue to cause disruptions to 
road transportation seasonally throughout the region – road and highway closures often occur in 
conjunction with fire and smoke (CBC News, 2015a).

4.3 ADAPTATIONS FOR ROAD INFRASTRUCTURE

Provincial governments have been active in implementing adaptive strategies. For instance, 
Manitoba has initiated a program to flood-proof roads, focusing on key trade routes such as the 
Provincial Trunk Highway (PTH) 75 to the U.S. and routes to the west. This adaptive strategy includes 
elevating roads, increasing culvert capacities, redirecting water flows, and paving gravel roads to 
reduce washout risks (Transportation and the Environment Task Force, 2014).

Other infrastructure adaptations involve the use of flexible regulations. For example, Manitoba’s 
Spring Road Restrictions program previously enforced fixed start- and end-dates for its axle-weight 
restriction season (Manitoba Infrastructure and Transportation Staff, personal communication, 2015). 
These restrictions minimize road damage from heavy trucks during the spring thaw when roadbeds 
are relatively soft. In response to more variable temperature and weather conditions, the program 
has been adjusted to allow variable start and end dates (Government of Manitoba, 2015b). The 
complementary Winter Weight Premium Policy has been similarly modified (Manitoba Infrastructure 
and Transportation Staff, personal communication, 2015). Adjusting these programs cost very little 
relative to their benefits.

The Government of Manitoba is also reviewing its approach to water control on roadways to maintain 
traffic flow during extreme rainfall. Adaptation strategies under consideration include:

• 

• 

• 

• 

the use of larger drains and culverts to increase water-flow capacity; 

larger bridges capable of withstanding intense precipitation; 

the use of more appropriate erosion-control mechanisms such as riprap and dikes; and,

installing devices capable of monitoring bridge scour in real time during significant flood events.  

The province is also assessing design standards for provincial bridges and culverts to determine if 
updates are required to accommodate changes in climate, land use, surface water drainage, and 
flood vulnerability (Government of Manitoba, 2015c). Major floods in 2011 and 2014 catalyzed many 
of these efforts. 

 
CHAPTER 5: THE PRAIRIES 

118
118

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
