9.0 INFORMATION GAPS AND CONCLUSIONS

Several gaps and barriers related to climate change adaptation in Atlantic Canada’s transportation 
sector are evident. First, there is an absence of vulnerability assessments and comprehensive data 
specific to transportation in the Atlantic region. While risk assessment protocols have been applied 
to identify climate vulnerabilities in some cases, it is not known which specific roads, rail, airports 
and ports are most and least vulnerable. In addition, for certain important weather conditions such 
as fog and wind, there is little relevant, published climate data and literature from which to draw 
conclusions. Wind and fog have major impacts on marine and air navigation in the Atlantic region, so 
further research could better inform planning and operations.  

The research conducted for this chapter also suggests that the risks to assets and operations posed 
by extreme weather events are more salient to public and private infrastructure managers than 
those related to long-term changes in climate parameters (i.e. sea-level rise, increased ambient 
temperatures). Greater attention is given by municipalities, practitioners, and infrastructure operators 
(i.e. Halifax Harbour, Port Saint John) to the increasing frequency of extreme weather events over 
other, longer-term impacts. This is not surprising, given limited public resources and the high costs 
incurred by flooding and other catastrophic events.

Likely for this same reason, practitioners and researchers conducting risk assessments and adaptation 
planning in Atlantic Canada acknowledge challenges in engaging stakeholders. The relevance of 
climate change to business owners can be difficult to explain – sea-level rise is a long-term process 
that does not fit neatly into conventional business cycles.

Despite some of these difficulties, this chapter has identified a number of tangible adaptation efforts 
in the transportation sector, just one sector among many in Atlantic Canada considering how to 
adapt to emerging climate risks (Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions Association, 2016). Climate 
change adaptation is a growing issue on the transportation agenda, and climate risks are spurring 
investment and planning. Practitioners are aware that the demand for transportation services will 
change in response to physical damages and service disruptions caused by changing climate 
conditions, and actions taken to enhance economic access to new or expanded markets will alter 
the supply and demand of freight in the region. Ensuring an efficient and resilient transportation 
infrastructure through collaboration and adaptation will be important to reduce impacts and 
maximize benefits from a changing climate.

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

251
251

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
