INFRASTRUCTURE RELOCATION 

Relocating or flood-proofing road infrastructure may be required, where the shoreline is at risk of 
being inundated or unusable, due to sea-level rise, storm surges, and coastal erosion (Transportation 
Research Board, 2008; Davidson-Arnott and Ollerhead, 2011). Some municipalities in Atlantic Canada 
have chosen to locate new roads away from coastal areas (Graham and Musselman, n.d.); or 
elevate infrastructure when feasible (i.e. Moncton, New Brunswick; see Chapter 9) (AMEC Inc., 2011). 
For example:

• 

• 

The Confederation Bridge, which connects PEI to the Canadian mainland in New Brunswick, was 
built to accommodate a one metre rise in sea levels over 100 years.  The bridge was also designed 
to allow ice blocks to pass safely underneath (Gregg, 2010). 

The Prince Edward Island Department of Transportation is rebuilding the Souris bridge one metre 
higher, due to sea level rise projections (Government of Prince Edward Island, 2015). 

•  Nova Scotia’s provincial government recently rebuilt its 100-series highways further inland from 

their original coastal locations to provide safer and faster corridors; as a result, these highways are 
much less sensitive to coastal hazards (Finck, 2013).

• 

The New Brunswick Department of Transportation rebuilt and raised a bridge on the main road into 
Pointe-du-Chêne to accommodate future sea-level rise (Daigle, 2011). 

•  Relocation of the section of Trans-Canada Highway along the Chignecto Isthmus has been 

discussed as a potential long-term adaptation solution, but is presently considered too costly (see 
Case Study 5).

OPERATIONAL AND MAINTENANCE PRACTICES

Operators are also adapting to challenging weather conditions. For example, one trucking company 
in Newfoundland, experiencing more frequent repairs due to difficult road and weather conditions, 
has found a creative way to ensure business continuity (Fleming, 2014). Towing trucks to the 
company’s facility in Corner Brook is expensive and time consuming; therefore, the company now 
strategically leaves replacement parts in customers’ homes and businesses along its routes (Fleming, 
2014). When minor repairs are required (i.e. tires, springs, and lights), drivers contact the closest facility 
to request delivery or replacement of the appropriate parts. The company’s connections to local 
communities make this approach possible.

Governments are investing in proactive maintenance to reduce climate risks to transportation 
infrastructure. For instance, to reduce spring flood risks in rural New Brunswick resulting from periods 
of rapid warming and snowmelt, the federal government invested $1.7 million in 2015 to proactively 
remove snow from the roadways of eight vulnerable First Nations communities. As many as 800 
truckloads of snow per day were removed from critical infrastructure (including roadways) in some 
communities. Regional snowfall in winter 2014 broke local records and contained higher-than-normal 
water content, making snow difficult for communities to remove (Water Canada, 2015; Aboriginal and 
Northern Development Canada, 2015).

 
CHAPTER 8: ATLANTIC CANADA 

236
236

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
