WIND

To reduce the impacts of wind, structures can be designed to withstand more turbulent conditions 
(OFCM, 2002). In some rural Ontario communities, living “snow fences” (rows of trees lining open tracts 
of farmland) have been used to reduce soil loss due to intense wind; however, they also provide 
co-benefits for transportation by reducing the impacts of blowing snow on roadway visibility in winter 
(Huron County, 2014). 

EXTREME HEAT AND RISING TEMPERATURES

Some parts of the province, including the City of Toronto, use heat-tolerant pavement mixtures 
to enhance roadway heat-resiliency (Andrey and Mills, 2003; City of Toronto, 2011). The Ontario 
Ministry of Transportation (MTO) and some Ontario municipalities have also used an asphalt materials 
characterization system called “SuperPave” since 1997. This system was designed to improve long-
term pavement performance (reducing rutting and cracking) under diverse environmental conditions 
(Ontario Ministry of Transportation, 2013b). The SuperPave system considers high- and low-temperature 
performance for pavement lifecycles, using detailed weather station data to determine appropriate 
asphalt mixes for specific locations. While the system does not include projected climate parameters, 
MTO is implementing an enhanced “mechanistic-empirical” pavement design method for some 
projects, taking into account pavement performance predictions, detailed weather station data, and 
traffic levels.  The MTO believes this will facilitate the use of road materials and designs that are more 
responsive to changing climate conditions (Ontario Ministry of Transportation, 2013b).  

Finally, reduced seasonal operating seasons for winter roads in Ontario, resulting from warmer 
temperatures, could require a shift to other modes of transportation (e.g., air) for some shipments, 
given the prohibitive cost of replacing Ontario’s winter roads with all-weather infrastructure (estimated 
at approximately $1.5 billion) (Deloitte, 2014). Changes to shipment-scheduling and resource 
exploration activities have also been proposed as adaptations, along with specific operational 
and maintenance practices (see Chapter 3 for more detail on these practices) (Prowse et al., 2009; 
Transportation Association of Canada, 2011).

Table 3 provides an overview of the impacts and adaptations identified in this section.

 
CHAPTER 6: ONTARIO 

159
159

Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016Climate Risks & Adaptation Practices - For the Canadian Transportation Sector 2016
