 

o  Require covenants on title of new buildings or properties to require buildings and land uses 

to adapt to future SLR and FCL requirements. 

 

for the SLR Planning Area Yr 2200: 
o 

Identify strategies on how proposed land uses and buildings can be adapted to guideline 
SLR, FCL and Setbacks that might occur in the Year 2200. 

SLR Planning Area strategies may also include planning dates in addition to Year 2100 and 2200. 
For instance, existing buildings may have a lifespan that expires in about 2050, and the planning 
authority  may  deem  it  relevant  to  project  requirements  to  building  reconstruction  at  that  date  – 
perhaps by planning for FCL and Setback requirements for new buildings with a lifespan to Year 
2150. 
Some building uses may have a lifespan of shorter than 100 years. With assistance by Qualified 
Professionals, it is appropriate to consider whether these shorter lifespans could be considered for 
reduced  approval  requirements.  However,  approving  officials  are  cautioned  in  these  cases  to 
ensure that proponents plan and covenant for adaptation of the next generation of buildings and 
land uses on the site to SLR at the Year 2100 and Year 2200 or other appropriate thresholds. 
It  is  recommended  that  SLR  projections  and  related  FCL  requirements  should  be  reviewed  in  5 
years  time  (Year  2015)  as  well  as  Year  2025  and  every  25  years  after  that  at  a  minimum.  The 
guidelines  and  requirements  in  SLR  Planning  Areas  will  need  to  be  reviewed  in  these  same 
intervals, with a focus on updating FCL elevation requirements, which may move up or down as 
projections for SLR become more accurate. 
The term of SLR Plans will also move with the review intervals – with the general intent that SLR 
planning looks ahead approximately 100 and 200 years from the date of the plan. For example, in 
the  Year  2050  the  SLR  Planning  Area  boundaries  (FCL  contours)  may  reflect  Years  2150  and 
2250. 
Building Setbacks from the Sea 

In un-diked areas, SLR will have the long-term effect of moving the Natural Boundary landward. 
This effect will be more pronounced on gently sloping shorelines or low coastal benches than in 
steeper  shoreline  terrain  or  where  bedrock  is  present.    Coastal  Bluffs  will  require  special 
consideration. 
Sea Level Rise may increase the risk of coastal erosion and accelerate the retreat of shorelines. 
Higher risks will occur on sandy shorelines, with moderate risks at gravel or estuarine settings. The 
changes  in  risk  will relate to  increased frequency of wave action at  shorelines  and  at  the  toe  of 
related  slopes  or  bluffs.  The  rate  of  retreat  will  be  highly  dependent  on  the  wind  and  wave 
characteristics at the site and the material of the shoreline and backshore bluffs. 
Where lands are to remain un-diked, setbacks for buildings from the sea must anticipate SLR for 
the lifespan of the building. 
Figure 4-4 illustrates SLR to the Year 2100 in a relatively flat and rolling shoreline condition. SLR 
will increase the elevation of High Tide, and with storm surge, wave effects and freeboard added, 
the cumulative effect is to increase the Flood Construction Level (FCL) by an amount related to 
SLR and the local storm exposure. This increase in sea level and wave runup will gradually move 
the Natural Boundary to a higher level. 
Building  Setback  should  be  established  as  ‘the  greater  of  15  m  from  the  future  Estimated 
Natural  Boundary  or  a  distance  to  where  the  native  land  elevation  equals  the  Flood 
Construction  Level’.  This  setback  would  apply  to  non-erodible  bedrock  cliffs  as  well  as  other 
shoreline types. In cases of coastal bluffs, greater setbacks would apply, consistent with the Land 
Use Guidelines 2004.  

4.3 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

14 


