 

1. 

2. 

6.5 

6.6 

If the future estimated Natural Boundary is located at least 15m seaward of the toe of the bluff, then 
no action is required and the setback shall conform with guidelines suitable to terrestrial cliff 
hazards. 
If the future estimated Natural Boundary is located 15m or less seaward of the toe of the bluff, then 
the setback from the future estimated Natural Boundary will be located at a horizontal distance of at 
least 3 times the height of the bluff, measured from 15m landwards from the location of the future 
estimated  Natural Boundary. 
In some conditions, setbacks may require site-specific interpretation and could result in the use of a 
minimum distance measured back from the crest of the bluff.  The setback may be modified 
provided the modification is supported by a report, giving consideration to the coastal erosion that 
may occur over the life of the project, prepared by a suitably qualified professional. 
Outside the Strait of Georgia, setback requirements would be similar but should be adapted to 
include tsunami effects.  Land use specific provisions in the existing guidelines would still apply.  
 
Renovations or Additions to Existing Buildings  

Renovations  to  existing  buildings  within  the  existing  footprint  of  the  building  are  not  affected  by 
these guidelines. 
Additions of up to 25% of the floor area, at the elevation of the existing building can be allowed, 
provided that the addition is no closer to the existing natural boundary than the existing building. 
Reconstruction of Existing Buildings  

Replacement or redevelopment of a building on an existing low lying lot must meet the new FCL 
and Setback guidelines. If meeting the new guidelines would sterilize the lot (i.e., not allow even 
one of the land uses or structures permitted under the current zoning), the development approving 
official may agree to modifying setback requirements as recommended by a Qualified Professional, 
provided  this  is  augmented  through  a  restrictive  covenant  stipulation  of  the  hazard,  building 
requirements, and liability disclaimer. 
Outside of the Strait of Georgia the requirements would be similar but adapted to include Tsunami 
considerations and a 30m minimum setback. Land Use Specific provisions in the existing guideline 
would still apply. 
 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

22 


