 

Figure B3: Coastal Flood Hazard – Adaptation for Climate Change 

 
Sea Level Rise will gradually raise both the mean sea level (MSL) and the tidal levels along 
the BC Coast. Both MSL and tidal levels will rise in approximately equal amounts in response 
to SLR. For example, if the MSL rises 1.0m, all tide levels, including High Tide, also will rise 
by  1.0m.    Over  time  this  will  mean  that  MSL  is  no  longer  approximately  the  same  as  the 
terrestrial  vertical  datum  plane (CGD), unless  the  terrestrial  datum  plane  is  adjusted  at  the 
same rate. 
As sea level rises, the storms that occur will leave a mark on the slowly changing shoreline.  
In particular the ‘Designated Storm’ will define; in conjunction with the local coastal exposure, 
the nearshore bathymetry, shoreline orientation and topography, a Total Storm Surge and an 
additional wave related runup (Wave Effects). The combination of antecedent storms and the 
Designated  Storm  will  move  the  existing  Natural  Boundary  landward  to  a  new  Natural 
Boundary location at the top of the wave affected zone. At any given time in the future, the 
actual mark of this tide, storm and wave action will reflect the latest storm events, which may 
or may not be “ordinary” and the response of the particular stretch of shoreline. 
It is recommended that a combination of the ‘Designated Flood Level’ and an estimate of the 
expected shoreline response be used to establish the future Estimated Natural Boundary for 
planning  purposes,  as  this  is  a  more  predictable  and  practical  tool  than  relying  on  future 
vegetation  or  soil  response  interpretations,  in  particular  when  SLR  changes  may  be  faster 
than  the  new  shoreline  sediment  or  vegetation  responds.    It  is  also  not  clear  that  at  any 
particular time the mark on the shoreline will reflect an “ordinary” year. The elevation of this 
Estimated Natural Boundary location is defined as the Flood Construction Reference Plane 
(FCRP). 
To  calculate  the  FCL  a  Freeboard  allowance  is  added  above  the  Flood  Construction 
Reference  Plane  (FCRP)  to  allow  for  uncertainty.  This  Freeboard  allowance  may  include 

Appendix B 

4 


