 

 
 
In Figure B1, Mean Sea Level is essentially the same as the terrestrial vertical datum plane of 
Canadian Geodetic Datum = 0 m. The tides, which are nominally centred about mean sea 
level, are established by the definable gravitational interactions between the earth, the sun 
and the moon and are reasonably predicable. Although the difference between mean tide and 
high tide varies from place to place and from time to time, these levels are defined by the 
Canadian Hydrographic Service and available for many locations in coastal British Columbia. 
The Natural Boundary shown on Figure B1 is an established concept in BC law – and reflects 
the change in vegetation and the soil based on effects of the sea. In the Flood Hazard Area 
Land Use Guidelines 2004, building setbacks were established from Natural Boundary, on 
the assumption that the location of Natural Boundary was relatively static (other than erosions 
and accretions).  
The Natural boundary  is, in  practice,  often  difficult  to  determine  in  the  field or  from remote 
survey.  
Flood Construction Level (FCL) is established in the 2004 Guidelines as a general minimum 
of 1.5m above the elevation of the Natural Boundary at the Sea. There are several exceptions 
to these guidelines, including: 
  Coastal Bluffs, where the toe is closer to the Natural Boundary than 15m, or when the toe 

is subject to coastal erosion. 

  Bedrock or designed shore protection might allow a reduced setback. 
  Lands behind Standard Dikes have setbacks and minimum elevations established in the 

Sea Dike Guidelines. 

  Lands  outside  the  Strait  of  Georgia  are  subject  to  tsunami  hazard,  and  that  generally 

prevails over the sea flooding guideline; 

  Lands exposed to other sources of flooding e.g. from river estuaries, may have flooding 

hazards that are higher than the requirements for a hazard from the sea. 

Figure B2 provides a more detailed interpretation of the flooding concepts for the sea in the 
the existing Flood Hazard Area Land Use Guidelines 2004.  In particular: 
  The  location  of  the  Natural  Boundary  is  generally  higher  and  further  inland  than  the 
location of the line marking predicable High Tide. Two natural processes essentially then 
define the location of Natural Boundary: 
o  The water  level  during  an  “ordinary  year”, which results  in  water  and wave actions 
strong enough to mark the shoreline sediments in a distinct manner.  Implicitly this 
suggests  that  it  is  likely  associated  with  a  commonly  occurring  storm  or  “Ordinary 
Storm”. 

 

o  Wave related actions during the ‘Ordinary Storm’. 
the  1.5m  additional  vertical  requirement  that  defines  the  Flood  Construction  Level 
therefore needs to account for two additional considerations:  
o  an additional allowance for storm surge and wave effects for conditions greater than 

the “Ordinary Storm”. 

o  A Freeboard allowance. 

These  considerations  are  shown  in  Figure  B2.    If  a  freeboard  allowance  of  0.6  m  is 
considered,  based  on  the  freeboard  allowance  in  the  existing  companion  document  Dike 

Appendix B 

2 


