 

6 

6.1 

6.2 

6.3 

6.4 

Application to Lands Subject to Future Flooding 
This section applies to land uses that are not protected by Standard Dikes. In areas protected by 
sea dikes that meet BCMOE requirements, FCLs may not apply and land use behind those sea 
dikes may not be restricted. Building setbacks will be required on the landside of dikes as needed 
for dike maintenance and to provide land for future dike raising and reconstruction. 
Sea  Level  Rise  will  create  an  increasing  risk  of  periodic  inundation  to  existing  low  lying 
undeveloped lands along the BC Coast and in lower reaches of river deltas near the Coast. 
These  guidelines  are  not  meant  to  preclude  the  use  of  these  lands  or  of  existing  structures  on 
these 
that  development  of  new  structures  or 
redevelopment/replacement of existing structures recognizes and can appropriately accommodate 
the projected impacts of sea level rise on coastal hazards and flooding over time.  

lands.  The  goal 

is 

to  ensure 

General Guidelines - FCL and Setback 
The FCL shall be established for specific coastal areas during the SLR Planning Areas process. 
FCL shall be a minimum elevation for habitable floor level or underside of wood construction, and 
shall  be  based  on  and  include  allowances  for  Year  2100  SLR  and  High  Tide  levels,  associated 
storm surge and wave effects for the Designated Storm, and Freeboard. 
Building Setback shall be the greater of 15m from the future Estimated Natural Boundary of the sea 
at Year 2100, or a horizontal distance until the natural ground elevation contour reaches the Year 
2100 projected FCL. Landfill or structural support (e.g. pilings) for a coastal development shall be 
treated as a Dike structure – refer to the “Sea Dike Guidelines 2010” for guidance.  

Subdivision of Undeveloped Lands 
All  lots  created  through  subdivision  shall  comply  with  the  general  FCL  and  Setback  guidelines 
noted above. 
To regulate redevelopment at the end of the building lifespan, the development approving official 
shall require a restrictive covenant stipulation of reconstruction requirements to meet the FCL and 
setbacks in force at the time of redevelopment, and identifying the hazard, building requirements, 
and liability disclaimer if reconstruction does not take place at or before the planned lifespan of the 
building. 

Development on Existing Undeveloped Lots 
On existing lots, if meeting the guidelines noted above would sterilize the lot (i.e., not allow even 
one of the land uses or structures permitted under the current zoning), the development approving 
official may agree to modifying setback requirements as recommended by a Qualified Professional, 
provided  this  is  augmented  through  a  restrictive  covenant  stipulation  of  the  hazard,  building 
requirements, and liability disclaimer. 

Lots with Coastal Bluffs 
 
For lots containing coastal bluffs that are steeper than 3(H):1(V) and susceptible to erosion from 
the sea, setbacks shall be determined as follows: 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

21 


