 

 
 
 

3.3 

Sea Level Rise and Building Flood Construction Level 
In  coastal  areas,  calculation  of  the  Flood  Construction  Reference  Plane  (FCRP)  and  a  Flood 
Construction Level (FCL) that reflects expected SLR is complex, and will vary depending on the 
local tide conditions, shoreline orientation and exposure and other factors that change allowances 
for local storm surge and wave effects. 
An  example  of  the  calculation  of  the  FCL  for  an  exposed  location  at  Victoria,  where  a  recent 
surveyed elevation of a present Natural Boundary is available, is provided in Table 3-1, based on 
the  existing  guidelines;  Land  Use  Guidelines  20043,  and  for  these  updated  guidelines,  for 
application up to the years 2100 and 2200.  
 ‘Guideline’ provides recommended values for current planning for the BC Coast for the indicated 
years as indicated in Figure 3-1. ‘Possible’ represents the highest potential values as defined in 
the  companion  “Policy Discussion Paper 2010”1  and  indicated by  the  upper  envelope curve  in 
Figure 3-1.  The “Possible” scenario is only included to illustrate the potential implication of the 
present upper bound of all global scenarios. 
The updated estimate for 2010 in Table 3-1 shows that the change from relying on the elevation of 
the present Natural Boundary to one which is based on expected water levels makes no significant 
difference to the estimation of a FCL for 2010.  The results in Table 3-1 also show that planning 
today  for  a  FCL  of  5.9  m  CGD  essentially  means  that  anticipation  of  an  extreme  SLR  by  2100 
simply provides an allowance that may provide protection until the year 2200, depending on actual 
SLR. 
Table  3-2 provides preliminary  FCRPs  and  FCLs  for  various areas  of  the  BC  coast  for  the  year 
2100, based on the Recommended Sea Level Rise Curve in Figure 3-1 and annual exceedence 
probabilities (AEP) defined in the companion document Policy Discussion Paper 20101.  It should 
be noted that these preliminary values should vary due to a number of factors that are site specific, 
including:  the  local  rate  of  crustal  uplift  or  subsidence,  the  nature  of  the  tides,  anticipated  local 
storm surge effects that depend on local bathymetry and the particulars of the anticipated storms 
associated  with  the storm surge.   The preliminary  values  provided  in Table  3-2  are  provided  for 
guidance.  Further analysis is required to provide FCRPs and FCLs for specific sites. 
SLR  Planning  Areas  should  be  established  along  the  BC  Coast  to  provide  a  basis  for  local 
calculations  and  guidance  on  required  Flood  Construction  Levels,  and  to  provide  a  basis  for 
management  of  the  expected  ongoing  increases  in  SLR  as  it  affects  land  use  and  buildings. 
Proposed terms of reference for SLR Planning Areas are introduced in Section 4 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

7 


