 

Both DFL and FCL will need to change over time as sea level rise continues. The pace of sea level 
rise and the arrival of more accurate projections will inform how often a revision to FCLs needs to 
take place. Given current information, a review in five years, and then again by 2025, as well as at 
least once every 25 years thereafter, is warranted. 
Building Life Cycle and Sea Level Rise 

3.2 

In considering FCL in the face of an evolving sea level, it is necessary to consider the longevity of 
the buildings, structures or land use under consideration. A range of 50 to 100 years of practical 
service life is expected for most buildings, although some building life may extend well beyond that 
lifespan. Given the prospect of rising sea level, it is necessary to establish a FCL that anticipates a 
flood level applicable to the end of the lifespan of the proposed building. 
Figure 3-2 illustrates how planning for the 100 year lifespan of a structure or land use brings future 
SLR  increases  into  immediate  focus.  The  graphic  illustrates,  in  100  year  steps,  how  building 
elevations may need to be incrementally adjusted higher to accommodate gradual SLR. 

 

Figure 3-2: Incremental Sea Level Rise Effect on Planning for 100 Year Life Structures 

 

For  land  use  management  guidance  in  BC,  allowances  for  Sea  Level  Rise  until  the  Year  2100 
should be used in current planning and building approvals. 
This guideline should apply for the period from 2010 until the next SLR review, which should be 
completed by 2015. 
Figure 3-2 shows how high SLR projections could affect a building that has an expected lifespan 
extending  to  the  Year  2100.  An  allowance  of  1.0  m  of  SLR  plus  or  minus  regional  effects  (e.g. 
crustal uplift or subsidence) could be required. Figure 3-2 also extends the allowance out to the 
Year  2200,  indicating  that  an  additional  SLR  of  approximately  1.0  m,  for  a  total  allowance  of 
approximately 2.0 m, can be expected over the 200 year period. 
SLR  over  the  next  centuries  will  continue  to  increase  the  pressure  for  ever  higher  building 
elevations to adapt to the risk of flooding from the sea. 

 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

6 


