 

 

Figure 4-7: Concept Plan of Typical Planning Responses to SLR  

 

For ease of land use planning administration within SLR Planning Areas, planning authorities may 
find it useful to establish ‘areas’ of similar planned structure lifespan, as opposed to allowing a mix 
of  buildings  with  short,  medium  and  long-term  lifespans  in  a  small  area.  Note,  however,  this 
requirement  is  not  intended  to  discourage  mixed  land  use  communities.  With  new  legislative 
support, a building lifespan requirement could be an added clause to a Development Permit Area 
or a Zoning Bylaw. Associated with the planned structure lifespan would be a FCL and shoreline 
setback. A covenant on title would provide legal notice that the FCL and setback rules may change 
for reconstruction at the end of the structure lifespan period. 
However, the recommended planning approach is to set FCL based on a precautionary principle 
and a reasonably long building lifespan (i.e.100 years), and then allow those applicants that need 
to challenge these FCLs to commission studies by a qualified professional to consider the science 
and  site  conditions  and  recommend  a  site-specific  and  structure-specific  FCL.  This  approach  is 
similar to that used in the BC Riparian Area Regulation.  In these cases a covenant on title would 
provide notice on the allowances and restrictions on the land use and structure use, and would give 
notice  that  future  FCL  levels  may  vary  depending  on  future  SLR  projections  and  the  lifespan  of 
future buildings. 
In the meantime until SLR Planning Areas are defined, local governments could consider adding 
requirements to development information statutes stating that applicants proposing to construct at 
elevations below those outlined in Table 3-2 provide Qualified Professional expertise to determine 
appropriate flood protection in keeping with the 2010 Guidelines. This would be an interim measure 
only until more cost-efficient neighbourhood scale SLR Planning could be done. 

4.5 

Zoning for Risk 
Land  Use  Zoning  should  match  land  use  permissions  to  the  risk  of  SLR.    An  example  of  “Risk 
Zoning” is provided in Table 4-1. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

18 


