 

Figure 4-5: Concept Section of SLR Planning Area Yr 2200 

 

 

4.4 

Land Use Planning Strategies  

 

Beyond concerns about individual buildings, the long-term nature of SLR provides an opportunity to 
minimize risks and impacts by land use planning strategies. 
During planning for land use and development, careful mapping and planning strategies for SLR 
Planning  Areas  will  minimize  costs  and  hazards  for  both  the  public  and  private  landowners  / 
insurers. 
Figure  4-6  introduces  in  plan  view,  the  concept  that  a  SLR  Planning  Area  extent  varies  with 
shoreline  and  backshore  terrain.  Where  shorelines  are  relatively  steep  and  rocky,  typical  of 
bedrock points of land, the minimum 15m setback combined with a steep slope would mean the 
areal extent of SLR will be limited. In shoreline areas where gentle beaches, beach dunes and flat 
or rolling backshores exist, SLR impact could affect a considerable land area. A first step in land 
use planning for SLR is to establish the future FCL allowances for Year 2100 and 2200, and map 
the associated FCL lines on detailed contour maps. The SLR Planning Area lines will be, in effect, 
contour lines representing allowances for the FCL levels in Year 2100 and Year 2200. 
Figure 4-7 shows typical planning responses, at the land use level, to risks of SLR in areas that will 
not be diked. An initial response should be to concentrate development outside the SLR Planning 
Area, to AVOID risks associated with SLR. 
Increases in SLR will gradually move the natural boundary landward. Land use in the area that will 
be  inundated  in  the  future  should  be  managed  to  adjust  to  the  change  in  shoreline  and  to  the 
increased risk of sea flooding during the Designated Storm. Uses such as agriculture, parks, open 
space and limited industrial or short-term uses would be preferred. 
In  cases  of  estuarine  or  coastal  wetlands,  the  zone  of  wetlands  may  tend  to  move  shoreward. 
Where coastal defences or existing rock geology stops the shoreline from moving, intertidal areas 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

16 


