 

In coastal areas, the vertical distance to be added to a Designated Flood Level is site and 
structure specific. 

1.12  Natural Boundary 
Means the visible high watermark of any lake, river, stream or other body of water where the 
presence  and  action  of  the  water  are  so  common  and  usual  and  so  long  continued  in  all 
ordinary years as to mark upon the soil of the bed of the lake, river, stream or other body of 
water a character distinct from that of the banks thereof, in respect to vegetation, as well as in 
respect to the nature of the soil itself (Land Act, Section 1).  In addition, the natural boundary 
includes the best estimate of the edge of dormant or old side channels and marsh areas.  For 
coastal  areas,  the  natural  boundary  shall  include  the  natural  limit  of  permanent  terrestrial 
vegetation.  
Natural Boundary is an established concept in BC law – and reflects a change in vegetation 
and soil based on effects of the sea. In the Flood Hazard Area Land Use Guidelines 2004, 
building setbacks were established from Natural Boundary, on the unstated assumption that 
the location of Natural Boundary is relatively static (other than erosions and accretions).  
Natural boundary is, in practice, often difficult to determine in the field or from remote survey. 
In  coastal  areas,  the  Natural  Boundary  reflects  a  snapshot  historical  record  of  tide,  storm 
surge and wave runup effects, which may be the mark of a recent storm in an ordinary year or 
it may be the mark of the most severe storm in recent times.  There is no way of knowing for 
certain.  A technical basis for the Natural Boundary in coastal areas is site and time specific.  
In the future the location and elevation of a Natural Boundary will change from time to time 
due to changes associated with sea level rise and it will likely lag sea level rise.  It is also 
unlikely to immediately reflect the action of the water, especially the storm surge and waves, 
during a Designated Storm. 

1.13  Project Life 
The number of years a particular project; including a sea dike, a building or a community, is 
intended  to  serve  before  it  is  replaced,  upgraded  or  dismantled.    Regular  maintenance  to 
ensure the project provides the intended purpose is expected during the project life. 

1.14  Sea Dike 
A dike, floodwall or any other thing that prevents flooding of land by the sea. As defined in the 
Dike Maintenance Act, “dike” means “an embankment, wall, fill, piling, pump, gate, flood box, 
pipe, sluice, culvert, canal, ditch, drain”. 

1.15  Sea Dike Crest Elevation 
Sea  Dike  Crest  Elevation  has  essentially  the  same  meaning  as  “dike  crest  height”  in  the 
existing  document  “Dike  Design  and  Construction  Guide  2003”.  However,  the  existing 
definition  of  dike  height  suggests  that  consideration  of  wave  run-up  and  set-up  is  optional. 
The term Sea Dike Crest Elevation is defined to specifically cover scenarios where wave run-
up, overtopping and wind and wave setup must be included in defining the height of the dike. 

1.16  Sea Dike System 
A  system  of:  dikes,  dunes,  berms  or natural shorelines  that  provide  a  similar  function;  and 
associated  engineering  works  (e.g.,  tidal  gates,  outfalls,  outlet  structures,  seawalls,  quay 
walls, ramps, adjacent building features, etc.) used to protect land from flooding or inundation. 
In the Netherlands where dike systems are highly evolved, a dike system is termed a “dike 
ring” that forms the flooding defence for a region.  There are approximately 95 such rings in 

Appendix A 

4 


