 

Zone 

Little or no risk areas:  
Outside SLR Planning Area 

Table 4-1:   Zoning for Risk Areas 

adapted from:  Policy Discussion Paper 20101 

Planning Response 

  No constraints on planning due to flood risk 

Low to medium risk areas: 
e.g.: SLR Planning Areas for 

Year 2200 

  Not usually necessary to consider flood risk unless local conditions 

indicate otherwise. Suitable for development other than essential 
services.  

  A flood risk assessment may be required at upper end of the 

probability range (0.5% or 200 year average return period) or where 
the nature of the development or the local circumstances indicates 
heightened risk. Water-resistant materials and construction may be 
required.  

  Generally not suitable for essential civil infrastructure/services such 
as hospitals, fire stations, emergency depots. Where such services 
or infrastructure have to be located in these areas or they are being 
substantially expanded or upgraded, they must be capable of 
remaining operational and accessible during extreme flooding 
events. 

 

 

Medium to high risk areas: 
e.g.: SLR Planning Areas for 

Year 2100 

 

  Generally not suitable for essential infrastructure such as hospitals, 

fire stations, emergency depots, schools, ground-based electrical 
and telecommunications equipment.  Flood proofing may be 
acceptable. 
In areas already built up: May be suitable for residential, institutional, 
commercial and industrial development, provided flood prevention 
measures to the appropriate standard already exist, are under 
construction, or are planned as part of a long-term development 
strategy. In allocating sites, preference should be given to those 
areas already defended to that standard. Use water-resistant 
materials and construction as appropriate.  
In undeveloped and sparsely populated areas: Generally not suitable 
for additional development of any type. Exceptions may arise if a 
location is essential for operational reasons; e.g., for navigation and 
water-based recreation uses, agriculture, transport or some utilities 
infrastructure, and an alternative lower-risk location is not 
achievable. Such infrastructure should be designed and constructed 
to remain operational during floods. 

  May be suitable for some recreation, sport, amenity and nature 

conservation uses provided adequate evacuation procedures are in 
place. Job-related accommodation (e.g., caretakers and operational 
staff) may be acceptable. New trailer or mobile home should 
generally not be located in these areas. 
If built development is permitted, flood prevention and alleviation 
measures are required and the loss of storage capacity minimised. 
Water-resistant materials and construction as appropriate.  
Land should not be developed if it will be needed or have significant 
potential for coastal managed realignment (retreat) or creation of 
wetlands as part of an overall flood defence.  

 

 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

19 


