 

4 

4.1 

Sea Level Rise (SLR) Planning Areas 
SLR  creates  serious  risks  for  public  health  and  property  in  lowlands  on  the  BC  coast.  It  is 
necessary to minimize the risk and costs of SLR, to both public and private interests, by proactive 
planning  for  future  land  use.  SLR  Planning  Areas  should  be  defined  for  both  settled  and  new 
development areas that are at risk of SLR inundation or related erosion.  

Extent of SLR Planning Area 
This  section  describes  how  to  determine  the  extent  of  SLR  Planning  Areas,  and  introduces  the 
proposed scope of planning. 
Figure 4-1 illustrates in concept the proposed SLR Planning Areas. They would extend from the 
existing  Natural  Boundary  of  the  sea  landward  to  the  contour  elevation  of  a  future  Flood 
Construction Level (FCL). Each SLR Planning Area would have two parts: 
  SLR Planning Area Year 2100 would extend from Natural Boundary at the sea to the guideline 

FCL elevation projected for Year 2100. 

  SLR Planning Area Year 2200 would extend from Natural Boundary at the sea to the guideline 

FCL elevation projected for Year 2200. 

For the purposes of determining the extent of SLR Planning Areas, the presence of existing sea 
dikes or coastal defences should be ignored.  However, if the Management Option selected for the 
Area  is  to  protect  the  Area  in  perpetuity  with  sea  dikes,  then  the  design  of  the  dikes  should  be 
considered  in  the  determination  of  appropriate  FCLs.    Land  use  policies  must  then  address  the 
land needs required to upgrade the existing sea dikes. 
Flood  Construction  Levels  for  SLR  Planning  Areas  should  be  calculated  specific  to  the  local 
conditions  of  shoreline  terrain  and  vegetation,  tides,  wind  fetch  and  upland  topography.  Each 
location may have a different allowance for High Tide, Sea Level Rise, Storm Surge, and Wave 
Effects which together with Freeboard determine the FCL. 
Planning policy and land use designations within the SLR Planning Area must consider how land 
uses can adapt to the projected future Flood Construction Levels. 
 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

11 


