 

Background 

Scope 
This guideline document describes the principles for determining the exposure of low lying lands to 
a flooding hazard due to their exposure to the sea and provides guidelines and direction for their 
management. 

2 

2.1 

2.2 

Reference Documents 

2.2.1  Standards and Guidelines 

2.3 

2.4 

A  national  standard  or  guideline  for  the  management  of  lands  exposed  to  coastal  flood  hazards 
does  not  exist.    This  document  is  intended  to  provide  guidance  for  coastal  exposure  in  British 
Columbia. 

Definitions 
A summary of definitions and terminology used in this document is provided in Appendix A. 
Where possible the same terminology and definitions as used in the existing document; Land Use 
Guidelines 20043 are used; however, as the existing terminology and definitions sometimes need 
modification, clarification or expansion to be appropriate for coastal conditions, in some cases new 
or  revised  terminology  and  definitions  are  proposed.    It  is  recommended  that  the  reader  of  the 
updated  documents  familiarize  themselves  with  the  updated  terminology  and  definitions  in 
Appendix A as necessary. 

Updated Definitions 
In the existing documents the definition of the management parameters; Flood Construction Level 
(FCL) and Setback, is based on the defined location of the Natural Boundary – a position defined in 
law, and in the existing definitions, but which has a tenuous technical basis. The Natural Boundary 
is  a  position  that  can  be  identified  on  an  existing  shoreline  as  indicated  in  Figure  2-1.  It  is  not 
possible to identify the Natural Boundary for a future higher water level. Further background and 
discussion is provided in Appendix B. 
A brief summary of necessary changes is provided below and is summarized in Figure 2-2. 
In  general  terms  the  reference  point  for  the  FCL  and  for  the  Setback  becomes  centred  on  an 
estimated location for a future Natural Boundary, the location of which will change over time as sea 
level rises.  The reference point can be estimated by defining: 

1.  The Designated Flood Level (as indicated in Figure 2-2) 
2.  An estimated future Natural Boundary location (as indicated in Figure 2-2): 

The Designated Flood Level is defined as: 
 

 

 

Designated Flood Level (DFL)  = 

Future SLR Allowance 
+ Maximum High Tide (HHWLT) 
+ Total Storm Surge during Designated Storm 

                                                      

3 “Land Use Guidelines 2004” means the Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines, May 2004, 
prepared by the Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

2 


