 

1 

1.1 

Introduction and Application of This Document 

General 
This document provides guidelines for the management of lands that are exposed to coastal flood 
hazards  arising  from  their  exposure  to  the  sea  and  to  expected  sea  level  rise  due  to  climate 
change. 
This document will supersede the related sections of the existing “Land Use Guidelines 2004”, 
which means the Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines, May 2004, prepared by 
the Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection (now Ministry of Environment). 
The  existing  document  is  focussed  primarily  on  river  flood  risks  and  the  existing  section  on 
exposure to flooding by the sea (Section 3.5) is essentially based on the historical slow rise in sea 
level  on  the  coastlines  of  BC  over  the  last  century.    Recent  and  future  sea  level  rise  is  now 
understood to be occurring at faster rates and in the future is anticipated to be rising at a rate that 
is approximately 10 times faster than the historical rate. 
This  document  provides  guidelines  intended  to  help  local  governments,  land-use  managers  and 
approving  officers  develop  and  implement  land-use  management  plans  and  make  subdivision 
approval decisions for lands exposed to coastal flooding hazards and Sea Level Rise (SLR). 
The  Sea  Level  Rise  (SLR)  projections  and  potential  responses  considered  in  this  document  are 
drawn from the Policy Discussion Paper 20101. 
Current  BC  guidelines  require  flood-proofing  behind  dikes  (i.e.  raising  the  habitable  areas  of 
buildings to the Flood Construction Level); however, where sea dikes are upgraded to new design 
guidelines,  as  defined  in  the  companion  document “Sea Dike Guidelines 2010”  2,  relaxation  of 
flood-proofing guidelines may be considered. The relaxed flood-proofing must be compatible with 
the design of the sea dikes. 
This document, and the companion document “Sea Dike Guidelines 2010” 2 are specific to flood 
hazards  arising  from  the  exposure  of  BC  lands  to  the  sea.  In  some  locations,  specifically  river 
estuaries, the lands will also be exposed to other sources of flooding. These new documents are 
companion  documents  to  the  existing  guideline  documents  which  still  address  flooding  hazards 
from rivers.  Analysis of flooding hazards from all sources – rivers and the sea - will be required in 
estuaries.  

1.2 

Acknowledgment 
Preparation of this document and its companion documents was made possible through funding by 
Natural Resources Canada’s Regional Adaptation Collaborative program and administration by the 
Fraser Basin Council.  

                                                      

1 Draft Policy Discussion Paper - Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea Dikes  and Coastal Flood 
Hazard  Land  Use  in  BC.  Rev  0”.  Prepared  by  Ausenco  Sandwell  for  the  British  Columbia  Ministry  of 
Environment. 
2 Sea Dike Guidelines - Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea Dikes  and Coastal Flood Hazard 
Land Use in BC. Rev 0”. Prepared by Ausenco Sandwell for the British Columbia Ministry of Environment. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment/ Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

1 


