guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:26 AM  Page 90

APPENDIX 5

Extreme Event: An extreme weather event refers to
meteorological conditions that are rare for a particular place
and/or time, such as an intense storm or heat wave. An
extreme climate event is an unusual average over time of a
number of weather events, for example heavy rainfall over a
season.

Extreme Weather Event: An event that is rare within its
statistical reference distribution at a particular place.
Definitions of “rare” vary, but an extreme weather event
would normally be as rare as or rarer than the 10th or 90th
percentile. By definition, the characteristics of what is
called “extreme weather” may vary from place to place. An
“extreme climate event” is an average of a number of
weather events over a certain period of time, an average
which is itself extreme (e.g. rainfall over a season). (IPCC,
2001)

Global Circulation Models (CGMs): Numerical
representation of the atmosphere and its phenomena over
the entire Earth, using the equations of motion and
including radiation, photochemistry, and the transfer of
heat, water vapour, and momentum. (NSIDC, n.d.) 

Human System: Any system in which human
organizations play a major role. Often, but not always, the
term is synonymous with “society” or “social system” (e.g.
agricultural system, political system, technological system,
economic system). (IPCC, 2001)

Kyoto Protocol: The Kyoto Protocol to the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) was adopted in 1997 in Kyoto, Japan, at the
Third Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) to
the UNFCCC. It contains legally binding commitments in
addition to those included in the UNFCCC. Countries
included in Annex B of the Protocol. Most Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development countries and
countries with economies in transition agreed to reduce
their anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (carbon
dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons,
perfluorocarbons, and sulphur hexafluoride) by at least 5%
below 1990 levels in the commitment period 2008 to
2012. The Kyoto Protocol entered into force on 16
February 2005. (IPCC, 2007)

Mainstreaming refers to the integration of adaptation
objectives, strategies, policies, measures or operations such
that they become part of the national and regional
development policies, processes and budgets at all levels
and stages (UNDP, 2005).

Maladaptation: Any changes in natural or human systems
that inadvertently increase vulnerability to climatic stimuli;
an adaptation that does not succeed in reducing
vulnerability but instead increases it. (IPCC, 2007)

Mitigation: The promotion of policy, regulatory and
project-based measures that contribute to the stabilization or
reduction of greenhouse gases concentration in the
atmosphere. Renewable energy programs, energy efficiency
frameworks and substitution of fossil fuels are examples of
climate change mitigation measures. (The World Bank, n.d.)

Mitigative Capacity: A country’s ability to reduce
anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions or enhance natural
sinks. “Ability” refers to skills, competencies, fitness, and
proficiencies that a country has attained which can
contribute to greenhouse gas emissions mitigation. The
main sets of factors influencing mitigative capacity are
technological, economic, and institutional in character. The
economic factors include income, abatement cost and
opportunity cost while the technological factors include the
ability to absorb existing climate-friendly technologies or to
develop innovative ones. The institutional factors include
the effectiveness of government regulation, clear market
rules, a skilled work force and public awareness. (Winkler
et al., 2007) 

Non-Climatic Hazards: include globalization and growing
competition, deepening wealth gap, changing
demographics and population patterns, concerns about
socio-political insecurity, rapid technological change,
declining natural resources, ecosystem services, natural
habitat and biodiversity, increasing level of pollutants in the
natural environment also affecting health  

No Regret Adaptation Options: Adaptation options (or
measures) that would be justified under all plausible future
scenarios, including the absence of man-made climate
change. (Eales et al., 2006)

Mainstreaming: A definition of ‘mainstreaming’ does not
yet exist, although the term is widely used. It seems that
‘mainstreaming’ is used interchangeably with ‘integration’.

Planned Adaptation—Adaptation that is the result of a
deliberate policy decision, based on an awareness that
conditions have changed or are about to change and that

90

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


