guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 50

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  5

It  is  important  to  communicate  the  results  of  the  SAM
project as it progresses with other local governments and
agencies to promote information exchange and to increase
your capacity to address future events. This communication
can also help to identify future opportunities and initiatives
to tackle climate change and promote sustainability. These
new projects may require involvement of new stakeholders
such  as  representatives  of  other  levels  of  government,
neighbouring communities, non-governmental organizations
or professional organizations. 

Examples of SAM Actions

The  following  tables  list  a  number  of  adaptation  actions
applicable to various sectors. As suggested by Wilbanks et al.
(2007), these actions are separated into the following: City and
Community,  Water,  Forestry,  Food,  Biodiversity-related,
Coastal Area and Floodplain, Health, Energy, and Recreation.
In  addition  to  the  adaptation  response  examples  provided
below, examples of potential maladaptation have been included
for further reference at the end of the section (Table 5).

TABLE 4.   EXAMPLES OF ADAPTATION ACTIONS

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

PRINCIPLES 
OF CITY AND
COMMUNITY
ADAPTATION

INFRA-
STRUCTURE

(cid:129) Ensure effective governance that integrates different aspects of development with environmental

and social perspectives 
Introduction of mainstreaming is suggested to facilitate consistency between adaptation initiatives
and other programs, such as sustainable development planning
Internalize climate change into the market mechanism using economic instruments such as taxes,
emission trading, and insurance to promote adaptation  and mitigation policies
Implement general capacity building programs, market development, and local enterprise and
finance development (e.g. soft loans, micro credits, and educational and training programs)

(cid:129) Encourage a strong sense of community and interests in natural resources conversation
(cid:129) Develop an Official Community Plan (OCP) to identify a comprehensive community vision for

the long-term
Increase resilience of urban system physical and linkage infrastructures and allocate financial
mechanisms for increasing resiliency

(cid:129) Change location choices, migration behaviour while promoting low carbon and resilient

alternatives
Strengthen markets and other information exchange processes, including support of human and
social capacities

(cid:129) Formalize flow of communication between local governments’ departments (i.e. planning,

engineering, parks, emergency management) and levels of government (i.e. federal, provincial,
municipal) to coordinate adaptation goals and efforts
Implement ‘mainstreaming,’ the integration of climate change vulnerabilities or adaptation into
related government policy (e.g. integration of climate information into vulnerability or hazard
assessments, broad development strategies, macro policies, sector policies, institutional or
organizational structures, development project design and implementation)

(cid:129) Encourage developers to meet Leadership in Environmental Design (LEED) standards
(cid:129) Create green roofs to extend roof life (i.e. green roofs can almost double the life expectancy of
roofs by protecting roofs’ waterproofing membranes) and lower development costs (i.e. storm
management afforded by green roofs can reduce the number of drainage outlets required on
buildings)

(cid:129) Use sustainable drainage systems (SUDS) 
(cid:129) Promote ‘cool’ or ‘white roofs’ to minimize damage to infrastructure. Cool roofs reduce damage
from ultraviolet radiation and daily temperature fluctuations, which cause repeated contraction
and expansion  

(cid:129) Planting vegetation (i.e. planting trees and vegetation to avoid subsidence in shrink-swell soils

and erosion of sandy soils) 

50

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


