guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:26 AM  Page 91

APPENDIX 5

action is required to return to, maintain, or achieve a
desired state.

Potential Impacts: All impacts that may occur given a
projected change in climate, without considering
adaptation.

Reactive Adaptation: Adaptation that takes place after
impacts of climate change have been observed.

Resilience: The capacity of a system, community or society
potentially exposed to hazards to adapt, by resisting or
changing in order to reach and maintain an acceptable level
of functioning and structure. This is determined by the
degree to which the social system is capable of organizing
itself to increase its capacity for learning from past disasters
for better future protection and to improve risk reduction
measures. (UN/ISDR, 2004)

Risk (climate-related): is the result of interaction of
physically defined hazards with the properties of the
exposed systems – i.e., their sensitivity or (social)
vulnerability. Risk can also be considered as the
combination of an event, its likelihood, and its
consequences – i.e., risk equals the probability of climate
hazard multiplied by a given system’s vulnerability (UNDP
2005). Risk is the probability that a situation will produce
harm under specified conditions. It is a combination of two
factors: the probability that an adverse event will occur; and
the consequences of the adverse event. Risk encompasses
impacts on human and natural systems, and arises from
exposure and hazard. Hazard is determined by whether a
particular situation or event has the potential to cause
harmful effects.

Risk Management: The implementation of strategies to
avoid unacceptable consequences. In the context of climate
change adaptation and mitigation are the two broad
categories of action that might be taken to avoid
unacceptable consequences. (UNDP, 2005)

Sensitivity: the degree to which a system is affected, either
adversely or beneficially, by climate-related stimuli. The
effect may be direct (e.g., a change in crop yield in response
to a change in the mean, range, or variability of
temperature) or indirect (e.g., damages caused by an
increase in the frequency of coastal flooding due to sea level
rise) (IPCC, 2001)

Socio-Economic Vulnerability: is an aggregate measure of
human welfare that integrates environmental, social,
economic and political exposure to a range of harmful
perturbations (UNDP, 2005).

Stakeholder: A person or an organization that has a
legitimate interest in a project or entity, or would be
affected by a particular action or policy. (IPCC, 2007)

Threshold: Any level of a property of a natural or
socioeconomic system beyond which a defined or marked
change occurs. Gradual climate change may force a system
beyond such a threshold. Biophysical thresholds represent a
distinct change in conditions, such as the drying of a
wetland, floods, breeding events. Climatic thresholds
include frost, snow and monsoon onset. Ecological
thresholds include breeding events, local to global
extinction or the removal of specific conditions for survival.
Socioeconomic thresholds are set by benchmarking a level
of performance. Exceeding a socioeconomic threshold
results in a change of legal, regulatory, economic or cultural
behaviour. Examples of agricultural thresholds include the
yield per unit area of a crop in weight, volume or gross
income. (Marsden Jacobs Associates, 2004)

UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change): An international treaty adopted in
1992, and entered into force in 1994, that sets an overall
framework for intergovernmental efforts to address
challenges posed by climate change. It recognizes that the
climate system is a shared resource whose stability can be
affected by industrial and other emissions of carbon dioxide
and other greenhouse gases. Under the Convention,
governments cooperate in preparing for adaptation to the
impacts of climate change, launch national strategies for
addressing greenhouse gas emissions and adapting to
expected impacts, and gather and share information on
greenhouse gas emissions, national policies and best
practices. One hundred and ninety-two countries have
ratified their membership with UNFCCC and the Kyoto
Protocol is an addition to this treaty. 

Vulnerability: The degree to which a system is susceptible
to, or unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate
change, including climate variability and extremes.
Vulnerability is a function of the character, magnitude, and
rate of climate variation to which a system is exposed, its
sensitivity, and its adaptive capacity. (IPCC, 2001)

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

91


