guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:26 AM  Page 76

APPENDIX 2

If the impacts are the increasing
concentration of population,
infrastructure and economic
activity in coastal zones, this
will increase vulnerability to
storm surges, sea level rise,
extreme weather events and
flooding.

The consequences could be issues such as:
(cid:129)

Sea level rise combined with an increased risk of storm surges and extreme
weather events pose new challenges for coastal settlements. Economic damage
from severe weather has increased dramatically over the past several decades,
largely due to the increasing value of infrastructure, property and economic
activity at risk. Often upgrades will be required to prevent overtopping or
breaching currently and in the future. Some have suggested that dike systems
will need to be re-examined to consider whether they should be maintained,
updated or even abandoned. The growing concentration of population and
economic activity in vulnerable areas may increase vulnerability in the case of
flooding or severe weather events. Emergency management planning will have
to be continually updated to reflect these realities.

These consequences could lead to potential vulnerability at the local level as
follows:
(cid:129) Vulnerability of coastal populations increases with the concentration of wealth

and people in exposed areas 

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129) A combination of El Nino conditions, storm surges and sea level rise increase

risk of coastal flooding and storm impacts on the west coast of Canada
It is still unclear how El Nino and Pacific Decadal Oscillation systems may be
impacted by climate change
Severe winter storms and coastal erosion have already been observed on the
Pacific coast. Sea level rise and storm frequency or intensity will increase the
risk of inundation, storm-surge flooding, shoreline erosion and other storm
related impacts 

(cid:129) Low-lying homes, docks and port facilities would be more frequently flooded

at high tide and during severe storms 

(cid:129) Munich Re, a leading insurance group internationally, recently stated that it
expects climate change to be a major driver of losses in the future, and urged
international action. Their most recent report showed an upward trend in the
number of natural catastrophes and the value of losses due to those
catastrophes annually

(cid:129) Communities’ dikes system may require upgrades to prevent overtopping or

breaching currently and in the future 

(cid:129) Dike systems will need to be re-examined to decide whether to maintain,

update, or abandon them; higher maintenance costs will be incurred for dikes,
seawalls and channel works at the mouth of the Fraser River 

(cid:129) Low lying areas that are not diked may be inundated, and pumping may be

required at additional energy cost 

(cid:129) Emergency preparedness measures will become obsolete unless knowledge of

potential climate change impacts is incorporated into these plans.

76

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


