guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 70

APPENDIX 2

appendix 2: understanding the consequences of
climate change impacts 

The important part of a climate change impact assessment should be not only obtaining information about changes in basic
climatic variables such as temperature and precipitation, but also information on what these changes mean for the resources,
infrastructure and vulnerability of areas relevant for the local government. This section outlines potential consequences of
impacts that changes in climate variables could pose on the community. From the viewpoint of adaptation and vulnerability
reduction, these consequences are very important for the design of adaptation actions since they relate changes in climate
variables to socio-economic and ecological dimensions of local development. The list below helps to illuminate potential local
consequences that are caused by the impacts of a changing climate and what potential vulnerability these consequences lead to
at the local level.

If the impacts are changes in
temperature, runoff and other
climatic conditions; these will
lead to significant changes in
species ranges, ecosystem
structure and function

The consequences could be issues such as:
(cid:129) Changes in climatic conditions will cause shifts in the geographic ranges of

species. This is generally expected as a shift of species northward accompanied
by a fundamental restructuring of ecosystems as conditions change. 

(cid:129) The shift in habitable areas for species is expected to have serious consequences

for overall biodiversity, given the natural (water bodies, mountains, etc.) and
human (habitat fragmentation) barriers to species migration. Increased
competition for available water supplies with human uses during the summer
or periods of drought will additionally stress ecosystems.

These consequences could lead to potential vulnerability at the local level as
follows:
(cid:129)

Shifting ranges of species and a fundamental rearrangement of ecosystems in
North America 
Species ranges typically shifting northward and to higher elevations. Such
changes in ecosystem composition can facilitate other disturbances, including
invasive species or other infestations
Significant number of species extinctions are expected 

(cid:129)
(cid:129) Effects on phenology, migration, reproduction and dormancy of animals across

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

(cid:129)

North America 
Surface and bottom water temperatures of lakes, reservoirs, rivers and estuaries
in North America will likely increase (projection of 2 to 7ºC under doubling
of CO2) 
Increased vegetation growth in certain areas, and an earlier onset of spring
“greenness” 

(cid:129) Forest growth will likely improve slightly in North America
(cid:129)

Increased river scouring and turbulence due to changes in runoff timing could
have negative effects on aquatic ecosystems

70

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


