guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 48

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  4

CASE STUDY 9

Tank loading facilities

Focus, objectives and team in the adaptation initiative: Through a cross-jurisdictional partnership between the
National Water Supply Expansion Program (NWSEP), provincial counterparts have worked with communities and individual
farmers across the country to support preparation for water shortages in agriculture and in the community. 

Current vulnerability and capacities: In response to adverse weather in 2001 – 2002, farmers typically exercise a
variety of coping methods - from altering irrigation and watering techniques, to planting alternative crops, to changing the
end product – with qualified success. 

Estimated  impacts  of  changing  climate: Climate  model  scenarios  project  changes  in  precipitation,  increasing
occurrence of drought and heavy rainfall over a short time.  

Long-term goals and priorities: Providing security to local agriculturalists and communities in the event of increasingly
frequent periods of water stress. 

Responses to climate change and their implementation: A tank-loading facility is a non-potable community well
built  in  an  area  of  stable  groundwater  supplies,  as  identified  by  hydrological  investigations.  At  a  cost  of  $1.00  for
approximately 908 litres, farmers can use the facilities to fill portable water tanks, which can be hauled back to the farm for
a variety of agricultural purposes - from livestock watering to spray operations. As an added bonus to the community, the
facilities also provide extra water for emergency response when necessary, an important safeguard during drought when the
risk of fire increases. As of spring 2007, four facilities have been completed and twomore are under construction. These
responses should also be accompanied by measures promoting increased water efficiency and conservation in irrigation
and other activities.

Source: Belliveau et al. (2006)

48

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


