guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 15

introduction

Climate change is a global problem, affecting us all.  Searches for causes and solutions have

brought together worldwide communities of scientists, governments, private sectors, special
interest  groups  and  civil  society.    The  effective  management  of  climate  change  presents  an
unprecedented challenge. How can all these groups and interested parties possibly work together
towards a set of solutions? 

Over  the  years  since  the  United  Nations  Framework
Convention on Climate Change was first signed in Rio de
Janeiro in 1992, there have been a number of efforts led by
national governments attempting to address the problems of
climate change collectively.  Unfortunately, these efforts have
progressed slowly. One feature of these negotiations was the
fragmentation of the climate change issue into sustainable
development,  adaptation  and  mitigation.  Adaptation  is
urgently  needed  now  in  many  places  where  the  adverse
impacts of climate change are being felt. Mitigation is also
urgent, but is viewed at a global level and a longer-term scale.
Both  adaptation  and  mitigation  are  necessary  to  achieve
sustainable development. It is widely understood that present
patterns of development cannot be sustained, but it is much
less  clear  what  changes  are  most  needed  and  how  the
problems are to be resolved.

There  is  a  temptation  for  those  faced  with  the  issues  of
climate change at the local level to become frustrated, remain
indifferent  or  focus  their  attention  on  more  “pressing”
problems. However, it is at this local level where practical
knowledge  and  experience  can  be  drawn  from,  where
integration can begin. This does not mean that a solution is
easy to achieve. Conflicts of interest are always present, but at
the local level they can be seen and assessed more readily; the
possibility for agreement and action are much greater than at
the  global  level.  It  is  this  line  of  reasoning  and  the
acknowledgement that adaptation, mitigation and sustainable
development are often developed separately, and need to be
considered together, that brought about the SAM initiative.

SAM (Sustainable development, Adaptation and Mitigation)
emerged  from  a  number  of  seminars  and  discussions,
including two workshops held in British Columbia in 2006
and  2008  involving  a  group  of  academic  researchers,

government scientists and local community representatives.
These  concepts  were  revised  and  further  developed  for
practical application in consultation with community and
provincial level stakeholders.  To date, SAM has been piloted
in two case studies in British Columbia in the communities
of Richmond and Quesnel. 

This Guidebook promotes adaptation and mitigation in the
context  of  sustainable  development  at  the  local  level  and
provides a set of consecutive steps and information that are:

(cid:129)  Proactive: SAM approaches are proactive in that they help
local  governments  create 
that  prepare
communities for future climatic, policy and development
challenges. 

responses 

(cid:129)  Collaborative: SAM approaches are collaborative; they
bring together stakeholders from different departments of
the local government, researchers from various expertises,
the private sector and many others.  

(cid:129)  Integrative: SAM approaches integrate long-term local
development plans with present priorities, while exploring
synergies  between  decisions  and  responses  to  climate
change.  

(cid:129)  Flexible: SAM approaches provide flexibility and can be

initiated at several stages of a project. 

(cid:129)  Practical:  The  SAM  Guidebook  provides  additional
reference  materials,  including:  information  on  how  to
interpret the consequences of climate change; potential
adaptation options available; an extensive list of published
guidebooks; and  several  other  resources  available  for
consultation. 

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

15


