guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:26 AM  Page 88

APPENDIX 5

appendix 5: glossary

an adaptation strategy, and continuing the adaptation
process. (UNDP, 2005)

Adaptability: The ability, competency or capacity of a
system to adapt to (to alter to better suit) climatic stimuli

Adaptation: Adjustment in natural or human systems in
response to actual or expected climatic stimuli or their
effects that moderates harm or exploits beneficial
opportunities. (IPCC, 2001)

Adaptation Benefits: The avoided damage costs or the
accrued benefits following the adoption and
implementation of adaptation measures. (IPCC, 2001)

Adaptation Costs: Costs of planning, preparing for,
facilitating, and implementing adaptation measures,
including transition costs. (IPCC, 2001)

Adaptation Measure: Policies and measures: usually
addressed together, respond to the need for climate
adaptation in distinct, but sometimes overlapping ways.
Policies, generally speaking, refer to objectives, together
with the means of implementation. In an adaptation
context, a policy objective might be drawn from the overall
policy goals of the country – for instance, the maintenance
or strengthening of food security. Ways to achieve this
objective might include, e.g., farmer advice and
information services, seasonal climate forecasting and
incentives for development of irrigation systems. Measures
can be individual interventions or they consist of packages
of related measures. Specific measures might include
actions that promote the chosen policy direction, such as
implementing as irrigation project, or setting up a farmer
information, advice and early warning programme. Both of
these measures would contribute to the national goal of
food security. (UNDP, 2005)

Adaptation Policy Framework (APF): is a structural
process for developing adaptation strategies, policies, and
measures to enhance and ensure human development in the
face of climate change, including climate variability. The
APF is designed to link climate change adaptation to
sustainable development and other global environmental
issues. It consists of five basic Components: scoping and
designing an adaptation project, assessing current
vulnerability, characterizing future climate risks, developing

Adaptation Technology: A report by the UNFCCC
Secretariat on a seminar on the development and transfer of
technologies for adaptation to climate change states that
defining adaptation technologies is difficult. It suggests that
an operational definition might be used for “the application
of technology in order to reduce the vulnerability, or
enhance the resilience, of a natural or human system to the
impacts of climate change”. Technological approaches to
adaptation include both “hard” technologies such as capital
goods and hardware, as well as “soft” technologies such as
knowledge of methods and techniques which enable “hard”
technologies to be applied. (UNDP, 2005)

Adaptive Capacity: The ability of a system to adjust to climate
change (including climate variability and extremes) to moderate
potential damages, to take advantage of opportunities, or to
cope with the consequences. (IPCC, 2001)

Anticipatory Adaptation: Adaptation that takes place
before impacts of climate change are observed. Also referred
to as proactive adaptation.

Autonomous Adaptation: Adaptation that does not
constitute a conscious response to climatic stimuli but is
triggered by ecological changes in natural systems and by
market or welfare changes in human systems. Also referred
to as spontaneous adaptation.

Base-Line Scenario: Baseline scenarios depict a future state
of society and/or environment in which no new
environmental policies are implemented apart from those
already in the pipeline today; or in which these policies do
not have a discernable influence regarding the questions
being analysed. (European Environment Agency, 2008)  

Capacity: A combination of all the strengths and resources
available within a community, society or organization that
can reduce the level of risk, or the effects of a disaster.
Capacity may include physical, institutional, social or
economic means as well as skilled personal or collective
attributes such as leadership and management. Capacity
may also be described as capability. (UN/ISDR, 2004)

Catastrophic Event: A climate-related event having sudden
onset and widely distributed and large magnitude impacts on
human or natural systems, such as historically rapid sea level

88

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


