guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 47

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  4

CASE STUDY 8

Heat Health Alert System

Focus and objectives in the adaptation initiative: Develop and implement an emergency preparedness plan to
mitigate the effects of high summer temperatures often exaggerated by humidity and urban heat island effect.

Current vulnerability and capacities: High summer temperatures, particularly when sustained over consecutive days
or when coupled with other factors such as humidity, are correlated with many negative health implications. In an urban
setting, high temperatures are exacerbated by the Urban Heat Island (UHI) effect, leading to even more health implications.  

Estimated impacts of changing climate: Climate change predictions show increasing occurrence of heat waves with
possible negative impacts on human health.

Long-term goals and priorities: To increase the resilience of the city by preparing the population for impending heat
through emergency preparedness and by minimizing the local sources of urban heat. 

Responses to climate change and their implementation: In light of these projections, the Toronto Public Health
partnered with the Toronto Atmospheric Fund to develop a Heat Health Alert System. When forecasts predict that the
threshold of certain pre-determined high-risk climate criteria will be breached, the alert system is triggered. Warnings are
advertised on the radio, television and internet, and a web of social service organizations are contacted in an attempt to
convey warnings and advice to vulnerable populations. Bottled water is distributed to the homeless; shelters allow people
to stay inside during the day; and a service performing house calls to at-risk individuals is made available on request. 99
libraries and 81 community centres, all of which are air-conditioned, provide relief from the heat. During extreme heat
alerts, four civic buildings are made available as designated cooling centres.

This program should ideally be complemented with some long-term adaptation actions to reduce urban heat, such as the
expansion of green spaces, the increase of porous city surfaces and the facilitation of green roofing.    

Sources: Penney and Wiedtz (2007)

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

47


