guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 27

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE 

is illustrated with case studies from Canada, which will help
in  visualizing  how  the  steps  were  carried  out  in  real-life
situations. We suggest referring to the appropriate appendix
when going through each step.  Appendix 1 contains methods
suggested throughout the Guidebook; Appendix 2 provides
further information on understanding the consequences of
climate  change  impacts;  Appendix  3  gives  examples, by
province, of mechanisms that promote local sustainability;
Appendix 4 lists references to readily available resources for
climate change adaptation; and Appendix 5 is a glossary that
provides definitions for terms contained in the Guidebook. 

Examples of SAM measures

or two storey buildings. Cool roofs are less expensive
than green roofs, however, they do not provide the
same benefits with regards to storm water runoff, air
quality or nature conservation.

2.  Sustainable Urban Drainage Systems (SUDS) mimic
natural drainage patterns and act to reduce surface water
runoff  and  impacts  from  flooding  events,  recharge
groundwater  stores,  lower  urban  heat  island  effects,
protect water quality and provide biodiversity benefits.
Examples of SUDS include: rainwater harvesting, filter
strips and swales, infiltration devices (i.e. soakaways),
green roofs, permeable and porous pavements, gravel,
and grass, basins, reed beds, and ponds

1.  Cool roofs or ‘white roofs’ have a coating of light-
coloured water sealant that reflects and radiates more
heat than dark surfaces.  This way cool roofs help lower
the  urban  heat  island  effect  and  the  need  for
mechanical cooling systems. They are most effective on
buildings with high roof-to-volume ratios, such as one

3.  ‘Cool’ or ‘porous pavements’ address issues related to
urban temperatures and water/flooding by: increasing
surface reflectivity and evaporative cooling; increasing
rainfall permeability and reducing stormwater runoff;
recharging ground water resources; and providing water
to surrounding vegetation (reducing need for irrigation)

TYPES OF SAM PROJECTS: 

1. An overall SAM local strategy approach: an initiative assessing adaptation and mitigation across a number of sectors
in local communities to develop integrated community-level strategies. Strategies have already been developed in cities
such as Vancouver, Halifax, Boston, Seattle and New York (Penney and Wieditz, 2007). These initiatives involved a
number of sectors, including collaboration between local government practitioners - focusing on identifying local
vulnerabilities, adaptation and mitigation options (Case study 1 – King County, Washington’s adaptation plan). 

2. A SAM project-base approach: an initiative identifying specific vulnerabilities, capacities and responses in the context
of particular local development projects. This approach explores ‘windows of opportunities’ as they occur in the
community. For example, when drainage, sewage, drinking water infrastructure are being renewed, transportation
networks are being (re-)developed, residential areas or coastal zones are being developed, and when investments for
economic diversification are being allocated. When addressing potential infrastructure capacity issues associated with
climate change, the potential costs of adapting to climate change can also be reduced by building resilience into major
infrastructures, for instance during the construction of new buildings or roads. Carefully designed infrastructure could
also help in climate change mitigation efforts. However, this is likely to be a staged process, taking use of the following
opportunities (TPCA, 2007 and LGA, 2006):

a. When infrastructure is upgraded;
b. When development plans or other plans come up for regular review;
c. When assessments are undertaken as part of a wider sustainability review; and
d. Before service providers are forced to act by a sudden event or mounting maintenance costs.

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

27


