guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:26 AM  Page 86

APPENDIX 4

WEB RESOURCES

■  International
www.ipcc.ch
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)
website provides information on the organization’s
meetings, reports, speeches, and presentation materials. Full
Assessment reports, summary for policymakers, and
technical summary of the Working Group II Report,
“Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability,” can be accessed
from this site. 

www.ukcip.org.uk
United Kingdom Climate Impacts Programme (UKCIP)
website provides information about climate change
scenarios for the UK. The Scenarios Gateway offers access
to maps, datasets, and guidance documents relevant to the
UKCIP climate change scenarios. 

www.fao.org/clim/adaptation_en.htm
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United
Nations website that describes adaptation measures and
provides links to information on win-win adaptation
options, clean development mechanisms, food security, and
risk management.

■  Canadian
www.hazards.ca 
Canadian Atmospheric Hazards Network (CAHN)
(Environment Canada) website provides links to
background material on climate change, information on
climatology, and data on extreme weather events for regions
across Canada.

www.cccsn.ca 
Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network (CCCSN)
(Environment Canada) website provides international and
Canadian climate change scenarios, on-line instructions for
using scenarios and downscaling tools, links to IPCC
guidelines on scenario use and interpretation, bioclimate
profiles for Canada, impact and adaptation research
documents, and links to other tools used in impacts and
adaptation research.

www.adaptation.gc.ca 
Climate Change and Impacts and Adaptation Division
(CCIAD); Natural Resources Canada website provides
information on climate change impacts and adaptation
research across Canada, including research on tools for
adaptation and comprehensive case study research. The
website also contains a project database of over 170
research projects supported by the CCIAD research
program, as well as presentations from the CCIAD speaker
series. There is also a section of additional links to climate
change resources.”

sustainablecommunities.fcm.ca
Centre for Sustainable Community Development (CSCD)
(Federation of Canadian Municipalities) website provides
information regarding financial support and capacity
building resources for Canadian municipal governments to
improve environmental performance, reduce greenhouse
gas emissions, and further sustainable community
development projects.

www.ec.gc.ca/climate/home-e.html
Environment Canada Climate Change website that
provides links to reports and news releases related to
Canadian climate change issues and initiatives.

pacificclimate.org (Note: Site is under development)
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) website that
provides climate change tools, including datasets, maps,
and plots, and resources, including publications and
presentations. 

www.ouranos.ca
Consortium on Regional Climatology and Adaptation to
Climate Change website provides access to the
organization’s publications, project reports, presentations,
posters, and newsletters related to the issues and
requirements for adaptation to climate change in North
America. An Observed and Historical Data program with a
climatic and hydrometric data search tool is available. 

http://www.unsm.ca/sustainability/index.html
Union of Nova Scotia Municipalities (UNSM) Municipal
Sustainability Office website that provides an overview of
climate change and sustainability related approaches and
resources for municipalities.  In particular are links to
interesting facts related to climate change adaptation and

86

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


