guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 37

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  3

STEP 3 Developing a vision of the future. Where

do we want to be in the coming decades?

3A:  Identifying goals and principles of local

sustainability  

This section is focused on examining future development
priorities that are articulated in local planning documents
such as Official Community Plans (in British Columbia) and
sustainable development plans. Local plans developed under
the guidance of these documents provide an opportunity to
reflect on local priorities in the context of current planning
goals, principles and the expected impacts of climate change. 

STEP 3A: METHODS AND ACTIONS

This step will provide an umbrella for identifying actions to
respond to climate change in the SAM project to meet overall
long-term priorities and help build a resilient community for
the future. The step requires creating a vision of the future.
Local planning documents very often provide key directions
and trajectories for a desired local development path, but
often remain very generic and leave space for diverse actions
to be included to achieve the goals. In Case Study 6, the
desired local development goals were diversifying the local
economy by extending tourist activities throughout the whole
year.

We suggest the following list of questions to highlight long-term development priorities and visions at the local level in the
context of the focus and objectives of an adaptation initiative: 

1. Based on community development priorities, identify the particular short and long-term priorities relevant for the focus

of the SAM project

2. Assess how these priorities help to build a resilient community

3.

Identify what planning and design challenges have been created as a result of these priorities

4. Assess the challenges created by the future impacts of climate change on the attainment of these goals

We suggest collecting the relevant planning documents and
convening a meeting or facilitated workshop to discuss the
long-term development priorities and what they mean for the
focus  and  the  objectives  of  the  SAM  project.  If  such
documents  are  not  available,  then  the  community  could
engage in creating a long-term local development scenario(s). 

At this step, the future sustainable development priorities
in  the  context  of  current  trends  and  future  climate
impacts for the SAM project should be selected. This will
help to frame the selection of adaptation and mitigation
options discussed in the next step.

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

37


