guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 40

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  3

3B.   Assessing impacts of climate change and
potential for adaptation and mitigation 

A  number  of  options  are  available  to  adapt  to  expected
climate impacts and similarly, there are number of ways to
reduce GHG emissions. In this step, we focus on identifying
a portfolio of responses to climate change that fits within the
focus of the SAM initiative. Building on the close linkages
between climate change related measures, capacities and local

development goals, the aim of the SAM project becomes one
of  avoiding  “dangerous”  local  situations  by  identifying
adaptation options and assessing them in order to determine
which are most viable. Mitigation measures can increase local
vulnerability to climate change, and measures for adaptation
can  increase  local  emissions  of  GHGs  –  unless  they  are
discussed together. This could be achieved for example by
conservation measures and producing renewable energy. 

We suggest the following list of actions to develop a portfolio of adaptation and mitigation responses to climate change
and identify synergies between them:

1. Estimate impacts of climate change and vulnerabilities of the local system that require adaptation. What kind of

expected impacts do we need to adapt to?

2.

Identify measures that could provide adaptation to estimated impacts of climate change in the development context
of your adaptation initiative (see also Section 6.6)

3.

Identify the current and expected emission reduction targets, involved sectors and considered mitigation measures

4. Assess the opportunities for emission reduction that are feasible under expected impacts of climate change 

5. Assess how the measures identified can be adjusted or modified to maximize both mitigation and adaptation benefits

6.

Identify the social, environmental and economic benefits and costs for the community if the SAM project promoted
measures linking both adaptation and mitigation

infrastructure, 

SAM  projects focused  on  issues  with  a  long  lifespan,
(transportation, 
urban
development, reforestation, responses addressing adaptation
needs, and mitigation potentials) could foster efficient use of
resources  sustained  with  even  stricter  emission  reduction
policies and bigger impacts of climate change.

expansion, 

For already implemented measures in Canada, an example
linking  adaptation  and  mitigation  could  be  the  use  of

photovoltaics (Case Study 7).   They provide a source of clean
energy (mitigation) and a source of energy during power
outages (adaptation). Another example is the Toronto Heat
Alert system (Case Study 8), which presents an adaptation
response to heat waves in the city that relies mostly on public
cooling centres; and in the long-run suggests the importance
of sustainable responses such as expansion of green spaces and
green roofs in the city.  

40

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


