guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 32

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  2

STEP 2 Assessing present status and trends.

Where are we heading?

2A:  Examining current development challenges,

planning principles and capacities 

This step is focused on examining local vulnerability and
available capacities. By looking at currently applied principles
and projections in local development (population growth
scenarios,  planned  coastal  and  flood  plain  development,
zoning, changes in the use of agricultural land, green spaces
and parks) and assessing them for their potential to address
current and future challenges from climatic and non-climatic
stresses, local vulnerabilities and adaptive capacities can be
assessed. Attention needs to be given to evaluating the extent
of  collaboration  between  different  departments,  since
addressing climate change and sustainability requires moving
away  from  ‘silos’  and  instead  promoting  collaboration
between sectors. 

Investigating the linkages between current decisions in the
context of development challenges and climate change are
important, because:

(cid:129)  Inclusion  of  climate  change  impacts  in  the  local
development planning process has implications for much
more than climate or environmental policy. Local taxes,
infrastructure investments, land-use regulations and budget
planning processes all have major implications for local or
regional development paths, and therefore for adaptation
and mitigation options and impacts. 

(cid:129)  The  local  context  frames  adaptation  and  migration
options. There are a number of ways to respond to climate
change impacts and reduce GHG emissions. For example,
to respond to flooding we could think of flood attenuation
and storage; upstream land management; permanent flood
defences  including  ring  dikes  around  vulnerable  areas;
diversion  of  flood  flows;  setting  back  river  edge  flood
defences  to  make  space  for  water;  changing  the
configuration of the coastline; green roofs; widening drains;
managing flood pathways; raising floor levels; free-standing
flood  barriers;  removable  household  products;  and

increasing habitable space. However, the option selected
depends not only on the impact, but also on current and
future local priorities. 

(cid:129)  Responses 

to  climate  change  very  often  require
harmonization between decisions of different departments
to avoid trade-offs and to benefit from synergies. Many
local governments have already created working groups on
sustainability  in  which  they  strive  to  avoid  narrowly
focused policies that often neglect social or environmental
benefits. Similar approaches are needed to progress with
the responses to climate change. 

(cid:129)  Finally, obtaining information about the community will
help to establish which measures are feasible in the short
and  long-terms, with  regard  to  current  and  future
development plans and available capacities.

The completion of these actions will provide information
about the state of local development, capacities and local
vulnerability. To address them, a number of methods can be
utilized. We suggest conducting a series of interviews, but
these  actions  could  also  be  discussed  using  focus  groups
(details about both methods are in Appendix 1). To do this,
the project team could collaborate with researchers to help
conduct the analyses and summarize the results. This exercise
will help to determine capacities and applied principles, and
scenarios in local planning. One way to proceed further is to
discuss the report in a meeting involving a project team and
the researchers working on the SAM project. This could be
used in the workshop setting to create a common ground for
completing the list of actions.

A project team should gather information on a series of
issues and develop a report on the assessment of current
areas  of  strengths  and  weaknesses  in  responding  to
current challenges, including weather-related events. This
step provides information about whether current plans
and priorities are effective to address current vulnerability
and  what  are  the  available  capacities  to  address  these
vulnerabilities. It also provides important inputs for the
next step by listing information needs of the practitioners
in regards to climate change impacts.

32

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


