guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 39

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  3

Economic Diversification and Sustainability Planning

CASE STUDY 6

Focus,  objectives  and  team  in  the  adaptation  initiative: The  Resort  Municipality  of  Whistler  (the  municipal
administration) and Intrawest Corporation (the resort operators) have been actively developing their non-winter tourist
opportunities, hence diversifying the local economy and making the community more resilient to climate change.  

Current vulnerability and capacities: Current vulnerability and capacities: Investments have been made into several
“off-season” activities, most notably to the thriving mountain biking industry. This activity ideally complements the ski
season: it operates when conditions do not support skiing (during the spring, summer, fall, and even warm winter spells),
and much of the same infrastructure (such as ski lifts) can facilitate both sports. Other summer offerings include golf,
horseback riding, hiking, and white water rafting. Whistler’s investments have resulted in steadily increasing room revenue
over the past several summers.  

Long-term goals and principles: The municipality has also developed a comprehensive sustainability plan, entitled
Whistler  2020.  One  of  the  goals  of  the  plan  is  to  ensure  ongoing  economic  viability  through  a  continued  focus  on
diversification and other activities. Indicators also monitor changes in GHGs, energy use and effectiveness of conservation
and recycling efforts. Developers of the plan have identified several measurable indicators of economic viability, and monitor
these indicators regularly. Outputs from Whistler 2020 monitoring allows residents and town planners to verify that
economic adaptations are actually improving the resilience of the municipality to climate change.   

Responses to climate change and their implementation: However, Whistler 2020 is a strategic adaptation that
complements the economic adaptations previously pursued. The monitoring of economic indicators, as determined by the
plan, could help ensure that present and future economic decisions shape a robust and sustainable economy as Whistler
encounters climate change. Recent activities to reduce GHG emissions are being introduced including waste recycling,
energy efficiency, conservation, increased use of renewable energy and offsetting carbon emissions. It is important to note
that Whistler has a distinct advantage over other resort municipalities and tourism businesses because of its status as a
well-established, corporately-owned facility with a big budget and substantial political leverage. 

Source: RMOW (2006); RMOW (2007)

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

39


