guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 9

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

foreword

Since the Brundtland Commission Report published in 1987, in both developed and developing countries,
the term ‘sustainable development’ has become an important concept among the science and policy making
communities. In the first few years, it was more predominantly within all economic sectors. Gradually
‘sustainable development’ has evolved as a multidisciplinary topic where every discipline has a stake.

Climate change has emerged as one of the most crucial environmental challenges of the 21st century.
Researchers, policymakers and practitioners are concerned that climate change is a significant threat to
‘sustainable development’. In the IPCC processes, it has received increasing importance and currently the
deep and multiple links between development and climate change are acknowledged, emphasizing the
need to move climate policy into the broader context of development, equity, poverty reduction and
sustainability. However, this is a challenging task.

This Guidebook builds on the rich experiences of researchers within Environment Canada’s Adaptation
and Impacts Research Division (AIRD) working with decision-makers on practical projects focused on
climate change and sustainable development. It provides a process closely tied to on-going planning cycles
to help decision-makers incorporate climate change science, impacts,  adaptation and mitigation solutions
into their sustainable development initiatives. This Guidebook provides the needed assistance in help
Canadians interpret the potential consequences of climate change impacts in the local context and how
to develop adaptation actions and responses to address the anticipated consequences. Our intent was to
produce this Guidebook as a tool for planners, decision-makers, local practitioners and investors to help
build  wealthier, healthier, safer and more resilient communities. 

Around  the  world  local  governments  and  communities  are  taking  a  leading  role  in  adaptation  and
mitigation to climate change. I am hopeful that this Guidebook will strengthen our abilities to assess
impending impacts from a changing climate, develop adaptation strategies that are coupled with mitigation
co-benefits and foster actions that will ensure a sustainable future. 

Don MacIver

9


