guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 42

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  3

CASE STUDY 7

Distributed generation using photovoltaics

Focus, objectives and team in the adaptation initiative: Evaluating the feasibility of distributing the generation of
energy amongst many small-scale producers is one adaptive strategy that can build resilience against climate change
impacts. 

Current vulnerability and capacities: Autonomous (stand-alone) systems are not connected to the energy grid and
they can provide resilience for building owners. One off-grid homeowner noted that, after the ice storm, his family returned
to regular functionality much faster than his neighbors. Grid-connected systems can act as an adaptation for the energy
sector as a whole, reducing the disruptive potential of an extreme weather event – if smaller systems fail, fewer people are
affected. Hybrid systems offer the best of both options, because they are connected to the utility, but have an emergency
back-up battery in case of grid failure. The PV market in Canada is expanding steadily, with more than 50% growth between
2002 and 2004. 

Estimated impacts of changing climate: Climate change will likely shift and in some cases increase the peak energy
demand in Canada from winter to summer, which requires adjustments in our infrastructure

Long-term goals and priorities: PV systems generate the most electricity during the heat of the day, thus reducing the
vulnerability of central generation plants. They were not designed as a response to climate change, nor are they often
identified as a potential adaptation. However, a well-designed DG network could be a powerful and far-reaching “no regrets”
adaptation. Unfortunately, uptake of this technology is occurring slowly because grid-tied systems are economically
uncompetitive, while stand-alone systems are only competitive in certain circumstances. Government support of this
industry could be invaluable.  

Responses to climate change and their implementation: Energy generation is one of several contentious issues
that polarizes the “mitigation” and “adaptation” agendas. Many adaptations to extreme weather involve the consumption
of energy (like air conditioners, for example), while traditional production of energy adds to climate change. Distributed
generation of renewable energy could bridge that divide by improving the resilience of the energy grid while concurrently
mitigating GHG emissions.  

Sources: Dignard-Bailey (2002); Oke (2007)

42

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


