guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 64

APPENDIX 1

Determining the costs of adaptation is thus a complex task,
and methods for this are still developing. For the most part
these methods draw heavily on economic valuation methods
(e.g.:  see  Cost-benefit  analyses  and  Cost-effectiveness
analyses); however, other tools can also be used. A recent
study  of  climate  change  adaptation  options  for  water
resources in the Okanagan also provided estimates of the cost
of various adaptation measures (Cohen and Neale, 2006).

Assessments of the cost of inaction

There  are  costs  associated  with  implementing  adaptation
measures and there are costs associated with choosing to not
take proactive measures to adapt. The cost of inaction refers
to the net costs that would be incurred due to climate change
impacts in the absence of proactive adaptation measures. This
is an important part of understanding and communicating
with the public about the potential costs of maintaining the
status quo: inaction is not neutral, rather it implies costs that
will  be  borne  sometime  in  the  future  (e.g.  see  Role  of
discounting).

Estimating the cost of inaction requires an understanding of
the  current  situation  and  drivers,  projecting  changes  in
socioeconomic  and  climatic  systems,  interpreting  those
changes into expected impacts and then estimating economic
values for those impacts. Estimates vary greatly depending on
the  approach  and  assumptions  chosen  for  the  analysis,
particularly due to difficulties both in estimating physical
impacts and in assigning an economic value to those impacts.
A recent technical report by the European Environmental
Agency provides an overview of the methodologies for cost of
adaptation and cost of inaction, together with examples of
estimates (European Environmental Agency, 2007).

Cost-benefit analyses

CBA  is  a  quantitative  approach  that  can  be  applied  to
determine  the  costs  and  benefits  of  a  course  of  action  in
monetary terms. Three objectives may be evaluated: whether
benefits  outweigh  the  costs,  whether  net  benefits  are
maximized, and which of multiple options presents the most
net benefits. This is one of the more straightforward methods
conceptually  (although  it  is  data-intensive)  and  is  most
appropriate for evaluating economic objectives or objectives
that can be meaningfully assessed in monetary terms. For
assets that are not traded through the market (and hence have

no  dollar  value),  techniques  have  been  developed  for
assigning  monetary  values  in  some  cases,  for  example  by
asking what people would be willing to pay for that asset
(Rothman et al. 1999). Nonetheless, one of the significant
drawbacks of CBA is that its application is problematic when
non-monetary  values  such  as  social  and  environmental
objectives  are  also  being  evaluated,  as  in  climate  change
studies. There are also difficulties in valuing assets in the
future  versus  their  value  in  the  present  day  (see  Role  of
discounting).

CBA is one of the most widely applied decision support tools.
The state of Maine in the United States used CBA to evaluate
four  potential  options  for  adapting  to  sea-level  rise  at  a
specific study site, concluding in that case that it would be
more cost-effective to retreat from the shoreline as sea level
rises, as opposed to protecting development and maintaining
the shoreline (USEPA 1995).

Cost-effectiveness analyses 

This method is used to evaluate a single chosen objective so
as  to  minimize  the  possible  costs  associated  with  its
implementation. In contrast with CBA, this analysis treats
benefits as fixed, and seeks only to find the least-cost strategy
to  achieve  an  objective.  This  method  aims  to  provide  a
ranking of the cost of different options for achieving the given
objective, and is most appropriate for evaluation of isolated
projects. Similar to CBA, this method is limited when non-
market values need to be accounted for (see Cost-benefit
analyses). 

In climate change studies it is suggested that this technique
be used where a minimum level of a public good or service is
required and the question is therefore how to achieve this
objective at a minimal cost. Flood protection could be an
example of such a service. In the United Kingdom, a cost-
effectiveness  analysis  methodology  was  developed  for
determining whether options for achieving established water
service standards could be carried out at a reasonable cost
(Risk and Policy Analysts Ltd. 2004).

Decision analysis

Decision Analysis is a formalized method for approaching
decision-making  that  employs  a  wide  range  of  tools  to
structure and evaluate choices to see how well options satisfy

64

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


