guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 68

APPENDIX 1

Sensitivity  analysis  was  applied  in  a  Canadian  study  to
evaluate the impacts of climate change on drainage design
methods and on different types of drainage systems. Using
this method, they were able to investigate possible changes
to variables, such as peak flow and runoff volume and how
these  changes  would  affect  components  of  the  drainage
system, including required pipe size or the cost of different
design methods (Kije Sipi Ltd., 2001).

Trade-off analyses

Trade-off  analysis  is  a  form  of  integrated  assessment  that
incorporates stakeholders, experts and policy makers in a
process  designed  to  provide  policy-relevant  information.
Through incorporation of relevant components of the social,
economic,  decision-making  and  biophysical  systems,  this
approach  highlights  the  interactions  between  different
components  of  the  system  in  order  to  describe  tradeoffs
associated  with  different  adaptation  options.  Various
qualitative and/or quantitative methods may be employed in
the research process, including public consultations, focus
groups,  expert  judgment,  and  mathematical  models.
Tradeoffs are identified between the components of interest.
For  example,  these  could  be  tradeoffs  between  different
sectors  of  society,  between  environmental,  social  and
economic objectives, or between adaptation and mitigation
policies. These tradeoffs are then presented publicly in various
forms, for example as tradeoff curves, maps or risk diagrams,
to be used in decision-making (Stoorvogel et al., 2004).

This approach was applied in a case in the Philippines to
evaluate tradeoffs in climate change adaptation options for a
specific watershed. This study examined tradeoffs between
key sectors of society in order to identify potential synergies
and  conflicts  between  different  adaptation  options.  This
provided insights into which policy options may have positive
impacts on multiple sectors and which may have negative
consequences. Thus allowing policy to be directed towards
optimizing  synergies  and  proactively  mitigating  negative
effects of adaptation strategies. This approach also helped to
identify early on some of the potential conflicts that could
arise (Lasco et al., 2006). 

Uncertainty analyses

Two main sources of uncertainty for climate change policy
derive from limitations on our knowledge of how the global

climate system works and our ability to model it, and the
uncertainties  present  in  predicting  the  course  of  human
actions in the future (e.g. policy decisions, demographics,
economics,  technology,  etc).  While  efforts  are  constantly
being made to reduce uncertainties around climate change
science  and  modeling,  uncertainty  will  always  be  an
important  component  informing  climate  change  policy.
Rather than becoming a source of indecision, this must be
recognized  and  analyzed  so  as  to  best  understand  and
communicate the areas of uncertainty that have a bearing on
policy decisions. 

Uncertainty  analysis  is  therefore  an  integral  part  of  any
climate change assessment. This analysis can also be used to
describe different types and degrees of uncertainty relating to
policy options, or to assign relative likelihoods to various
scenarios and present a selection of most likely scenarios. The
purpose is to provide an informed basis for decision-makers
and the public to begin consideration of appropriate policy
options for adaptation and mitigation (Webster, 2003). For
example, in the IPCC Fourth Assessment report uncertainty
analysis is used to provide judgments of relative likelihoods
that projected outcomes will occur, expressed in terms of the
following confidence levels:

(cid:129)  Very High confidence (at least 9 out of 10 chance of being

correct)

(cid:129)  High confidence (about 8 out of 10 chance)

(cid:129)  Medium confidence (about 5 out of 10 chance)

(cid:129)  Low confidence (about 2 out of 10 chance)

(cid:129)  Very low confidence (less than 1 out of 10 chance)

Vulnerability assessment 

A starting point for planning for climate change adaptation
is  to  conduct  an  assessment  of  the  vulnerability  of  a
community’s human, natural and physical infrastructure to
climate variability and severe weather. Such an understanding
provides a basis for setting adaptation policy priorities by
identifying areas that require new policies or partnerships,
and areas of emerging opportunities. Vulnerability assessment
at a local level proceeds in five steps. First, parties that would
be affected by, and make decisions about, climate change for
a  certain  sector  are  brought  together.  Second,  current
vulnerabilities  to  severe  weather  events  are  identified  by
participants for all affected sectors. Third, future conditions

68

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


