guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 41

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  3

STEP 3B: METHODS AND ACTIONS

This step requires development of adaptation options that offer mitigation benefits that address current vulnerability and
the impacts of climate change, while helping to achieve the long-term priorities of the community. Methods are available—
including expert judgments and portfolio analyses—to discuss potential adaptations (see the next section on adaptation
examples). We suggest that the project team organize a workshop within the local government while inviting departments
related to the focus of the project. The project team could also consider inviting representatives from neighbouring
municipalities or experts on the issue related to the focus of the initiatives (for example, dikes if you deal with flooding, forest
system if you deal with reforestation etc). During the workshop, adaptation options with mitigation co-benefits will be
identified. To help, the next section lists adaptation options by sector. We suggest the following workshop agenda to develop
a portfolio of adaptation responses:

1. Present a focus of the SAM project and relevant long-term development priorities 

2. Present the outcomes of the scoping study, including the consequences of the impacts and identified areas of major

vulnerabilities 

3. Use a list of suggested adaptation options and involve the workshop articipants in identifying a list of responses to

climate change (through group discussion) that fits within the focus of the SAM project

4. Create a list of potential responses to climate change 

5. Finally, based on the identified list of responses to climate change, discuss further information that may need to be

collected about these options in order to be considered for implementation 

At this step of the SAM project, a list of adaptation options, with mitigation co-benefits that minimize trade-offs between
adaptation and mitigation and are feasible at the local level,  have been developed. 

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

41


