guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 29

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  1

The  collaborative  work  between  local  governments’  and  researchers  provides  significant  opportunities  for  local
governments, including:

• Obtaining information on the areas of interests and facilitating integration into policy-making (including extreme events,
maps of local flooding and hazards, updated future hydrological scenarios, local specific information about precipitation,
timing of snowmelt)

• Getting examples of changes in climate variables such as increases in temperature and changes in precipitation patterns

which are important for local hydrology, habitat and construction 

• Getting help in understating the sources of uncertainty in data 

• Developing credible costing information, such as the cost of inaction and cost of adapting at the local level 

• Accessing examples from case studies from communities and transforming lessons learned to the local level

• Developing and testing indicators to measure the effectiveness of adaptation and mitigation activities.

•

Strengthening institutional networks and forming partnerships that may extend into the future

researchers, this provides an opportunity to engage in so-
called ‘usable science’ - combining knowledge-driven, applied
and interactive science to achieve a balance between what we
need to know to understand complex problems and what in
these  examples  local  governments  perceive  to  be  their
immediate needs for making decisions.

Local authorities are advised to adopt a precautionary approach
when assessing development proposals in those areas identified
as at risk from impacts such as flooding, pest infestation, heat
waves and land instability due to erosion, as well as, for their
potential contributions to GHG emission reductions.

Completing the outlined actions will help to identify those
areas of local development that are vulnerable to the current
climate, that lack capacities to deal with potential climatic
and  non-climatic  stresses, and  that  have  the  potential  to
contribute to the long–term development of the region. 

To identify the team, practitioners already working together
on sustainability, planning, engineering and climate change
issues should be involved. Based on the focus of the SAM
project,  the  team  could  include  members  of  the  local
government, project developers and NGOs. The team may

need  to  collaborate  with  scientists  and  consultants.  Also,
experiences from local government initiatives on adaptation to
climate change show that having a champion within the local
government helps to ensure that the project receives sufficient
attention and support within the local government. While
capacity to address climate change issues may exist in isolated
pieces in departments of the local government, the nature of
this challenge requires coordination across departments. 

Local governments, including Kativik Regional Government,
The Resort Municipality of Whistler and Toronto Public
Health, initiated the examples listed in this Guidebook. The
remaining cases are from non-governmental organizations
and organizations closely collaborating with local government
such  as  the  Inuvik  Regional  Health  Centre,  the  Clean
Annapolis River Project (CARP) and the Sheltair group. In
each of these cases, collaboration with scientists working on
different aspects of climate change were established. 

By completing this step, the focus of the SAM project will
be defined and basic information about the objectives will
be identified. The core team that will carry the project
through the next steps will be identified as well.

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

29


