guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 49

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  5

STEP 5 Monitoring, re-assessment and

adjustments  

In addition to good planning and good information, good
decision-making also involves revisiting a decision as new
information becomes available. Scientific understanding of
climate change at the local level embodies many uncertainties
that are multiplied during the translation of climate data into
scenarios  of  future  impacts  on  hydrology,  changes  in

biodiversity or impacts on agriculture. Scientific knowledge
in the climate change field is progressing rapidly and it is
expected that more detailed localized data will be available in
the  coming  years.  In  addition,  human  capacities  and
governance are also changing at all scales. This may create
new opportunities or lead to setbacks as political and social
preferences  change  and  new  issues  overshadow  old  ones.
Close  monitoring  of  the  adaptation 
initiative  after
implementation  by  both  practitioners  and  policy-makers
creates opportunities to address challenges as they appear. 

STEP 5: METHODS AND ACTIONS

To proceed with this step, we suggest using the following list of questions:

1.

Identify emerging development challenges and policies that have the potential to create new vulnerabilities with regard
to climate change

2. Assess new information as it becomes available that could provide insight into or change best practices in local planning

processes

3.

Identify the aspects of the project that require follow-up and monitoring. How will monitoring be done and linked with
reporting procedures?

4.

Identify activities that require follow-up 

It is important to maintain contact with the project team and
scientists so they can up-date you on the latest developments
and provide data about impacts and responses to climate
change. Because climate change is a rapidly evolving issue in
research  and  practice  and  because  local,  national  and
international  policies 
continually  developing,
opportunities  may  arise  for  follow-up  activities  on  the
adaptation  initiative  or  new  projects  that  demonstrate
practical ‘on the ground’ solutions to climate change in the
context of local development may be identified. 

are 

Monitoring the performance of the implemented adaptation
actions  is  one  of  the  important  priorities  of  this  step.  A
potential list of indicators to monitor the performance of the
implemented adaptation options could include: 

(cid:129)  Average carbon emissions for heating, cooling and

transport per unit of new buildings 

(cid:129)  Amount of housing and commercial development
permitted in flood risk or vulnerable coastal areas 

(cid:129)  Average permeable and non-permeable surface area in

permitted developments

(cid:129)  Total renewable energy and /or electricity supply (energy

or electricity supplied)

(cid:129)  Average domestic/freight trip length/total distance per

person/vehicle per annum

(cid:129)  Average level of waste recycling per type of waste in the

community 

(cid:129)  Average level of outdoor and indoor water use per

person, household or hectares 

(cid:129)  Average increase/decrease of green spaces and trees 

Many of these indicators are already being monitored and
many of the currently used indicators can be used to assess the
effectiveness of the implemented adaptation measures.  

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

49


