guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 34

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  2

CASE STUDY 4

Storm surge mapping on Canada’s east coast

Focus, objectives and team in the adaptation initiative: To use storm surge mapping to predict the impact of the
design storm at current and projected sea levels.  The project was initiated in 1998, by the Clean Annapolis River Project
(CARP), a non-governmental organization in collaboration with the town of Annapolis Royal, focused on mapping storm
surge.  

Current vulnerability and capacities: With an average tidal range of 10 metres and an average frequency of two
hurricane-type storms every three years, the Bay of Fundy and its surrounding coastal towns are susceptible to storm surges.
Much of the inhabited land bordering the Bay is at or below sea level, having been reclaimed by Acadian settlers in the 17th
century with an elaborate system of dykes. The dykes, which now protect a large population and economically significant
agricultural lands, have been maintained and upgraded based on a historical design from 1869. However, if projected impacts
of climate change lead to unprecedented storm surges, they would surpass the dykes and overwhelm the coping capacity
of the communities.  

Estimated impacts of changing climate: CARP encountered many obstacles in their efforts because the data critical
to the completion of the exercise, like elevation maps with reasonably small contour intervals, were either non-existent or
difficult to access. Nonetheless, they succeeded in generating maps, which indicated that much of the town would be
flooded, and that critical infrastructure such as the fire department could be marooned from the rest of the community.  

Responses to climate change and their implementation: Resulting adaptations in the risk management strategy
included the re-distribution of some emergency response equipment and the purchase of a boat by the fire department. The
maps also led to the organization of a mock disaster scenario to engage the public in disaster management planning. CARP
has since pursued some saltmarsh restoration in the Bay, a natural solution that can help reduce the impact of storm surges.
The maps indicated the need for changes in town planning and protection strategies. Presently, adaptation strategies include
reviewing the emergency preparedness plans, improving the early warning system and collaboration with a number of
departments and institutions to ensure the effectiveness of the early warning systems. 

Sources: Belbin and Clyburn (1998); Danard, Munro and Murty (2003); McKenzie (2006)

34

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


