guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 20

INTRODUCTION 

Climate  change  mitigation  and  adaptation  have  been
considered separately in the global climate change discussion.
However, there is increasing recognition that both mitigation
and  adaptation  efforts  are  necessary  in  order  to  decrease
climate risks and capture co-benefits. At the level of actual
actions, adaptation is needed now and can provide immediate
and short term benefits. Mitigation is equally urgent in order
to prevent future anthropogenic interference with the climate
system, and will only begin to have an effect on global mean
surface  temperature  decades  from  now.  The  benefits  of
mitigation  are  not  immediate.  But,  both  adaptation  and
mitigation are essential: adaptation to reduce impacts in the
near term and mitigation to reduce long term impacts. One
could imagine that adapting to a several metre rise in sea level
might be a theoretical possibility - it would mean massive
economic losses and substantial displacement of population

–  not  something  we  want  to  envision  as  our  future
development pathway. 

Linking mitigation and adaptation at the local level is likely
to highlight interactions between these two types of climate
change  actions.  Mitigation  measures  can  increase  local
vulnerability to climate change, and measures for adaptation
can increase the local emissions of GHG – unless they are
considered together. For example, efforts to reduce GHG
emissions  could  include  the  concentration  of  housing
development with renewable energy close to a town centre,
while an adaptation strategy could dictate that if the town
centre is located close to a river prone to flooding it would be
desirable to locate new housing sufficiently far away from the
centre.

From a practical point of view, designing local responses that simultaneously address the
issues of climate change and sustainability is a challenging task. To help identify possible
synergies and trade-offs between mitigation and adaptation activities, it may be useful to
consider the four categories of interactions presented in Figure 1. Activities that fall into the
lower  left  quadrant  are  unsustainable,  resulting  in  both  increased  GHG  emissions  and
vulnerability to climate impacts. Activities that fall into the upper right quadrant represent
the  opposite  condition:  activities  that  build  on  the  synergies  between  adaptation  and
mitigation and reduce both climate vulnerability and GHG emissions. Water conservation is
an example of this type of activity and it is also an example of a sustainable development
measure.  The  other  two  quadrants  represent  trade-offs  created  by  focusing  solely  on
mitigation or adaptation and, consequently, further increasing vulnerability or levels of GHG
emissions (Cohen and Waddell, 2009). 

20

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


