guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 25

overview of the guidebook 

Potential users of this Guidebook

This Guidebook is designed to assist local governments in incorporating climate change adaptation

and mitigation into planning and operations. The users include local governments, planners,
policy-makers and community leaders who aim to address local development issues in a sustainable
way and are concerned about climate change. The approach outlined in this Guidebook advocates
for creating partnerships with civil society members, researchers and other experts in the climate
change impacts and responses field. 

Purpose of the Guidebook

(cid:129)  To facilitate and promote the utilization of an integrated
approach to climate risks centred on sustainability, and in
this  way  to  help  avoid  maladaptive  and  short-term
responses to climate change.

(cid:129)  To ensure the adaptation strategies, policies and measures
are  compatible  with,  and  supportive  of,  the  need  to
mitigate by reducing greenhouse (GHG) emissions.

(cid:129)  To help address both adaptation and mitigation in the
context of sustainable development - a good balance of
adaptation and mitigation is the essence of local, regional
and global sustainability – and in this way help to build
low-carbon and resilient communities;

(cid:129)  Provide  support  for  decision-makers  in  identifying  key
capacities  needed  in  order  to  carry  out  successful
adaptation actions.

Suggestions on how to use the Guidebook

This Guidebook provides a description of a method that can
be  applied  to  existing  planning  processes,  both  at  the
individual  project  and  on  a  strategic  level.  We  suggest
working  with  these  guidelines  together  with  relevant
development plans, planning policy frameworks and acts that
aim to promote local sustainability (see Appendix). 

The Guidebook outlines a series of steps that lead to the
development of locally-specific responses to climate change.
We  suggest  reading  through  all  the  steps  first,  and  then
following each step based on the outlined instructions. The
description of each step starts with its main goal, followed by
suggestions for methods and actions that help you reach the
goal. The last paragraph lists the outputs that lead to the next
step.  Each  step  includes  diverse  case  studies  to  provide
examples to help illuminate the goals and outcomes of each
step. The listed cases represent real local activities in which
adaptation, mitigation and sustainability were involved to
different extents. We tried to select case studies that have all
the elements, but because of the early stage of the work on
climate change adaptation at the local government level, we
were not always able to find cases with all elements of the
SAM.

At the end of the step-by-step guidelines is a list of adaptation
options (examples of SAM).  Lastly, the Appendix contains
numerous supporting materials including: a list of suggested
methods  with  examples  of  their  application  in  climate
change-related projects, potential local consequences from
changes  in  climate  variables,  provincial  mechanisms  to
promote  local  sustainability,  climate  change  adaptation
resources including  already  published  guidebooks  and
resources and a glossary. These additional materials aim to
provide information in order to facilitate the development of
a SAM project.  Not all of these materials are directly referred
to in the text, so please consult them throughout the process.

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

25


