guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 36

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  2

Water Management and Climate Change in the Okanagan Basin, British Columbia

CASE STUDY 5

Focus and objectives of the adaptation initiative: The goal of this initiative was to develop integrated climate change
and water resource scenarios for the Okanagan Basin and engage stakeholders in dialogue on the implications of climate
change for water management in the region.

Current vulnerabilities and capacities: The Okanagan Basin is characterized by a semi-arid climate and rural agrarian
landscape and is a significant producer of tree fruits, wine grapes and other horticultural products. The region has also
experienced rapid population growth and urbanization in the past two decades, with populations increasing from 210,000
in 1986 to 310,000 in 2001. Population growth is expected to continue, reaching 450,000 by 2031. Long-term climate
records in the region indicated a significant warming trend, particularly in winter and spring, leading to earlier onset of spring
snowmelt. Increased precipitation has also been observed in spring and summer, along with a reduction in the proportion
of precipitation falling as snow at lower elevations. Low snow pack and hot dry summers led to drought conditions in 2002-
2003, causing forest fires and impacts on water supplies in many parts of the basin affecting the ability to meet agricultural,
residential and ecological water demands. 

Estimated potential impacts of a changing climate: Climate and hydrological modeling indicates that the region can
expect earlier onset of spring snowmelt, a tendency toward a more rainfall driven hydrological regime, and reductions in
annual and spring flow volumes in the 2050s and 2080s. Inflow to Okanagan Lake is estimated to decline to approximately
69% of historical inflows by 2100. Agricultural water demand is expected to rise by 12-20% in the 2020s, 24-38% in the
2050s, and 40-61% in the 2080s over the baseline modeled crop water demand of 200 million m3. Residential water demand
is also expected to rise as a function of population growth, housing density and climate change.   

Long-term goals and principles: Sustainable development is a major concern in the Okanagan Basin. In particular, there
is a desire to maintain the rural agrarian landscape, while coping with increasing population growth and density. In this
context, there is also a widely recognized need to address impacts of climate change on water supply and demand. Increasing
water use efficiency by all sectors, maintaining agriculture’s access to water and providing adequate water for fish habitat
are all important priorities for water management.   

Responses to climate change and their implementation: The issue of climate change impacts on water supply and
demand has gained a profile in the region over the past several years. As a direct result of this research, climate change
projections were incorporated into a sub-regional water management plan and the topic has become has become a major
part of sustainable development dialogue processes. A provincially-funded basin-wide water supply and demand study is
underway  to  more  accurately  characterize  current  and  future  water  supply  and  demand  and  support  planning  and
management decisions. The Okanagan Basin Water Board has also been given greater powers to examine basin-wide water
supply and demand issues, explore water, energy and resource conservation issues to promote sustainability in the fast
growing region.  

Source: Cohen et al. (2004); Cohen and Neale (2006)

36

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


