guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 26

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE 

step-by-step guidelines

STEP 3 Develop a vision of the future. Where do

we want to be in the coming decades?

The following framework aims to promote development of
adaptation  responses  with  mitigation  co-benefits  that  are
tailored to local long-term priorities. To achieve this aim, we
suggest a framework of five major steps starting with the
selection of the focus of the SAM project and ending with a
strategy to implement the actions and define potential follow-
up  activities.  The  framework  includes  the  following  five
major steps:

SAM initiative

STEP 1 Identify the focus and objectives of a
STEP 2 Assess present status and trends. Where

are we heading now? 

a.  Identify future development priorities based on the

principles of local sustainability and community
planning 

b.  Assess impacts of climate change and the potential for

adaptation and mitigation within community goals 

STEP 4 Set trajectories to meet priorities. How can

we get there?

a.  Identify actions to achieve the vision of the future 
b.  Develop capacities and institutional linkages to support

implementation

STEP 5 Monitor, reassess and adjust.

Reexamining the identified actions in a

project or addressing new challenges  

a.  Examine current development challenges, planning

principles and capacities

b. Estimate impacts of climate change

The  following  section  presents
the  five  steps,  briefly
describing suggested methods, process and outputs. Each step

Identify focus and objectives of a

SAM project 

Start new SAM
project cycle 

Set trajectories to 

meet priorities 

Identify actions to achieve

future vision 

Develop capacities and
institutional linkages

tosupport implementation 

Assess present 
status and trends 

Examine current development
challenges, planning priorities

and capacities

Estimate impacts of 
changing climate 

Develop a vision of the future

Assess impacts of climate change and
potential for adaptation and mitigation

Identify goal and principles of 

local sustainability

FIGURE 2. Main steps of the SAM framework to address climate change adaptation and mitigation 

in the context of local sustainable development.

26

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


