guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 30

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  1

CASE STUDY 1

King County, Washington’s adaptation plan

In late 2005, the King County Executive established a “strike force” to develop plans for tackling both climate change
mitigation and adaptation efforts for the County. This group – now called the Global Warming Team – is led by the Deputy
Chief of Staff, and meets every two weeks to coordinate research and planning for both mitigation and adaptation activities.
The group includes representatives from the budget office, water planning, solid waste, air quality, parks, transportation,
land-use  planning  and  building  codes,  economic development,  public  health  and  executive  services  (which  includes
emergency management). They are charged with “reviewing every county business line, operation and capital plan to identify
challenges and opportunities and to recommend concrete options for infrastructure and service adaptation”. The Team
reports to the King County Executive.

Source: Penney and Wieditz (2007)

CASE STUDY 2

Forest renewal strategies in Quesnel (BC)

Focus and objectives of the SAM project: To develop a renewal strategy for the mountain pine beetle (MPB) infestation
that integrates local priorities for sustainability with economic diversification. The focus also addresses adaptation needs,
because of linkages between the MPB and climate change and exploring opportunities for renewable energy production from
biomass (mitigation). To address these issues the process was initiated with local government in collaboration with forestry
companies and small business’ representatives in the area.

Current vulnerabilities and capacities: In the short term, the MPB epidemic is increasing economic activity for many
communities since the lodgepole pine timber harvest levels are increasing due to the need to use the dead trees before they decay
and lose their commercial value. This short-term surplus of harvestable timber will be followed by a significant reduction in the cut
as the epidemic runs its course and dead trees reach the end of their economic usefulness. The loss of future timber supply presents
a very significant challenge to the communities affected because of pine making up over 50 per cent of the harvestable timber from
which 80 per cent could be killed by 2013, and well over half the pine trees could be dead by the summer of 2007. 

Estimated potential impacts of changing climate: Forests of mature lodgepole pine are prime habitat for the MPB. The
beetle also thrives under warm weather conditions. The interior of British Columbia has an abundance of mature lodgepole
pine. The area has experienced several consecutive mild winters and drought-like summers. Beetle populations in many parts
of interior B.C. have increased to epidemic levels as a result.

Long-term goals and principles: From the community perspective, the long-term focus is on promoting local social
sustainability of renewal options by accounting for local needs, such as job and training requirements and effects on local
industries. The long-term goal is helping to create a sustainable community and healthy forest. 

Responses to climate change and their implementation: Potential responses include diversification of planted trees
to increase adaptability to climate change, which includes a decrease of pine and an increase of hard wood. It will also include
using wood waste material and small-scale wood planting for bioenergy production. The activities also suggest diversification
of community businesses to rely less on forestry industry. This include activities such as expanding tourism, maintaining
naturally valuable areas, services for retirees and increasing a level of wood-processing within the community. 

Source: British Columbia’s Mountain Pine Beetle Action Plan 2006-2011 (2005)

30

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


