guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 65

APPENDIX 1

objectives. This  type  of  analysis  begins  with  generating  a
comprehensive list of options that could potentially address
the defined problem. Influence diagrams or decision trees are
then used to identify points where decisions would have to be
made, and where chance occurrences would influence the
direction of events. The likelihood of chance events is then
evaluated, and the utility of different outcomes is calculated.
A final step uses specific criteria to determine which set of
options  has  the  greatest  potential  to  achieve  desired
outcomes.

Decision analysis has been applied to evaluate intersecting
issues of adaptation, mitigation and sustainable development
in the context of BC’s Gateway Programme. The method
allows a complex and contentious set of issues and objectives
to be structured in a way that can enhance understanding
and communication to aid in the decision-making process
(Wilson and McDaniels, 2007).

Role of discounting in assessments 

Discounting  is  a  method  used  in  economic  analyses  to
compare the value of costs and benefits occurring at different
points in time. To calculate the value today, of something that
will exist in the future, a “discount rate” is used. A discount
rate  expresses  the  degree  to  which  consumption  today  is
preferred over consumption a year from now—the higher the
discount  rate,  the  less  value  that  is  placed  on  that
consumption  (or  good,  service,  cost,  benefit,  etc)  in  the
future. Discounting is an important consideration because of
our tendency to value a cost or benefit in the present more
than  that  same  cost  or  benefit  in  the  future.  However,
application in the context of climate change and sustainable
development also begs consideration of preserving options
for  future  generations,  which  would  imply  quite  a  low
discount rate.

A recent and controversial application of discounting was the
United  Kingdom’s  “Stern  Review”  that  was  charged  with
evaluating  the  cost  of  climate  change  adaptation  in
comparison to the cost of inaction, globally. Considerable
debate developed around the report’s conclusions, in part due
to differing perspectives on whether the appropriate “social
rate of time” discount rate had been applied. This type of
discount compares the value of well-being today to well-being
of future generations. Stern chose to use a very low discount
rate that values well-being in the future as virtually equal to
well-being today. While some defend this choice based on

the imperatives of sustainable development, it is ultimately
an ethical choice, not a technical choice. Hence, others begin
from different ethical assumptions and conclude that a higher
discount  rate  would  produce  more  appropriate  results
(Varian, 2006).

Downscaling techniques 

Downscaling is the process of deriving local or regional scale
climate information from models or data at a larger scale. In
effect, the larger climate is used as a predictor of the local
climate. There are two main types of downscaling techniques:
dynamical and statistical. Dynamical downscaling uses the
inputs  of  Global  Climate  Models  (GCMs)  in  order  to
develop  Regional  Climate  Models  (RCMs).  Statistical
downscaling  combines  large-scale  climate  variables  with
locally  observed  variables  (often  from  a  specific  weather
station) to produce a statistical model that is then used to
project  future  changes  at  a  local  scale.  An  advantage  of
statistical  downscaling  is  that  it  is  less  computationally
demanding than dynamical downscaling, although it still
requires a large amount of data to develop the model (Barrow
et al, 2004; CCSN, 2007). 

There are a variety of techniques that can be applied, as well
as software that can assist in translating large-scale data to a
local  scale.  The  Canadian  Climate  Change  Scenarios
Network provides further information and software tools on
their  website  (http://www.cccsn.ca).  This  method 
is
increasingly being applied in order to develop smaller-scale
scenarios  that  can  aid  in  developing  climate  change
adaptation policies at a local or regional scale. 

Using expert judgments

Expert judgments are evaluations performed by people who
have a particular expertise relating to the question at hand.
The  judgments  can  be  of  at  least  two  types,  and  are
commonly a bit of both: that is, they may be issues of factual
judgment (something that can be proven right or wrong) or
of value judgment (expressing an opinion) that derives from
expert  knowledge  of  the  issue  being  evaluated. This  is  a
routine part of creating policy-relevant evaluations.

Often  expert  judgment  is  done  informally,  although  it  is
increasingly a formalized component of studies on climate
change and associated uncertainty analyses. Two main ways

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

65


