guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 33

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  2

STEP 2A: METHODS AND ACTIONS 

We suggest the following list of actions in order to estimate current development challenges, planning principles and
vulnerabilities: 

1.

2.

Identify the climatic and non-climatic (if needed) variables or factors that affect the problem you are looking to address
with your SAM project.  Consider changes in level of GHGs as well. 

Identify socio-economic scenarios that are currently used in local planning processes.  What are the assumptions that
form the basis of these scenarios? 

3. Assess to what extent current plans, policies and regulations account for the identified set of variables and their further
changes.  Are there measures that are presently enforced that are able to provide a buffer against expected future
changes, including climate changes? How flexible are they? How do they present challenges or barriers? 

4.

Identify  impacts  of  present  day  weather  patterns  (temperatures,  precipitation,  etc.)  and  severe  weather  events
(windstorms, heat waves, cold snaps, rainstorms, thunderstorms, snowfalls etc.) on sector/infrastructure related to the
focus of your initiative  

5. Discuss examples of responses to major weather events (flood, windstorm, thunderstorm, heat wave) that have occurred

in the past. Were they effective? Why / why not? 

6.

Identify information that you need gather in order to make effective decisions about adapting to climate change in
issues related to the focus of your initiative (i.e., changes in design or operation of current systems to cope with changing
weather patterns expected because of climate change). 

This could include:

•

•

•

•

Local projections of climatic variables (precipitation, sea level rise, wind, flooding, snow melt);

Local consequences of the impacts (changes in local river hydrology, changes in ground water availability, impacts on
slope stability, occurrence of pest and diseases etc.)

Best practices for adapting to climate change, that have been applied in similar conditions to your location

Information on low-carbon technological options that could address climate change impacts 

7.

Identify departments that have the most flexibility or capacity to develop and implement new programs to cope with
climate change impacts

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

33


