guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 46

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  4

4B.  Developing capacities and institutional linkages

to support implementation 

To  achieve  successful  implementation  of  the  adaptation
initiative, it is important to ensure that the various agencies
that  may  be  involved  in, or  affected  by, the  activity  are
supportive. Local governments in Canada are required to
comply with a host of regulations, guidelines and standards
that are developed by other levels of government or regulatory
bodies that govern professional practice. Additionally, many

issues, such as the management of drinking water supply and
demand, involve multiple agencies at municipal, regional,
provincial and federal government levels. Existing statutes,
regulations,  bylaws,  building  codes  and  professional  best
practices  may  not  currently  support  or  allow 
for
unconventional  or  innovative  development  that  may  be
required by the SAM project to meet adaptation, mitigation
and sustainable development goals. It is therefore necessary to
build collaborative relationships and teams so that the project
can  be  implemented  and  that  the  lessons  learned  can  be
translated into best practices at all levels. 

STEP 4B: METHODS AND ACTIONS

1.

Identify how the implementation of measures will be funded. Does the budget for current and forthcoming years enable
actions to be implemented?

2.

Identify staff that will be responsible for implementation within the local government (department level, etc.)

3. Assess whether project implementation has support from all levels (council, senior management, operations, etc.) and
departments (planning, engineering, bylaw enforcement, etc.) within the local government. If not, how can support be
enhanced?

4. Assess whether there are adequate human and material resources. If not, where can resources be obtained?

5. Gather information about the public awareness and support of the project. Is an education and outreach program

required? Is a communication strategy required?

6. Estimate linkages to other agencies outside of the local government. What involvement or buy-in from other agencies

is needed for successful implementation?

7. Assess whether the project is entirely within the jurisdiction of the local government or do other levels of government

need to be engaged by the project team.

It  would  be  beneficial  to  consider  some  of  these  actions
throughout the SAM project’s process, as they may influence
who is engaged as part of the project team and  to help avoid
pitfalls during the implementation stage. Outcomes of the
evaluation  from  the  previous  step  will  provide  valuable
information on what capacities are needed to implement the
SAM  project.  In  the  listed  cases  focused  on  emergency
preparedness (Case Studies 4 and 8) additional capacities
were needed in order to implement a plan. In Case Study 9,
additional capacities were needed to maintain facilities and
the program.

It is also important to consider that with climate change
progressing, more adaptation and mitigation actions will be
needed. Therefore, developing a capacity to address future
challenges should be considered when the capacity needs are
defined. The questions in this step and the outputs from the
previous  step  could  be  addressed  in  discussions  with  the
project team.   

After the completion of this step, the SAM project team
will have a clear picture of what adaptation options with
mitigation co-benefits will be implemented and what are
the capacities for successful implementation.

46

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


