guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 38

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  3

Smart Growth and Climate Change in British Columbia

Land use is the key factor affecting our quality of life. We can reduce transportation greenhouse gas emissions marginally
through more efficient vehicles and cleaner fuels, but the only way to really address the issue is to reduce the total amounts
we drive. This can only be accomplished by more efficient land use and the development of compact, complete communities. 

‘Smart growth’ is a collection of land use and development principles that aim to enhance our quality of life, preserve the
natural environment, and save tax resources over time. The ten smart growth principles are:

1. Mix land uses so that living, working, and shopping occur in close proximity. 

2. Build compact neighbourhoods and communities by identifying growth areas.

3. Provide a variety of transportation choices as alternatives to driving.

4. Create diverse affordable housing opportunities so that residents from all family types, life stages, and income levels

can live in the same neighbourhood.

5. Encourage investments in infrastructure and servicing such that new developments do not take up new land.

6. Preserve open spaces, wetlands, grasslands, and other environmentally sensitive areas. 

7. Protect and enhance agricultural lands. 

8. Utilize green infrastructure, alternative development standards, and green buildings.

9. Foster a unique neighbourhood identity.

10. Nurture engaged citizens.

Creating smart growth communities means planning for the long term. Policy tools such as Official Community Plans (OCPs)
and Regional Growth Strategies (RGS) create opportunities for communities across BC to incorporate smart growth principles
into guiding the future development of communities to be more resilient and adaptable to climate change. Currently, the
planning process in BC requires that landscape hazards be identified and the location of a community’s future development
considers these hazards. Flooding, sea level rise, avalanche risk, and other climate change scenarios could (and should) be
incorporated into this planning process to ensure that future development occurs in the safest places possible.

Recently, the Government of British Columbia introduced new strategies and legislation that support the principles of smart
growth and will encourage local and regional governments to grow smarter. These include the Brownfields Renewal Strategy,
the Carbon Tax, Bill 27, and a revised Building Code. Once Bill 27 comes into force, local governments will be required to
include GHG emission targets, policies and actions in their Official Community Plans and Regional Growth Strategies and will
be able to use regulatory tools to promote energy and water conservation, and to waive or reduce charges for green
development.

The research on urban form and climate change impacts and adaptation may be only beginning to emerge, but the links are
already clear. Smart growth communities are more walkable and better able to provide efficient transit, which is increasingly
important as the cost of fuel rises. They are surrounded by productive and protected farmlands to provide residents with
increased food security. Carbon sinks such as forests, wetlands and other naturalized areas are conserved. They redirect
and encourage a strong local economy by keeping small businesses in town centres alive and thriving. 

Cleary, the ‘where’ and ‘how’ of climate-resilient communities tomorrow will be based on smarter growth today. 

(Contributed by Ione Smith)

38

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


