guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 69

APPENDIX 1

are estimated. Scenarios developed by experts on projected
socio-economic  and  climate  changes  are  provided  to
participants  who  consider  what  economic,  social  and
environmental impacts may occur as a result. In step four,
future vulnerabilities are estimated based on these scenarios,
and potential adaptation strategies are identified. The final
step  is  to  evaluate  options  and  their  potential  to  reduce
vulnerability, decide on preferred strategies and implement
them.  Implementation  requires  ongoing  monitoring  and
review to ensure that adaptation approaches are responding
to  actual  conditions  and  new  information  as  it  becomes
available (Lemmen and Warren, 2004). 

Vulnerability assessment has been utilized in BC to evaluate
the vulnerability of forestry-based communities to climate
change in places like Vanderhoof, BC (Natural Resources
Canada, 2005).

What-if analyses

There are a variety of types of this analysis, which begins with
the  postulating  of  “What  if?”  questions  in  a  structured
brainstorming  session.  This  is  commonly  used  in  risk
management to anticipate potential problems and suggest
response strategies and ways of mitigating the risk. In climate
change  studies, this  technique  can  be  used  to  initiate
discussion  about  what  impacts  may  occur  under  certain
changes  in  climate,  and  generate  ideas  of  appropriate
responses.  Example  questions  include, “What  if  available
water supplies dropped by 20% during the summer? and
What changes in water policy would be required for various
uses, given this condition?” This technique could be used in
a  focus  group  or  workshop  setting  that  gathers  together
experts  on  the  general  subject  area  (e.g. agricultural 
or engineering experts) or the specific area of application 
(e.g. planners and engineers at the city).

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

69


