guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 43

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  4

STEP 4 Setting trajectories to meet priorities.

How can we get there?

4A:  Identifying actions to achieve the vision of 

the future    

Experiences  in  developing  responses  to  climate  change
showed  that  placing  greater  responsibility  on  planning
bodies and collaboration among government officers and
stakeholders to resolve planning issues promoted greater
local ownership of policies and an increased commitment to
their implementation (UKCIP, 2001). To progress toward

policies and implementation, the options identified need to
be communicated in a language that speaks to the target
audience. Action is best enabled when it fits into the current
mandate and activities of decision-makers, or when it is
linked  to  the  goals  expressed  in  existing  planning
documents. 

In  terms  of  implementation,  adaptation  options  may  be
considered on different time scales. Short-term “no regrets
actions” are those actions where society would benefit from
their implementation, even if anthropogenic climate change
did not take place. 

STEP 4A: METHODS AND ACTIONS

To move from the list of adaptation options in the previous step to implementation, we suggest using the following list of
questions:

1.

2.

Identify the ‘preferred options’ that reach the overall development priorities for the future development pathway in
the context of the adaptation initiative

Investigate if there are actions that provide win-win and/or no-regrets solutions both in the context of climate change
and the adaptation initiative

3.

Identify short-term measures that are needed to implement the selected option

4.

Identify long-term measures that are needed to ensure the implementation

5. Assess what capacities are needed to ensure that the planned actions could be implemented effectively. Who will be

responsible for implementation?

6. Estimate how progress will be measured and evaluated. Are there existing systems in place to monitor the progress?

7. Assess what procedures are needed to incorporate lessons learned into future planning and best practices

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

43


