guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 35

GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE  STEP  2

2B. Estimating impacts of  climate change 

The purpose of this step is to estimate the impacts of climate
change in the context of the SAM project. The previous two
steps set the context for the climate change impacts. Except
in areas of high vulnerability, climate change is usually not a
major driver of changes in development policies and plans.
Even so, it can act as a significant stressor that may influence

the  direction  of  local  development  and  vice  versa.  In
particular, climate change is most likely to have significant
implications  for  development  by  interacting  with  other
stresses on sustainable development. For example, in areas
where the aging infrastructure is under pressure because of
the  growing  population  and 
for
maintenance, further stresses due to climate change could
lead to severe consequences. 

limited  resources 

STEP 2B: METHODS AND ACTIONS

We suggest the following list of activities to estimate current and past experiences with weather-related events to help
identify future impacts of a changing climate:

1.

Identify the changes in climatic variables estimated by climate model simulations

2. Estimate impacts of changing climatic variables on a resource-base that is relevant for the focus of the SAM project

(hydrology, forestry, coastal land flooding due sea-level rise etc.)

3. Assess the potential consequences of estimated impacts that could be relevant in designing future development

activities, adaptation and mitigation measures

4.

Identify areas of future vulnerability in the context of relevant plans, policies and regulations

The important part of a climate change impact assessment
should be not only obtaining information about changes in
basic climatic variables such as temperature and precipitation,
but also information on what these changes mean for the
resources, infrastructure and vulnerability of areas relevant for
the local government. From the adaptation and vulnerability
reduction point of view, these consequences arevery important
for the design of actual adaptation actions because they relate
changes in climate variables to socioeconomic and ecological
dimensions of local development.

After completing steps 2A and B, the major vulnerabilities 
to climate change should be identified. This could be done in
a meeting or workshop in which the climate impacts and
their  consequences  are  presented.  Based  on  the  current
vulnerabilities and capacities, major future vulnerabilities can
be identified. To discuss the current and future vulnerabilities,
a method such as ‘what-if ’ analyses could be used (see the
Appendix 1 for more details).

By  this  stage  of  the  SAM  project,  the  study  on  major
climate change impacts relevant to your community has
been  completed  and  major  future  vulnerabilities  have
been identified.

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

35


