guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 24

SETTING THE STAGE 

An anecdote by David Diamond 

In May of 2007 I was working in a small northern Manitoba community called Wasagamack. To get there,

one flies from Winnipeg in a Dash-8 due north for about an hour to St. Teresa Point. From there
transport is a small boat with an outboard motor for 30 minutes to Wasagamack – a community to which
almost everything must travel by plane and then boat.

One morning I was having breakfast with some of the organizers of the work. I picked up a jar of jam that
was on the table. French Jam. French mango and pineapple jam. Wait a minute, I thought to myself, mangoes
and pineapples don’t grow in France. How many times has whatever fruit there is in this jar been around the
planet to make it into my hands in Wasagamack? And worse than that – if I wasn’t preparing for a project on
global warming, this thought would likely never have entered my mind. Why? Because for some reason, I am
entitled to eat mango and pineapple jam from France.

So, there I was spiraling into a vortex of guilt and despair and, not wanting to endure that alone, decided to
share the thought with my colleagues at the table; social justice activists each and every one of us.

Upon doing so, one of them, in a very weary voice said, “Can’t we just have breakfast?” Understanding and
sympathizing with the fatigue….I shut my mouth. The voices in my head that don’t want to be seen to always
be a bother, that want to be liked, that are also tired and panicked at the enormity of the global warming issue,
convinced me, against my true better judgment, to be silent.

Of course governments need to develop clear and well thought out policies to deal with this most important
issue. Likewise, corporations must change their destructive behaviour on the planet. I have questions, though,
if either of these necessities will have much meaning if each and every one of us humans don’t confront our
own expectations, entitlements and patterns of behaviour that create the intricate web that both supports, and
is, the unsustainable culture in which we live.

David Diamond is a co-founder and the Artistic
and Managing Director of Headlines Theatre. In
2007 and 2008 Headlines Theatre organized a
series of intimate evenings of theatre (without a
play) about global warming 2º of Fear and Desire
– an intimate evening of theatre (without a play)
grew out of a particular moment in time. For
more information: www.headlinestheatre.com.


