guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 66

APPENDIX 1

that expert judgment can be applied formally are by pooling
expert  judgments  to  achieve  one  combined  result  or  by
presenting a range of distinct judgments made by individual
experts. In the latter case a further process, such as consensus
building,  will  be  needed  in  order  to  incorporate  these
judgments  into  societally  acceptable  decisions.  A  related
approach is the Delphi technique, where expert judgments
are contributed in a structured process to come up with joint
forecasts (Willows and Connell, 2003).

Expert  judgment  is  used  often  in  climate  change  studies
where there is a lack of available data or where uncertainty is
so great that other quantitative evaluations will not produce
a  meaningful  result.  For  example,  where  predictions  of
technological,  social  or  political  change  are  required  for
climate  change  scenario  development,  formalized  expert
judgment may be the most reasonable way of estimating the
necessary  parameters.  Another  common  use  of  expert
judgment in climate change studies is to estimate uncertainty
(Otwayl et al., 1992; Webster et al., 2003).

Facilitated workshops

Facilitated  workshops  are  a  participatory  method  that
incorporates  the  ideas,  concerns  and  preferences  of  all
participants in a structured decision-making process. The
technique draws on Decision analysis methods and requires
participants  to  apply  information  to  develop  ideas  and
provide judgments on options. This often results in a ranking
of  policy  options.  It  contributes  to  a  learning  process
individually and collectively that simultaneously incorporates
diverse beliefs and values to develop joint recommendations
on preferred actions.

A series of facilitated workshops were used recently in the
Okanagan as part of a participatory integrated assessment of
water  management.  This  method  was  used  in  order  to
enhance  learning  and  understanding  of  the  issue  among
participants, and to jointly develop a decision support model
that  is  used  to  increase  knowledge  about  the  system  and
explore plausible future scenarios and adaptation options
(Cohen and Neale, 2006).

Focus groups

Focus groups are a method that brings together around six
to ten selected participants representing groups or individuals

whose ideas and opinions are of particular interest for the
discussion topic. This group is guided by a facilitator through
an interactive discussion around specific questions in order to
learn  from  participants’  experience.  The  method 
is
distinguished from other group methods by its intentional
interaction  between  participants  that  can  provide  shared
insight  and  a  diversity  of  understandings,  and  can  be  an
efficient way of gathering responses with limited resources or
time.  However,  the  very  strength  of  this  method—
interaction—means that special consideration needs to be
taken where sensitive topics are being discussed, or power
dynamics between participants could constrain individual
responses (Morgan, 1996).

Focus groups are used in a variety of settings for a range of
purposes. For example, this technique is currently being used
by  Natural  Resources  Canada  and  professional  planning
associations in development of a national planning policy on
climate change adaptation. Elsewhere, focus groups have been
used in the prairies to understand agricultural producers’
perceptions of risks, opportunities and capabilities due to
climate change, as well as their ideas of what support will be
required to manage risk (Stroh Consulting, 2005). 

Multi-criteria analyses 

Multi-Criteria  Analysis  (MCA)  refers  to  any  structured
Decision  analysis  that  evaluates  preferred  options  for
addressing a number of objectives simultaneously. This is
done by identifying desired objectives and corresponding
indicators that can include social, economic, biophysical or
other  types  of  components.  These  indicators  are  often
evaluated  quantitatively,  for  example  through  ranking  or
economic valuation; however, they will often not be in the
same units and may also include qualitative measures. MCA
includes techniques for comparing and evaluating outcomes
while incorporating this range of types of indicators, and is
particularly  useful  where  a  method  such  as  cost-benefit
analysis cannot be used due to the difficulties in assigning
monetary values to social or environmental objectives.

This approach has wide application. In Canada, it has been
used to evaluate conflictual policy areas such as sustainable
forestry  options  in  B.C.  that  address  a  range  of  public
objectives  (Sheppard  and  Meitner, 2005),  and  evaluating
alternative  energy  supply  futures  for  the  country  (Noble,
2004).

66

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE


