guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:26 AM  Page 89

APPENDIX 5

rise or sudden shifts (over a decade or less) in atmospheric or
oceanic circulation patterns. Such events have occurred in the
past due to natural causes (UNDP, 2005)

Climate Change: Climate change refers to a statistically
significant variation in either the mean state of the climate
or in its variability, persisting for an extended period
(typically decades or longer). Climate change may be due
to natural internal processes or external forcings, or to
persistent anthropogenic changes in the composition of the
atmosphere or in land use. The United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), however,
does make a distinction between “climate variability”
attributable to natural causes and “climate change”
attributable to human activities altering the atmospheric
composition. In the UNFCCC’s Article 1, “climate change”
is defined as: “a change of climate which is attributed
directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the
composition of the global atmosphere and which is in
addition to natural climate variability observed over
comparable time periods.” (IPCC, 2001)

Climate Feedback: The influence of a climate-related
process on another that in turn influences the original
process. For example, a positive climate feedback is an
increase in temperature leading to a decrease in ice cover,
which in turn leads to a decrease of reflected radiation
(resulting in an increase in temperature). An example of a
negative climate feedback is an increase in the Earth’s
surface temperature, which may locally increase cloud
cover, which may reduce the temperature of the surface.
(IPCC, 2001)

Climatic Hazards: include increasing frequency of extreme
weather events (floods, hurricanes, tornados, droughts),
increasing summer temperatures, lower level of
precipitation during main growing seasons, changes in
streamflow, changes in snowfall

Climate System: The system consisting of the atmosphere
(gases), hydrosphere (water), lithosphere (solid rocky part
of the Earth), and biosphere (living) that determine the
Earth’s climate. (NOAA, 2005)

Climate Variability: Climate variability refers to variations
in the mean state and other statistics (such as standard
deviations, the occurrence of extremes, etc.) of the climate
on all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of individual

weather events. Variability may be due to natural internal
processes within the climate system (internal variability), or
to variations in natural or anthropogenic external forces
(external variability). (IPCC, 2001)

Climate: Climate in a narrow sense is usually defined as the
‘average weather’, or more rigorously, as the statistical
description in terms of the mean and variability of relevant
quantities over a period of time ranging from months to
thousands or millions of years. Climate in a wider sense is
the state, including a statistical description, of the climate
system. The classical period of time is 30 years, as defined
by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
(IPCC, 2001) 

Climatic Variable: Qualitative classification of a weather
element (e.g. temperature, precipitation, wind, humidity,
etc.) at a place over a period of time. (NOAA, 2005)

Coping Capacity: The means by which people or
organizations use available resources and abilities to face
adverse consequences that could lead to disaster. In general,
this involves managing resources, both in normal times as
well as during crises or adverse conditions. The
strengthening of coping capacities usually builds resilience
to withstand the effects of natural and human-induced
hazards (UN/ISDR 2004). Capacity refers to the manner
in which people and organizations use existing resources to
achieve various beneficial ends during unusual, abnormal,
and adverse conditions of a disaster event or process. The
strengthening of coping capacities usually builds resilience
to withstand the effects of natural and other hazards.
(European Spatial Planning Observation Network)

Critical Threshold: The point at which an activity faces an
unacceptable level of harm, such as a change from profit to
loss on a farm due to decreased water availability, or coastal
flooding exceeding present planning limits. It occurs when
a threshold q.v. is reached at which ecological or
socioeconomic change is damaging and requires a policy
response. (UNDP, 2005)

Development Pathway: An evolution based on an array of
technological, economic, social, institutional, cultural and
biophysical characteristics that determine the interactions
between human and natural systems, including production
and consumption patterns in all countries, over time at a
particular scale. (IPCC, 2007)

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

89


