guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 67

APPENDIX 1

Policy exercise 

This method brings together policy makers with academics to
combine  knowledge  from  multiple  disciplines  for  use  in
developing policy to deal with complex management issues.
Key  components  of  the  approach  include  proposing
unconventional but plausible scenarios of the future, and
then  developing  and  testing  different  policy  options  that
respond to the key challenges represented by the scenarios.
This method requires a significant investment of time and
capacity and incorporates a combination of mathematical or
computer-based modeling and scenario analysis together with
techniques such as facilitated workshops and brainstorming.
The exercise is conducted in an organizational context that
reflects  real-world  institutional  issues  of  relevance  to  the
problem being discussed. 

This  method  can  be  used  both  to  generate  and  evaluate
adaptation options. The process does not necessarily result in
new knowledge or an explicit set of policy recommendations.
Rather,  it  can  be  used  to  identify  priorities  and  gaps  in
knowledge,  as  well  as  institutional  barriers  or  needed
technological changes. In a case applying the policy exercise
(PE) approach in southeast Asia, a combination of methods
including data collection, modeling, impact assessments and
background scenarios were used in preparation for the policy
exercise  workshops.  This  experience  demonstrated  the
usefulness of PE for effectively structuring the issues involved
in order to develop appropriate adaptation policy options
(McCarthy et al., 2001).

Scenario development and analyses 

Synthetic  and  analogue  scenarios,  in  addition  to  Global
Climate Model (GCM) scenarios, are methods for exploring
possible changes in future climates (See Barrow et al., 2004,
Section 6.4). Synthetic scenarios, also known as “arbitrary”
or “incremental” scenarios, are the simplest climate change
scenarios  to  construct  and  apply.  This  is  done  by  using
historical climate records and altering a climate variable by
an  arbitrary  amount  to  see  how  it  affects  the  system.
Accordingly, its main use is in sensitivity analysis, to gain a
better understanding of how changes to a certain variable may
impact a system. It can also be used to identify thresholds
and the tolerance of the system to changes in climate.

Analogue scenarios use existing climate information, either
from the site being studied (“temporal” analogue) or from

another  location  whose  current  climate  is  similar  to  that
expected for the study site in the future (“spatial” analogue).
A strength of temporal analogues is that, because the climate
was experienced in the past, it is physically plausible that it
could occur in the future. While the same is partly true for
spatial analogues, the transferability of climate data from one
location to another is limited due to geographical differences
between locations (e.g: day length, proximity to water, etc).
For both types of scenarios, a key limitation is that using
analogues as a basis for future scenarios assumes that the
climate will continue to respond the same way in the future
as it has in the past. Global climate models (GCMs) are a
more reliable approach for developing future scenarios for use
in impact assessments.

The  other  side  of  scenario  development  concerns  the
socioeconomic  context  and  drivers  for  climate  impact
assessment.  This  may  be  done  by  developing  plausible
“storylines” that describe social, economic, technological and
political changes that will have a bearing on emissions, future
conditions and adaptation possibilities. As it is impossible to
predict trajectories for socioeconomic scenarios, these are
often expressed as possible alternative futures. For the United
Kingdom Climate Impacts Programme, four socioeconomic
scenarios were developed alongside climate scenarios in order
to  produce  an  integrated  climate  impact  assessment.
Socioeconomic  scenario  development  is  also  useful  for
promoting social learning about climate change impacts in
the community (Berkhout et al., 2002).

Scenario  analysis  is  a  systematic  evaluation  using  expert
judgment  and  scientific  methods  to  identify  a  range  of
possible outcomes that could occur, taking into account key
drivers and the uncertainty surrounding them. This is the
method used in the IPCC reports to develop future climate
scenarios. In California, scenario analysis was used to explore
possible  energy  futures,  identify  potential  challenges  and
strategies, and make policy recommendations for the state
(Ghanadan and Koomey, 2005).

Sensitivity analyses

Sensitivity analysis is a technique that looks at how sensitive a
system is to climate variability or change. For example, how
does the system respond to an increase of 2°C in average surface
temperature? Synthetic scenarios are one example of a sensitivity
analysis. Sensitivity analysis can also be used in estimating the
uncertainty of outcomes (see Uncertainty analyses). 

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

67


