guidebook livia-rev-final:Layout 1  12/23/08  9:25 AM  Page 10

CANADIAN COMMUNITIES’ GUIDEBOOK FOR ADAPTATION TO CLIMATE CHANGE

executive summary

Many local governments have already begun working on decreasing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.

Recently, a growing number have begun examining ways to adapt to climate change – the act of
reducing climate change impacts that are already underway. This Guidebook is intended to help those who
are looking for ways to reduce the impacts of climate change (increasing heat waves, water shortages, intense
storms and sea-level rise) while decreasing GHG emissions and ensuring sustainable development for their
communities.  Several different methods can be used to adapt to climate change.   Some of these methods
contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions while increasing long-term sustainability.  Expanding the
tree canopy in urban centres, for example, helps to reduce the impact of an increasing number of hot days
and heat waves.  It also reduces the need for air conditioning, and so reduces greenhouse gas emissions from
fossil-fueled electricity generation. Healthy trees also decrease the impact of intense rainfall, stormwater
runoff and pollution – increasing sustainability for our communities.  

Climate change impacts will affect societies in complex and broad-ranging ways as technological, economic,
social and ecological changes take place across regions, groups and sectors. Ecological impacts have cascading
effects on social and health outcomes. Infrastructure problems have profound economic effects, such as the
estimated $10 billion US price tag resulting from North America’s 2003 power outage. Cities, regions and
countries are linked through the global political economic system so that impacts in one area of the world
may affect other areas through economic forces, such as prices for agricultural products, or pressures including
international migration.

In North America, vulnerability to climate change will depend on the effectiveness and timing of adaptation,
as well as the distribution of coping capacity. While Canada has considerable adaptive capacity when
compared to many less developed nations, vulnerability and adaptive capacity are not uniform across our
society.  Socially and economically disadvantaged populations are likely to have less adaptive capacity than
the population as a whole, and climate “surprises” may bring weaknesses in adaptive capacity to light that
were not previously recognized (e.g., the 1988 Ice Storm, Hurricane Katrina or the 1995 Chicago heat wave).
Community attributes, including social networks, social cohesion, volunteerism, economic and income
diversification, contribute to adaptive capacity and resilience. Societal impacts will therefore depend on
factors such as wealth, infrastructure quality, emergency preparedness, healthcare, community vitality,
economic and governance system structure, and population growth.

Adaptation, Mitigation and Sustainable development (SAM) are often developed separately at the local
government and community level. Recognition of the need to integrate climate risks into development
priorities and decision making is the principal driving force behind the development of the SAM project. A
number of methods are possible for the integration of adaptation and mitigation in the context of sustainable
development.  This Guidebook provides one such method.  

10


