November 14, 2017 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Higher average temperatures bring longer 
growing seasons by increasing the average 
number of frost-free days. In the Canadian 
prairies, Agriculture Canada is anticipating 
significant increases in the length of the 
growing season over wide areas based on a 
predicted 10C to 20C increase in average 
temperatures over the 2009 to 2032 
period. For example, while 33.6% of the 
area had a growing season longer than 130 
days in the 1971-2000 period, that is 
expected to increase to 56.6% of the area 
by 2032.  

Willingness to Buy Local Food 

“The consumers in the Yukon show a strong 
desire to buy locally. This can be seen in the 
support for community markets, and in 
strong farm gate sales. This has also 
translated into high premiums for a limited 
amount of Yukon production. This local 
premium may be as high as two to four- fold 
over imported production.” (Serecon, 2007 P. 
A15) 

Although a similar level of analysis has not been done for the Yukon, a similar lengthening of the 
growing season can likely be expected. And the increased summer precipitation from climate 
change will also increase agricultural potential and decrease irrigation needs and costs. Some 
general trends that emerge from the 2016 Census of agriculture, which largely combines the 
Yukon with the NWT, include: 

  The number of farms was largely unchanged from 2011 to 2016; 

  The area of cropland remained stable from 2011 to 2016 but there was a shift away from 

hay to the production of field crops, particularly field pea production; 

  The total area dedicated to fruit and berry production more than doubled between 2011 

and 2016 while greenhouse production has fallen; 

  Overall the agriculture sector in Yukon and NWT reported gross receipts of $10.0 million for 

2015, significantly higher than the $4.1 million in 2005; and 

  Poultry and egg farms accounted for 44% of reported gross receipts in 2015. 

Increasing Yukon agriculture is a low-risk climate change adaptation opportunity. It is an 
opportunity that may yield significant economic benefits and if properly managed does not have 
significant downsides if the climate threat turns out to not be as severe as some scenarios 
projected.  

Factors other than climate change that may help to further increase Yukon agricultural 
production include: 

  General trends toward higher demand for more local food. In the Yukon, the popularity of 

farmer’s markets has been rising: Dawson City, Haines Junction, Mayo and Whitehorse have 
all established local farmers markets (Yukon News, April 21, 2017).       

  The increased attention and interest in food security and the role of local food production in 
enhancing food security in the territory, particularly among rural First Nations communities. 
Since 2005, food security-related adaptation projects have been pursued by the Teslin 
Tlingit Council, White River First Nation, Little Salmon Carmacks First Nation, Liard First 
Nation, Vuntut G’witchin, and the Kluane First Nation. Little Salmon Carmacks First Nation 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
31 


