Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

began a community greenhouse and garden program in 2000 and other communities and 
First Nations have made similar efforts, including the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Teaching and 
Working Farm, which began in 2015.   

  The price premium that many are willing to pay for local food. “There are studies that show 
that consumers are willing to pay a premium for local products (Brown 2003; Schneider and 
Francis 2005; Novotorova and Mazzocco 2008; Darby, Batte, Ernst and Roe 2008). But this 
willingness to pay a premium is apparently contingent on local products being readily 
available and easy to identify” (Equiterre, 2011).  

  The very small amount of local food in proportion to the total market for food in the Yukon. 
The total gross receipts of farms (both Yukon and NWT) was $10.0 million in 2015 as noted 
above. The Yukon Bureau of Statistics reports that food and beverage stores in the Yukon 
had $203.4 million in sales in 2015. The farm receipts include sales (e.g., hay for horses) that 
do not directly compare to grocery sales and there are significant grocery sales that cannot 
be displaced by local production (e.g., soft drinks) but the numbers do indicate that local 
food has a lot of room to grow its market share in the Yukon.  

Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Teaching and Working Farm 

In 2015 the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in First Nation stated the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Teaching and 
Working Farm in the Klondike Valley near Dawson City. In the summer of 2017, the farm had 
22 students of varying ages, most of them post-secondary. “Students spend three hours a 
day in classes, which are taught in a large, open-air frame tent. The other four and a half 
hours of the day are spent in practicum, doing things like tending the sprawling garden 
beds, planting seedlings, operating and maintaining farm machinery and taking care of the 
pigs. Most students live on-site in small frame tents.” (Yukon News, July 4, 2017) 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
32 


