Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Figure 2: Timing of the Ice Breakup on the Yukon River in Dawson City 

November 14, 2017 

 

(Environment Yukon, 2017) 

Earlier breakup means that the ice road across the Yukon River that connects the town of 
Dawson with West Dawson will experience shorter seasons, limiting access to food, medical 
care, and work and recreation opportunities for West Dawson residents. All West Dawson 
residents plan for the shoulder season when there is no access to town, however, when the 
season extends longer than anticipated residents may be faced with shortages in food or other 
essential goods that occasionally require expensive helicopter re-supplies. Furthermore, not 
captured in the ice break-up data is that warmer and more variable temperatures increase the 
risk of mid-winter and spring flooding. In 2009, ice jamming and unusual patterns of river ice 
break-up triggered significant damage to infrastructure in Dawson City. 

2.3.3  Changes in Vegetation and New Bird Species on Qikiqtaruk-Hershel Island  

Documented changes in vegetation and the observation of new bird species on Qikiqtaruk-
Herschel Island serve as an example of how climate change is affecting Yukon’s most northern 
region. 

A seventeen-year study of the vegetation communities on Qikiqtaruk-Herschel Island 
documented rapid changes to the island’s vegetation ecology (Myers-Smith et al. 2017). Shrubs 
and grasses are growing higher and expanding into areas that were typically bare or had 
minimal vegetation. The changes were linked to warming air temperatures along with longer 
growing seasons and increasing permafrost thaw.  

Recent bird surveys conducted on Qikiqtaruk found several migratory bird species that are 
normally only found in areas a thousand kilometers further south. The most striking example of 
this was the discovery of a Calliope Hummingbird in the summer of 2017 (see Photo 2).  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
10 


