Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
7.  HUMAN HEALTH AND WELLBEING 

November 14, 2017 

Human health and wellbeing can be impacted by climate change in a variety of ways, from 
exposure to new disease and vectors to physical and psychological health effects of anxiety and 
stress from extreme weather events or wildfire damaging homes or livelihoods.  

Ticks in the North 

Over the long-term, climate 
change is projected to make the 
Yukon more hospitable to 
invasive species that are likely to 
bring with them both vector-
borne and zoonotic diseases. 
Vectors are organisms (usually 
insects) that transmit pathogens 
or parasites from one person (or 
animal or plant) to another. 
Zoonotic diseases are diseases 
that normally infect animals but 
can make the jump to human 
populations. Both can cause 
human illness and can negatively 
impact plants or animals that contribute to the food security and livelihoods of Yukoners. 
Climate change may also increase existing health-risks connected to climate-driven hazards or 
relationships between humans and natural ecosystems. 

In the summer of 2017, a black-legged tick was 
discovered in Yellowknife, one of the most northern 
locations in Canada that this insect has been 
documented. The black-legged tick, also known as the 
“deer tick” can be a carrier of Lyme disease. According 
to Canadian Lyme Disease Foundation president Jim 
Wilson, deer ticks are becoming increasingly resilient to 
colder climates, and it is expected that more of these 
insects will arrive in the north over the coming years. 

(CBC North News. June 13, 2017). 

According to the 2012 Yukon Health Status Report (Government of Yukon, 2012), many 
Whitehorse households and most rural households obtain at least some food from hunting (33% 
and 58%) or fishing (44% and 62%). These traditional food sources, and our ability to access 
these animals over land and water, are affected by shifting weather patterns and seasonal 
changes occurring here in Yukon. This may generate changes in diet that lead to physical health 
impacts, but also has implications for the mental health and psychological wellbeing of Yukon’s 
First Nations people whose ability to participate in traditional cultural activities that are 
intimately connected with traditional foods may become more limited.  

Mental Health 

“Many northern communities consider 
traditional practices as a pathway to 
mental health and wellness for First 
Nation youth” Adapting to Climate 
Change and Keeping Our Traditions: 
Selkirk First Nation Adaptation Plan. 
(VanBibber and Pratt 2016) 

 

The Vuntut Gwitchin First Nation is one of several 
Yukon First Nations who have taken steps to 
better understand the impact of climate change 
on human health and wellbeing. Between 2007 
and 2011, the First Nation undertook a multi-
phased project to solicit community feedback on 
local climate change impacts in the Vuntut 
Gwitchin traditional territory, understand 
historical adaptations to address food-related 
concerns, and develop new actions to improve 
community food security (Arctic Institute for 
Community-Based Research, 2017). 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
33 


