Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
3.2  KEY CHALLENGES TO ADVANCING YUKON’S ADAPTIVE CAPACITY 

November 14, 2017 

Building partnerships, developing Yukon-specific climate information, fostering innovation, and 
initiating dialogue with communities about climate change impacts have been the focus of much 
of the adaptation work that has been undertaken to date in the territory. Building on this work, 
and re-focusing efforts towards the targeted development of capacity and resources will be an 
important component of building resilience to climate change across sectors and communities. 
There are, however, certain challenges that will need to be addressed along the way.  

Most of these challenges relate to the multi-faceted nature of climate change (i.e., its 
complexity and uncertainty) and difficulties related to governance (i.e., difficulty of 
implementing adaptation due to limited annual budgets and competing priorities). The sense of 
urgency to address challenges that limit Yukon’s capacity to adapt is growing as impacts of 
climate change, and related issues of community development and sustainability, increase. 
Other specific issues that limit Yukon’s ability to adapt to climate change include: 

  Climate change is complex and cannot be fully understood or dealt with by one organization 

or government – especially in Yukon, which has eleven self-governing First Nations in 
addition to federal, territorial and municipal agencies with overlapping jurisdictions and 
interests.  

  Government departments and policy-makers sometimes struggle to prioritize long-term 

planning objectives related to climate change adaptation when faced with immediate needs 
and financial constraints. Furthermore, it is often difficult for many decision-makers to see 
tangible connections between the issues they are mandated to address and the interaction 
of these issues with climate change. 

  A challenge in the Yukon, as in the rest of Canada, is that there has been little effort to 

actively support climate change adaptation through changes to existing legislation or 
regulations. In part, this appears to stem from a general reluctance to open legislation for 
changes and from a lack of clarity or consensus on what changes should be made.   

  Difficulties in integrating adaptation into long-term planning are compounded by limited 

local-level information or projections about climate change impacts, which serves to 
increase uncertainty about what actions should be taken to address climate change impacts 
at a local scale.  

  Financial management and administration systems are sometimes designed in ways that do 

not adequately consider the long-term financial costs of climate change in present-day 
spending and procurement decisions (e.g., new buildings are not required to take into 
consideration possible impacts of climate change). 

  Slow progress on mitigating climate change (i.e., reducing GHG emissions) in Yukon risks 

slowing adaption as well. Successful climate change mitigation measures, particularly in the 
areas of infrastructure and buildings, will help adaptation and vis-versa (see Figure 3).  

 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
13 


