November 14, 2017 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
 
Executive Summary 
This report was commissioned by Environment Yukon’s Climate Change Secretariat to provide 
the public and other stakeholders with an understanding of how climate change is affecting 
Yukon, what actions have been taken to date to help us adapt, and the key challenges that we’ll 
need to address to adapt in the future. This work will also explore the economic challenges and 
opportunities related to adaptation. 

This is not a comprehensive analysis of all the issues around climate change and adaptation 
efforts. It is a synthesis of existing knowledge and provides a focused snapshot of selected key 
adaptation challenges in the Yukon. 

The strongest measure of climate change in Yukon is relative change in annual temperature. The 
annual average temperature has increased 2°C over the past 50 years, while winter 
temperatures have increased 4°C. 

Annual precipitation (rain and snowfall), another important indicator of climate change, has 
increased by 6% in the Yukon over the past 50 years, with the greatest increase seen during the 
summer months. 

Temperature is projected to increase by more than 2°C over the next 50 years. Winters are 
projected to warm faster than any other season. Precipitation is projected to increase by 10% to 
20% over the next 50 years in Yukon. Snowfall is projected to arrive later in the fall and become 
more variable over the winter, with periods of little snow and intense snow-fall events likely 
becoming more common. 

Adaptation to climate change starts when governments, communities, and individuals adjust 
their expectations about the future and make decisions to better prepare for changing 
conditions. Yukon has already started to adapt to the effects of climate change and decision 
makers have an interest in addressing present and future climate change impacts through 
adaptation. 

Growing concern for Yukon’s changing climate has led to increased research and adaptation 
initiatives that contribute to the development of new knowledge and local capacity and 
expertise. Ensuring that the climate change funding and programming opportunities 
substantively enhance the adaptive capacity of communities is critical to Yukon’s long-term 
adaptation efforts.   

 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
I 


