Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
While the impacts of climate change on wildlife, and especially traditional sources of food, is of 
great concern for Yukoners, there is limited scientific research on what these impacts will mean 
in practical terms both for wildlife and for the population who rely on them for food. A 
community-based climate monitoring program that provides resources and training for 
community residents to monitor and collect data on key ecological indicators of climate change 
could help to address this information gap while also providing modest economic benefit to 
Yukon communities. 

November 14, 2017 

Integrating the data collected through this program with existing research and information 
available through other public agencies (e.g. statistics on traditional food consumption, wildlife 
population health data, forest health information, etc.) may help to provide improved insights 
into the long-term implications of climate change for human health. The data can also be used 
to inform and guide natural resource planning and development to ensure that regional 
ecosystems and their capacity to support important traditional plant and animal species are 
sustainably managed.   

Beyond the information-gathering component of these initiatives, community-based climate 
monitoring provides a valuable opportunity to integrate traditional knowledge and scientific 
research on climate change and create new opportunities to re-connect with the land for 
individuals who may be feeling alienated from traditional land-use activities. Historical insight 
into local climate indicators related to, for example, the timing of seasonally significant events 
such as the first snowfall, sightings of migratory birds, and the budding of flowers in spring 
provide a deeper understanding of long-term climate trends in specific geographic regions. This 
type of traditional and local knowledge could feed into such initiatives by soliciting the 
participation of First Nations elders and contribute to cultural revitalization by providing a 
framework to promote and preserve land-based skills and knowledge for younger community 
members. (Lemmen et. al. 2016). 

Community-based climate monitoring programs are low-risk regardless of how severe the 
effects of climate change turn out to be. There is an opportunity for communities to benefit in 
different ways from the programs and their costs tend to be relatively low. 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
36 


