Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Our ability to adapt to climate change will have an 
important influence on what Yukon’s future will 
look like. If we are proactive in our approach to 
adaptation many issues can be avoided and some 
impacts lessened. However, some impacts will be 
much more difficult to adapt to. 

Building momentum for climate change adaptation 
will take time and concerted effort. Developing 
expertise and allocating adequate financial 
resources to adaptation initiatives and planning is 
critical. This report was developed in part to help 
support collaborative opportunities for climate 
change adaptation where connections are not 
always clear and simple. 

1.2  APPROACH 

Our approach to this report has been to: 

November 14, 2017 

What is Climate Change Adaptation? 

Climate change adaptation refers to 
actions that reduce the negative 
impact of climate change and/or take 
advantage of new opportunities. It 
involves making adjustments in our 
decisions, activities and thinking 
because of observed or expected 
changes in climate. 

(Lemmen, Warren, Lacroix, and Bush, 
2008). 

  Provide a synthesis of the most up to date information available on climate change impacts 

and adaptation in Yukon (Section 2); 

  Select and present concrete examples of some of the Yukon-specific work being done to 

better understand the effects of local climate change (Section 2.3); 

  Provide an overview of our assessment of the Yukon’s capacity to adapt to climate change 

(Section 3) along with a list of known adaptation initiatives undertaken in the territory 
(APPENDIX B); and, 

  Examine in more detail four issues that are particularly important as the Yukon continues to 

adapt to the realities of climate change: 

o 

Increased risk of extreme weather and wildfire hazards (Section 4); 

o  Damage to infrastructure (Section 5); 

o  Changing ecological landscapes (Section 6); and, 

o  Concerns regarding human health (Section 7). 

The four major issues grew from our review of the relevant literature and discussions with key 
contacts. For each of the four issues listed above, we summarize how climate change and 
current adaptation efforts intersect with the issue now and how we expect those intersections 
to change.  

We have attempted to identify further opportunities for adaptation, economic costs and 
possible economic benefits. These opportunities are not intended to be exhaustive or definitive, 
but to provide a starting point for a renewed conversation about how Yukon can address 
current and future climate change impacts. 

  

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
2 


