Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
2.  YUKON’S CHANGING CLIMATE 

November 14, 2017 

Climate change is a complex problem that impacts 
natural, human, and cultural systems in many 
ways. In Yukon, changes to the climate have 
already been observed and impact our water, 
ecosystems, landscapes, and ways of life. How 
climate change is understood and talked about in 
Yukon is grounded in scientific evidence, the 
Traditional Knowledge of Yukon First Nations, and 
the observations of Yukoners.  

Changes are expected to continue and increase in 
the decades ahead. The amount of change and 
associated impacts will ultimately depend on the 
success of global efforts to curb emissions of 
greenhouse gasses (i.e. mitigate climate change) 
and our ability to adapt to climate change  

Gradual and Sudden 

Although temperature and 
precipitation seem to be changing 
slowly, the interaction between 
“gradual” changes and other factors 
can produce complex and sudden 
effects. For example, warmer annual 
temperatures associated with 
climate change have accelerated the 
retreat of the Kaskawulsh glacier, 
which led to a sudden diversion of 
water from the Slims River to the 
Alsek River in 2016. This resulted in 
a substantial drop in water levels in 
the Slims River and in Kluane Lake, 
which impacts the communities of 
Burwash Landing and Destruction 
Bay.  

Temperature and precipitation are well understood 
and widely used indicators of climate change that 
drive a broad range of climate impacts. The Yukon 
generally has only about 50 years of temperature 
and precipitation data, not a significant record 
given that a climate normal is usually defined over a 30-year period. This lack of long-term data 
makes additional proxy data drawn from historical, local, and indigenous sources of knowledge 
particularly valuable in improving our understanding how climate change is affecting the Yukon. 

 

Variability Within Long-Term Trends 

Long-term climate trends are important, but these 
broader changes are driven in part by short-term 
weather variability. Extreme swings in temperature and 
precipitation can have serious impacts on everything 
from infrastructure to wildlife breeding cycles, but 
increases in the severity, frequency or duration of 
extreme events are not easily captured in long-term 
trends. For example, a one degree increase in average 
annual temperature can mean 25 days where 
temperatures are 15 degrees above the seasonal 
normal if climate remains at normal levels the rest of 
the year. This example shows how averaging change in 
temperature throughout the year can hide the extent of 
extreme temperature variability. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

This section summarizes analyses 
of temperature and precipitation 
data to show how Yukon’s 
climate has changed and how it 
is expected to change in the 
future. Projections for 
temperature and precipitation 
change in Old Crow and 
Whitehorse are also highlighted 
as local examples of the type of 
change Yukoners can expect to 
see in their communities.  

As climate change impacts 
Yukon’s regions in different 
ways, this section also includes 
discussion of how Yukoners are 
observing the impacts of climate 
change in their own communities 

 
4 


