Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
3.  YUKON’S CAPACITY TO ADAPT 

November 14, 2017 

Yukon’s climate change adaptation landscape involves a diverse group of governments and non-
governmental organizations with a wide range of jurisdictional responsibilities, resources, and 
areas of interest and expertise. While the variety of actors involved makes it difficult to 
assemble a comprehensive picture of Yukon’s adaptation capacity, analyzing some of the 
adaptation projects or initiatives that have been undertaken by these groups provides us with a 
snapshot. 

3.1  YUKON ADAPTATION EFFORTS TO DATE 

Over $13 million has been invested since 2008 in the 80 adaptation projects identified in this 
analysis, most of which (85%) was provided through federal government agencies and 
programs. More than two-thirds of these projects were partnerships between two or more 
organizations, with most implemented by First Nations or territorial government agencies – 
often in partnership with other non-profit, indigenous, or academic organizations – and funded 
by the federal government.  

Two notable federal adaptation programs that have served as drivers of territorial efforts to 
date to address climate change impacts are: 

 

Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada’s Climate Change Preparedness in the North 
program (formerly Climate Change Adaptation Program) supports identification and 
assessment of climate-related risks, adaptation research and planning, and efforts to 
address major climate change issues such as related to infrastructure, extreme weather 
events, and permafrost degradation. This analysis has identified 35 projects financed 
through the two funding streams of the program (for First Nations communities and 
territorial government departments, respectively).  
 

  Health Canada’s Climate Change Health Adaptation Program has emphasized a community-

focused approach; projects address climate change-related needs identified by the 
community, strengthen a community’s adaptive capacity, and involve community members 
in the project’s results. This analysis identified 23 Yukon projects funded through this 
program, many of which focused on food security and Traditional Knowledge transfer 
between elders and youth. 

The focus of most of these projects has been determined by the capacity and specific interests 
of proponents, and the criteria set out by funding agencies. These criteria, designed to be 
enabling rather than proscriptive, have provided significant flexibility for proponents to address 
climate change impacts of interest to their organizations or communities. While this flexible, 
project-based approach has helped to realize adaptation actions that might not otherwise occur, 
it is also more piece-meal than strategic, and does not easily lend itself to a more coherent 
effort to develop capacity or expertise in areas where they are most needed, or where they can 
have the biggest impact.  

A summary of adaptation projects identified for this analysis can be found in APPENDIX B. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
12 


