Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

This report was commissioned by Environment Yukon’s Climate Change Secretariat to provide 
the public and other stakeholders with an understanding of how climate change is affecting 
Yukon, what actions have been taken to date to help us adapt, and the key challenges that we’ll 
need to address to adapt in the future. This work will also explore the economic challenges and 
opportunities related to adaptation. 

This is not a comprehensive documentation of all the issues around climate change and 
adaptation efforts. It is a synthesis of existing knowledge and provides a focused snapshot on 
selected key adaptation challenges in the Yukon.   

1.1  CONTEXT 

Climate change is already affecting Yukon and consideration of climate is becoming increasingly 
important in decision making and planning for the future. The Yukon Climate Change Impacts 
and Adaptation ‘State of Play’ report was developed to provide Yukoners with the latest 
information about climate change impacts and adaptation in Yukon. Included in the analysis are 
the economic impacts of climate change. The report is designed to support public participation 
in decision making about climate change issues that affect Yukon communities by providing a 
snapshot of climate change impacts and adaptation efforts to date. 

Canada, along with most other countries, has begun taking more aggressive action on climate 
change. The recently adopted Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change 
(2016) commits to action in the areas of climate change mitigation, adaptation, carbon pricing, 
and clean economic growth.  

The Yukon government has committed to renewing its climate change strategy in a manner that 
better integrates its approaches to energy, climate change risk and action, and clean 
growth/economic development. Throughout this process, Yukon government aims to engage 
with the public to solicit feedback on the renewal of this strategy.  

The effects of climate change pull on environmental, social, and economic threads, not all of 
which are directly related to the changing climate, but are still important to consider when 
planning for effective adaptation actions. These include environmental changes caused by 
drivers other than climate change, as well as demography, culture and economic development. 
Indeed, “climate change has compounded some of the existing vulnerabilities caused by these 
other factors” (Larsen et al., 2014).  

Adaptation to climate change starts when governments, communities, and individuals adjust 
their expectations about the future and make decisions to better prepare for changing 
conditions. Yukon has already started to adapt to the effects of climate change and decision 
makers have taken steps to address present and future climate change impacts through 
adaptation policies and initiatives. Despite this, efforts to integrate climate change 
considerations into decisions and implement effective adaptive actions face significant 
challenges. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
1 


