Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
5.  INFRASTRUCTURE 

November 14, 2017 

Infrastructure in the 
Yukon is already being 
impacted by climate 
change and the warmer 
temperatures, higher 
precipitation levels, and 
greater weather variability 
that is projected will 
further increase 
environmental stressors to 
buildings, roads, power 
and communications 
systems, water and sewer 
systems, and mine sites. 
Specific climate change 
challenges for Yukon 
infrastructure include: 

Art and Margaret Fry Recreation Centre 

In August 2017, engineers deemed large portions of the Art 
and Margaret Fry Recreation Centre structurally unsound due 
to permafrost thaw, forcing the City of Dawson to close most 
of the building for over a month until the decision was made to 
re-open in September 2017. In 2009, Yukon government 
allocated $4 million in funding to improve the centre, but a 
2014 study estimated that $12.5 million in improvement costs 
would be required (Yukon News, November 21, 2014). In 
addition to repair costs, there are other financial and social 
costs — including loss of recreational and social opportunities 
and the staff time needed to manage the issue itself — that are 
difficult to quantify. 

  Most existing infrastructure was designed and built based on historical climate data that 

may not be appropriate for future conditions. Even small increases in snow load, storm 
severity and frequency, and thawing permafrost may directly affect structural integrity; 

  Buildings sited on permafrost are highly vulnerable as rising temperatures increase the rate 

of thaw. The cost of repairs required to keep affected buildings open and functioning is 
significant, but there are additional financial and social implications including periods of 
closure that negatively affect users (e.g. Dawson City’s recreation centre in 2017); 

  Thawing permafrost, landslides, 
erosion and other climate-driven 
damage to infrastructure is having a 
major impact on roads and highways 
in Yukon. Highways and Public Works 
reports higher operating and 
maintenance costs for many roads 
and bridges related to these climate 
impacts. Risks to highway 
infrastructure are of concern 
because there are limited 
transportation corridors through 
which consumer goods and critical 
supplies can enter the territory; 

Dempster Highway 

Climate-related operations and maintenance 
costs for the Dempster highway have increased 
significantly in the past two decades. On 
average, an additional $200,000 dollars per year 
has been needed to maintain the Dempster 
highway since 2005 (Burns, 2015). This trend is 
expected to continue and financial challenges to 
fund major road repairs are anticipated. 

  Thawing permafrost and increased precipitation has led to problems with mine 

infrastructure both for operating mines and at abandoned sites. Changes in the hydrological 
cycle – especially extreme precipitation events and melt patterns – are creating higher-than-
planned-for water flows that can exceed the capacity of water management structures; and 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
23 


