Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
and in culturally and ecologically important places. These and other related changes present a 
wide range of challenges and opportunities for future adaptation efforts in Yukon.  

November 14, 2017 

2.1  HISTORICAL CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE AND PRECIPITATION 

The strongest measure of climate change in Yukon is relative change in annual temperature. The 
annual average temperature has increased 2°C over the past 50 years, while winter 
temperatures have increased 4°C. These temperatures are understood to be increasing at twice 
the rate of southern Canada and the global average. This rise in temperature means that winters 
are getting shorter and spring and fall are getting relatively longer. There are significantly fewer 
very cold days in the winter but no significant change in the number of very hot days (above 
30oC) in the summer. (Furgal and Prowse, 2008; Larsen et al., 2015).  

Warmer average temperatures are associated with a wide variety of impacts on Yukon 
communities and landscapes. For example, more rapid permafrost thaw is resulting in an 
increase in impacts on community infrastructure built on permafrost areas. Warmer 
temperatures have also resulted in widespread melting of glaciers and the rate of melt 
continues to increase. Yukon has lost 22% of its glacial cover over the last 50 years (Derksen et 
al. 2012).  

Annual precipitation (rain and snowfall), another 
important indicator of climate change, has increased 
by 6% in the Yukon over the past 50 years, with the 
greatest increase seen during the summer months 
(Streicker, 2016). Changes in precipitation cause 
changes in surface and ground water, permafrost, 
vegetation and wildlife. Yukoners have experienced 
higher summer precipitation and more extreme rain 
events, associated flood events, permafrost thaw 
(more snow cover traps heat in the ground), and 
river bank erosion. The trend points towards a 
further increase in annual precipitation and possibly 
more extreme variability in precipitation as well. 

Yukoners have observed an increase in short-term 
extremes in temperature and precipitation and data 
suggests that variability is increasing in Yukon. 
Projected future changes in temperature and 
precipitation suggest that short-term extremes will 
happen more often (Streicker, 2016).  

El Nino 

During “El Nino” years, periodic 
warming of the Pacific Ocean drives 
warmer and more extreme weather 
patterns across North America. In 
2015-16 El Nino contributed to 
Yukon winter temperatures that 
were almost 70C above seasonal 
averages (Environment Canada, 
2017). Typically, El Nino years have 
been observed 5 out of every 100 
years, but new research suggests 
that global climate warming is likely 
to increase the number of El Nino 
events to 10 in every 100 years 
under current emission scenarios 
(Guojian, et al., 2017).   

Figure 1 shows how winter temperatures in 
2015/2016 departed from the 1961-1990 average across Canada. The biggest departure from 
average occurred in the central Yukon. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
5 


