Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
 

Lakes and streams are drying up or becoming choked with weeds, making the water 
undrinkable. 

November 14, 2017 

  Many animals are changing where they go and their behavior. Bears used to go into their 

dens in October and November, but are now out until December.  

  There is a growing dependence on market foods and people eat fewer traditional foods.  

These are just a few examples of the type of climate change impacts that are causing alarm for 
many Yukon First Nation elders. Importantly, elders emphasize the need for each community to 
have the ability to prepare for change and to be a part of designing the strategies that are being 
developed to respond to climate change impacts.  

Initiatives like the ongoing adaptation planning efforts of the Champagne Aishihik First Nation 
(CAFN) and the Selkirk First Nation (SFN) are examples of this work in action. These initiatives 
have sought to engage directly with community members to understand environmental changes 
that First Nations citizens are seeing on their traditional territories, and develop new ideas and 
approaches to preserving traditional practices in the face of climate change. 

2.3.2 

Ice Breakup on Yukon River in Dawson City  

Long-term community level impact information like the breakup data discussed here is valuable 
for measuring change, understanding the rate of change over time, and can help inform 
planning for the future. The trend from the past 120 years of breakup data is strong evidence 
that that fast ice cover on the Yukon River – the ice that extends into water from shore – will 
continue to diminish in Dawson. Although still an uncommon occurrence, in the winter of 2016-
2017 an official ice road was not possible because of poor ice conditions. Long-term data on the 
ice break up is an indicator that can help inform adaptation measures like extending the ferry 
season, and planning for shorter ice road seasons. 

The exact timing of the ice breakup on the Yukon River in Dawson has been recorded every year 
since 1886. The practice that originated from a lively betting tradition now provides a long-term 
indication of how changes in climate are impacting the breakup. Figure 2 shows the timing of 
the ice breakup over the past 120 years. The trend line shows the spring breakup occurring on 
average 6 days earlier per century. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
9 


