Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
2.2.1  Community-Level Climate Change Projections 

November 14, 2017 

The Scenarios Network for Alaska and Arctic Planning (SNAP) has developed a climate model 
that projects temperatures and precipitation patterns for approximately 80 locations in the 
Yukon. These projections give a sense of how, at a broad level, climate is expected to change at 
those locations. SNAP releases these projections with the qualifier that there is inherent 
uncertainty in projecting future climate change, but that the value of developing and using the 
projections in community adaptation planning “allows for greater flexibility in the face of high 
uncertainty” (SNAP 2017). One weakness in the SNAP model is that it does not take temperature 
inversions (i.e. significant temperature differences between lower altitude and higher altitude 
areas) into account, an important issue in many Yukon communities.  

We have selected Whitehorse and Old Crow as examples to illustrate what the SNAP model 
provides. See APPENDIX A. Some selected highlights of the SNAP projections for Old Crow and 
Whitehorse are: 

  Winter temperatures are projected to increase significantly for both Old Crow and 

Whitehorse; 

  Both Old Crow and Whitehorse are projected to have much warmer spring (May and June) 

temperatures with little extra rainfall in those months; 

  Overall precipitation is projected to increase steadily in Old Crow; and 

  An overall increase in precipitation for Whitehorse but with more variability than Old Crow. 

In general, the same changes are projected for both Whitehorse and Old Crow with notably 
warmer temperatures and more precipitation expected in the coming decades. At a practical 
level, these trends likely lead to different kinds of anticipated changes in both communities such 
as:  

  A longer growing season that will allow more local agriculture and therefore more local food 

supply; 

 

Increased fire risk early in the fire season which will have the effect of extending the fire 
season and its associated risks and costs; 

  A reduced period during which ice and frozen ground can be used for travel or food storage 

which may reduce traditional activities; and 

  A shift in precipitation from snow to rain, which impacts water storage capacity and surface 

water availability. 

2.3  COMMUNITY-LEVEL OBSERVATIONS OF CLIMATE CHANGE 

Yukoners have observed and experienced the impacts of climate change in their communities. 
Indigenous elders speak to changes on the land, communities, and traditional practices 
originating from changes in climate.  

Sections 2.3.1 through 2.3.3 highlight three examples from of local climate change impacts that 
have been observed at the community-level. These examples help to illustrate how our changing 
climate is affecting people in different areas of Yukon, and helps us better understand potential 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
7 


