Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
4.  EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS AND WILDFIRE 

4.1  EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS 

November 14, 2017 

The variability of our climate is expected to increase. This will mean more extreme weather 
events and greater fluctuations in precipitation, which are associated with increases in 
landslides and flooding. Flooding can negatively affect communities in a range of ways, including 
population displacement, impacts on critical infrastructure, interruptions to business activities, 
decreased production due to worker displacement, impacts on physical health, and impacts on 
mental health, including depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (Henstra, D. and 
Thistlethwaite, J., 2017). 

Some of the direct and 
indirect costs that result 
from extreme rainfall 
events are exemplified by 
the flash floods that 
simultaneously washed 
out the Alaska Highway at 
Rancheria and at the 
south end of Kluane Lake 
in 2012. 

The highway was closed 
for a total of four days at 
Rancheria and two days at 
Kluane Lake. During this 
period, the costs that 
resulted from these 
closures included: 

  Both the emergency 

Alaska Highway Closed 

“The Alaska Highway reopened Monday evening near 
Rancheria following the completion of a road detour around 
the substantial washout at Canyon Creek. Northbound 
commercial trucks stranded at the highway lodge since the 
washout occurred last Thursday night were the first to be 
taken over the single-lane detour… Once Rancheria was 
cleared, some 200 commercial trucks waiting in Watson Lake 
to come north were released… Larger industrial vehicles 
followed. Then private vehicles and RVs were released in 
groups behind a pilot car. Southbound traffic backed up in 
Teslin was released at about the same time as vehicles waiting 
in Watson Lake to come north.”  

(Whitehorse Star, June 12, 2012). 

road repairs and the permanent repairs; 

  The business costs to trucking companies as hundreds of trucks sat idle for days and trucking 

schedules were disrupted; 

  The time costs to travellers, both locals and tourists, whose plans were disrupted and 

delayed; 

  The costs to businesses who ran out of goods (particularly at grocery stores, where shelves 

sat empty), and to others whose workers were unavailable due to the travel disruption; 

  The costs of delays in mail and parcel delivery services; and 

  The knock-on losses to tourism businesses as people changed their plans in response.   

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
16 


