Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
  Wooded areas are thinned but very little area is cleared. (Note that clearing at least small 
areas of spruce further reduces fuel load. The cleared areas then begin the natural process 
of succession with far lower risk of fire); and 

November 14, 2017 

  FireSmart projects can and do provoke public objections that block them from undertaking 

fuel reduction activities in certain areas. 

The risks of wildfire are expected to increase with climate change and the likely impacts of an 
extreme fire for Yukon communities (and especially for Whitehorse) become larger and costlier 
every year as fuel loads increase and the community grows. A more aggressive and targeted fuel 
reduction effort could significantly reduce this risk. This may be accomplished by exploring a mix 
of tested and innovative approaches, including: 

 

Improved community awareness and communications to enhance understanding of wildfire 
risks and the importance of fuel reduction and management in reducing those risks; 

  Selectively cutting and clearing small patches and, where appropriate, replacing significant 
amounts of spruce with naturally re-growing aspen, willow and poplar that is less prone to 
wildfire; and 

  Actively maintaining a mix of increased aspen, willow or poplar trees to stop succession back 

to spruce. 

Building on the above actions, fuel reduction activities also present a further economic 
development opportunity by supplying firewood and wood chips for bio-fuel heating. The 
Dawson City wastewater treatment plant currently has been using local wood chips for heat for 
several years and the Whitehorse Correctional Centre uses a wood pellet fired heating system. 
There is considerable opportunity to expand the use of wood heat in Yukon, which presents a 
unique synergy between efforts to reduce reliance on fossil-fuels for heating, while increasing 
resilience to the impacts of climate change. 

The very recent Teslin Tlingit Council (TTC) project to convert ten buildings in Teslin from either 
propane or electric heat to a district biomass heating system is an example of the opportunities 
to combine adaptation to climate change with local economic development. Some highlights of 
the Teslin project include: 

  Community support for the project was built up over many years, beginning in 1998 in the 

TTC forest management plan and being revisited in community plans in 2009 and 2015; 

  The project identified a sustainable and economical supply of wood chips processed from 
locally-sourced waste wood – either from fire smarting activities, development-related, or 
from the Teslin Tlingit Council-owned sawmill (Hogan, 2017); 

  The ongoing operations of the project are anticipated to provide one full-time position plus 

an unknown employment benefit from local wood supply contracts.   

There is a significant risk attached to not taking more action on fuel reduction as an adaptation 
measure. The forest continues to age and wildfire fuel builds up year by year. There are obvious 
economic benefits to going forward with a FireSmart Plus approach linked to biomass heating as 
is clearly illustrated by the TTC’s efforts in Teslin. Even if greater risks of wildfire do not emerge 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
21 


