Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Other adaptations to climate change-driven increases in flood hazards in Yukon, both flash 
flooding and other higher water levels, are currently being advanced through ongoing efforts to 
reduce flood risks and damage, including: 

November 14, 2017 

  Better land planning and zoning to account for flood risks; 

  Flood control infrastructure in already developed areas subject to floods; 

  Re-assessment of eligibility of property owners for compensation in areas subject to 

repeated flooding; 

 

Improved road infrastructure standards, including elevation and culvert size requirements; 
and 

  Updated storm sewer standards. 

4.2  WILDFIRE  

Wildfire in Yukon forests is an existing hazard to Yukon communities and infrastructure that can 
have environmental and economic consequences. Most Yukoners live in the boreal forest, 
where fire is an integral part of the ecology: “fires are frequent and their ecological influence at 
all levels—species, stand and landscape—drives boreal forest vegetation dynamics” (NRCan, 
2017). In addition, many areas near communities, residences, and other infrastructure have 
accumulated deadfall and forest debris. The Yukon has seen many large wildfires (e.g., in 1958) 
and will see them again. 

Whitehorse Saved by Rain 

“Rain saved Whitehorse last week. If it hadn't come, forestry officials say there would have 
been little hope for the town with a 30-mile front of fire advancing. In some places 20 miles 
away, the fire came up within five miles of the White Pass tank farm and was seen plainly 
from city streets Friday evening… Nobody outside was more worried than local inhabitants 
who were told by Mayor Gordon Cameron to prepare for emergency evacuation. It was 
decided… that in event of the fire getting too close, local residents would be sent to 
Carcross either in their own cars or by special White Pass trains.” 

(Whitehorse Star, July 24, 1958). 

 

There are many factors — forest age, past fire suppression, lack of fuel management, insect 
infestations, drought, and trees blown down by storms — influencing the likelihood of wildfires. 
“Quantifying the multiple effects of climate change will be challenging, particularly because 
there are great uncertainties attached to possible interactions among them, as well as with 
other land-use pressures” (Price et.al., 2013). However, it appears that climate change is likely 
increasing both the likelihood and potential severity of wildfire hazards in Yukon:  

  Analysis of historical wildfire data examining annual area burned does not reveal a 

statistically significant increase in fire risks in Yukon, but a trend is apparent when looking 
more broadly at regional data from Alaska and the Northwest Territories that indicates an 
increased wildfire risk is expected (Streicker, 2016); 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
18 


