Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
  Thawing permafrost and other climate hazards present a growing risk for electricity 

November 14, 2017 

generation and distribution infrastructure, including generation facilities and powerlines. 

Ross River School 

Thawing permafrost beneath the Ross River School has led to structural damage requiring 
significant repairs. It was built in 2001 with a thermosiphon system – a method for passive 
heat exchange – designed to insulate and maintain the permafrost below the building. The 
system has not been successful. The building has required repairs in 2004, 2006, 2013, 2015 
and is still in need of further repairs. In 2015, the school was closed for 5 months, a major 
disruption in a small community where the school is the center of many activities. 
Approximately $3 million was spent on the repairs in 2013 and 2015 and cost estimates for 
further repairs are approximately $1.7 million. (CBC North News reports, May 10, 2017, May 
29, 2017 and August 4, 2017). In addition to the well-documented repair costs, there are 
other financial and social costs — including the disruption of the school year, increased child 
care costs, loss of recreational and social opportunities and the staff time needed to 
manage the issue itself — that are difficult to quantify. 

 

5.1  ADAPTATION TO INFRASTRUCTURE IMPACTS 

Increasing the resilience of Yukon’s infrastructure to climate change will require a shift in the 
way we think about design requirements of our built environment and the way that we evaluate 
the financial costs of construction, maintenance, and repair. Long-term infrastructure planning 
that takes future climate change into account will be an important aspect of this work. Other 
factors that will influence the resilience of Yukon’s infrastructure to climate change include: 

  Developing critical infrastructure partnerships with federal government agencies, First 

Nations, municipalities and the private sector to access funding and implement 
infrastructure adaptation projects (see National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure, 2009; 
National Action Plan for Critical Infrastructure, 2014);  

  Developing and applying new infrastructure standards and best practices. For example, the 
Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative developed many national standards that 
are directly relevant to land-based infrastructure in northern communities such as technical 
guidance on factoring in future climate changes when building on permafrost. New 
infrastructure design and maintenance standards that recognize climate resilience as a key 
objective are currently under development and are expected to be completed by 2020; 

 

Improving mechanisms for monitoring and data collection regarding buildings, roads and 
other infrastructure impacts by climate change, and making this information more 
accessible and transparent to a wide variety of user groups, may help to stimulate new 
insights into climate-resilient design; 

  Providing opportunity for more innovative building design that leverages lessons learned 

and best practices from other jurisdictions. More importantly, this approach may also create 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
24 


