Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
shown to advance the breeding cycle of rock and white-tailed ptarmigan and reduce the average 
number of eggs produced (Wilson and Marten, 2010). Other documented ecological impacts 
include more difficult winter and spring feeding for some animals due to deeper snowpack and 
changes to freeze-thaw cycles that lead to thicker layers of ice on and in the snow. Spring and 
summer have also seen greater levels of insect harassment of caribou (Furgal and Prowse, 2008; 
Streicker, 2016), which interrupts summer feeding, reducing overall animal health and leading to 
reduced reproduction.   

November 14, 2017 

Aquatic species are also affected by changes in water temperature and other climate change 
impacts to Yukon’s hydrological regimes. Climate change-related impacts on ocean and fresh-
water habitats for wild salmon exacerbate existing environmental and human-caused stressors, 
jeopardising migration and reducing reproductive success. According to the federal department 
of Fisheries and Oceans, the annual Yukon River Chinook salmon migration has historically 
reached up to 150,000 fish; by 2016 this number declined to less than 75,000, and salmon 
productivity has been consistently low since 2008. In response, several Yukon First Nations have 
imposed restrictions on salmon fishing for their citizens, cancelling or limiting the amount of fish 
available for seasonal fish camps. 

The cumulative impacts of these ecological, biological and hydrological impacts are less well 
understood. How these changes will impact the health of keystone species like caribou and 
salmon, which serve as indicators of overall ecosystem health, is of significant concern for 
Yukoners – especially Yukon First Nations whose traditional culture, diet and livelihoods are 
intimately connected with Yukon’s landscapes and wildlife. 

6.1  ADAPTATION TO THE CHANGING LAND 

Yukon First Nations have a long history of adaptation to changing landscapes and wildlife. 

30,000 Years 

“People have lived in what is now called the Yukon for perhaps 30,000 years. During that 
long period both the climate and the landscape have changed. The weather was sometimes 
much colder than it is now, sometimes warmer. For at least half of the last 30,000 years, 
instead of being covered by forests, most of the land was mossy or grassy tundra…The lakes 
too have changed in number, location, and shape. Rivers once flowed in places where there 
are none today, and salmon once spawned where they do no longer. Many of the animals 
that the early peoples hunted were unlike those they hunt today…” (McClelland. 1987. P.17) 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
29 


