Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
The Yukon government commonly uses life cycle costing (LCC) to help decide among options for 
some infrastructure projects. LCC measures the total cost of infrastructure throughout its life 
including planning, design, construction, operations and maintenance, and any other related 
costs. LCC is an excellent tool that lays out the financial case for a decision such as whether to 
completely renovate an old building for a new use or construct a new building, or to compare 
the total costs of trade offs between capital and operating costs (e.g., investing more up front in 
energy efficiency to save on operating costs throughout the life of the building). 

November 14, 2017 

There is the opportunity for the LCC approach currently used by YG to be expanded to explicitly 
encompass climate-related infrastructure risks. Examples might include an LCC analysis of 
culvert size selection when building or rebuilding highways. Installing a larger culvert costs more 
than a smaller one, but the larger culvert may also prevent road washouts during future flash 
flood events. Developing a metric to estimate the (increased) likelihood of such floods and 
including the average of repair and disruption costs saved in the LCC may present an 
opportunity to improve this decision-making process. Another example may be to develop a 
metric to estimate the indirect costs incurred (e.g., loss of recreational and social opportunities) 
when buildings are closed for repairs and include it in the LCC analysis from the onset.       

The application of full life-cycle cost accounting to the mining industry presents a more complex 
challenge. Mining companies build privately-owned infrastructure on public land and generally 
have an interest in minimizing their up-front costs. Unless the mining company is large and has 
ready access to capital, it may not be able to finance significantly higher capital costs associated 
with a full LCC analysis even if those result in net financial benefits in the long-term.  

Regulators are already requiring mines to account for climate change in mine design and closure 
plans, particularly with respect to water management. Governments and the public have an 
interest in ensuring the long-term stability of mine sites, but the industry continues to have a 
strong incentive to minimize capital costs and trust that future cash flow and profits will cover 
any future climate-driven cost-increases. These conflicting incentives make the application of 
full life-cycle cost accounting to the mining industry challenging. 

Minto Mine 

The Minto copper gold mine in the central Yukon is an example of a successful operating 
mine that has struggled to overcome mine design and water management shortcomings 
since it began production in 2007. Some of these issues are a result of the site’s 
discontinuous permafrost while others stem from higher than expected water levels on site 
that exceeded the design requirements it was built for. In 2009, the mine had two 
emergency discharges of untreated water into the Yukon River as its water containment 
systems were overflowing. 

Capstone Mining, owner of the Minto mine, has stated that “…future extreme weather in 
Yukon could again result in excess run-off at the mine site, which could have an adverse 
effect on the results of operations at the Minto Mine and on our business, financial 
condition, results of operation and prospects...” (Capstone Mining Corporation, 2015)   

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
26 


