Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
impacts that we may see in the future. They are also strong reminders of the need for improving 
local climate monitoring and data collection, and partnerships that will sustain these efforts, to 
better understand and adapt to climate change impacts that affect Yukon communities.  

November 14, 2017 

2.3.1  Yukon First Nation Elders see Climate Change Impacts to Water, Wildlife and 

Traditional Foods 

Yukon First Nations elders and 
other community members have 
concerns about the changes that 
are taking place on their lands 
that affect their way of life. 
Elders have documented many 
changes on the land and in their 
communities and are concerned 
about the future. 

Elders highlighted the following 
changes in forums held in 2003-
2004 in Yukon First Nation 
Communities (Huntington, Fox, 
and Dickson, 2005):   

 

In northern Yukon, freezing 
rains in the early winter have 
created a layer of ice that 
limit the ability of some 
animals to access food 
sources.  

Indigenous Knowledge 

Indigenous knowledge and observations are important 
to understanding climate change in Yukon. This 
knowledge indicates that important changes have 
already occurred. “In the Yukon community members 
are reporting changes including: unpredictable weather, 
glaciers and permafrost are melting, wildlife migration 
patterns, new species, insect populations, increasing 
forest fires and different water levels.” (Champagne and 
Aishihik First Nations and Alsek Renewable Resources 
Council, 2009).  

At another Yukon workshop elders described similar 
experiences with the weather becoming unpredictable, 
expressing growing concern about impacts of climate 
change on wildlife, land, and water (Dickson, in 
Henderson and Fox 2005 p. 77). 

 

  The bush and the forest are changing and shrubs are getting larger, and more abundant in 

areas where they were not typically seen before. 

  Birds that usually migrate south in August and September are now being seen in October 

and November.  

 

 

In some areas, thawing permafrost has caused the ground to drop or has made the area 
smell foul. 

In more southerly communities, rings around the moon are no longer seen, although they 
are still visible in the northernmost community.  Similar changes to the visual character of 
the atmosphere have been observed by Inuit Elders who observed changes in the location of 
the sunset on the horizon (Kunuk and Mauro, 2015). These observations indicate higher 
levels of moisture in the air linked to increases in temperatures.  

  There are more frequent sightings of cougars, and mule deer, and new types of insects. 

  People used to be able to predict when it would get colder by looking at tree leaves. It has 

become more difficult to do that now. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
8 


