Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Several Yukon First Nations have undertaken community-based research and adaptation 
planning to evaluate and respond to the effects of climate change on their land, water, and 
wildlife. For example, Selkirk First Nation partnered with the Arctic Institute of Community 
Based Research to develop a community based climate change adaptation plan (VanBibber and 
Pratt 2016). This plan emphasized, among other aspects, the resiliency of the community and 
ability to adapt as well as the importance of initiatives to connect youth with the land and work 
to improve the mental wellness of young people in the community. 

November 14, 2017 

Southern Tutchone Resilience 

“There are many examples of Southern Tutchone people being extremely resilient and 
adaptable to change in the past, including the dynamic land, the Gold Rush, the 
construction of the Alaska Highway, residential school, the dam construction at Aishihik 
Lake, the pipeline coming through, etc. Change has always been happening...  The 
conclusion of this study is that Southern Tutchone people are used to change and making it 
work for them.” (Champagne and Aishihik First Nations and Alsek Renewable Resources 
Council, 2009) 

 

Shifting species distributions may also provide future opportunities for hunting/trapping (e.g. 
deer) and warmer temperatures may contribute to higher survival rates for certain species. 
However, the cumulative negative effects may outweigh these benefits. Currently, very little is 
known about the full extent of ecological impacts on complex natural systems that will result 
from climate change and how those impacts will interact with the landscapes and the animals 
that are valued for food and other human uses. There is a lot of concern, but also a high level of 
uncertainty.  

Anticipating how regional ecological systems will be affected by climate change is very 
important in determining the potential effects on traditional lifestyles and ecosystem services. 
Ensuring that planning processes (land-use planning, development planning, park planning, 
forestry, etc.) explicitly incorporate mechanisms for anticipating and accommodating future 
climate change will influence the durability and effectiveness of land and resource planning 
initiatives. 

6.1.1  Adaptation Opportunity: Agriculture 
Yukon’s agricultural sector is limited not only by soil, but by temperature and precipitation.   As 
noted in Section 2, climate change has already resulted in 20C higher annual average 
temperatures and a 6% increase in average annual precipitation. Further change is expected to 
bring even higher average temperatures and generally higher levels of precipitation.  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
30 


