 ▪  Academic Institutions – Research roles including research funding and student support roles.
 ▪  Industry and Businesses – Advisory roles; monitoring and reporting; funding partners; research and educational roles.
 ▪  Community – Community members are engaging in various aspects of planning and management such as:
 ▪ Attracting landowners to planning tables;
 ▪ Gathering information on watershed history and resource use;
 ▪ Identifying community and watershed values and identifying priorities;
 ▪ Collecting input, feedback and advice on key issues and documents;
 ▪ Organizing special events and open houses;
 ▪ Collecting resource data;
 ▪ Reporting violations; and,
 ▪ Managing communications and media relations.

Good Practices for Collaborative Multi-stakeholder Processes
Bringing the right people together to discuss the myriad of issues within a watershed is no easy task, but when done well, it can be an 
efficient, credible, and cost effective means of developing integrated and robust solutions. There is no single approach to designing a 
multi-stakeholder process; however, a broad set of principles, or good practices, that contribute to successful outcomes of collaborative 
decision-making processes is emerging. The following table identifies several key elements and expected results of stakeholder 
engagement for successful watershed planning.

Criterion 

 

Purpose and incentives 

 

 

Stakeholder participation  

 

 

 

  

Description

 The process is driven by a shared purpose and provides incentives to participate and to work towards achieving consensus in the process. 
All participants should agree on the types of issues to be addressed by the planning process. A clear “terms of reference” may allow groups 
to decide whether to participate or not. 

 All parties with a significant interest in the issues and outcome are involved throughout the process. These could include residents, farmers, 
ranchers, businesses, industries and others. Representatives should be selected in a fair and open manner by each of the groups that have 
an interest in the outcome. Timelines for the planning process need to accommodate stakeholder participation and engagement.

Voluntary participation and commitment   

Parties, who are affected and/or interested, participate voluntarily and are committed to the process.

Self-design 

 

Clear ground rules 

 

 

Equal opportunity and resources 

Principled negotiation and respect 

Accountability  

 

Flexible, adaptive and creative 

High-quality information 

Cooperation   

Time limits 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

The parties involved work together to design the process to suit the needs of that process and its participants.

 As the process is initiated, a comprehensive procedural framework is established which includes clear terms of reference and operating 
procedures. This part of the process can also help to clarify realities and expectations in terms of roles, responsibilities and limitations.

The process provides an equal and balanced opportunity for effective participation of all parties. 

 Multi-stakeholder planning proceeds from the assumption that everyone has something to gain by reaching agreement. The process 
operates according to the conditions of principled negotiation, including mutual respect, trust and understanding.

The process and its participants are accountable to the broader public, to their constituents, and to the process itself.

Flexibility is designed into the process to allow for adaptation and creativity in problem solving. 

 The process incorporates high-quality information into decision-making. All participants should share information and cooperate to gather 
what information is needed for effective planning. 

Cooperation and working relationships between participating groups is improved both during and after the process is completed. 

Realistic milestones and deadlines are established and managed throughout the process.

Commitment to implementation and monitoring 

The process and final agreement include clear commitments to implementation and monitoring.

Effective process management 

Independent facilitation 

 

 

 

The process is coordinated and managed effectively. 

 The process uses an independent trained facilitator throughout. This may not be necessary in all cases, particularly where the planning 
issues may be less conflicted, where the community is not polarized, or where the lead facilitator of the planning process has established 
trust and credibility within the community. 

Adapted from both WCEL (2010) and Frame et al. (2004)

41


