Understanding the hydrologic cycle is critical to understanding how 
a watershed functions. While both salt water and freshwater are 
essential parts of the water cycle, the freshwater that we use on a 
daily basis for drinking water, irrigation, andother uses comprises only 
1% of all water on Earth. This small proportion of water is “recycled” 
through the hydrologic cycle, year after year, through oceans, rivers, 
rain and the atmosphere (Figure 1).

When water falls to the earth as either rain or snow, it either:
 ▪ Soaks into the ground
 ▪  Flows over the surface of the land into a stream, lake,  
wetland or the ocean, or 
 ▪ Returns to the atmosphere through evaporation.
The rate of infiltration within a watershed is determined by many 
factors, including soil permeability, rate of precipitation and the 
amount and type of vegetation cover on the land surface. Human 
activity can alter the rate of infiltration by changing the surface 
of the land. When rain falls or snow melts too fast to allow for 
infiltration, or when the ground is too hard (impermeable) for 
infiltration to occur, such as in an urban environment, the water 
flows over the land as surface runoff (also called overland flow). 
Surface runoff is evident within a watershed as streams, rivers, 
lakes, ponds, wetlands and drainage ditches. 

Water that infiltrates into the ground can take one of several routes:

 ▪  Plant roots may absorb the water, which will be used for 
photosynthesis.  
This water will eventually leave the plant through the leaves, 
transpiring back into the atmosphere.
 ▪  Water that is not taken up by plants percolates downwards 
through the soil to the fully saturated zone at the level of 
the water table, where it becomes groundwater. Significant 
collections of groundwater are called aquifers. Aquifers 
are sometimes tapped with wells for drinking or irrigation. 
Groundwater may eventually flow back to the surface as a spring 
or through sub-surface pathways into streams, rivers or lakes. 

Figure 1 –  
The Hydrologic Cycle 5  

The areas where precipitation or surface water infiltrates the soil and 
enters the groundwater system are known as recharge areas. They are 
often in upland areas of a watershed but may also be in low-lying valleys 
and floodplain areas. As water evaporates from collecting water bodies, it 
is returned to the atmosphere, and the cycle repeats itself. No new water 
is produced: the water that we use today is the same water that existed 
billions of years ago. How we develop and manage the land within our 
watersheds ultimately affects the quality of the water that is available for 
use. In the same way that streams and rivers flow through a collecting 
basin, the impacts of human activities also flow through a watershed.

It should be acknowledged that there are many different scales of 
watersheds. The scale of watershed that is appropriate to effectively plan for, 
and manage, a given issue (or issues) will depend on the nature and scope 
of those issues and the purpose and scope of the planning process.

2.4 RefeRenCes

1   Westland Resources Group Inc. for a partnership of Cowichan Valley Regional District, BC Ministry 

of Environment, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Catalyst Paper Corporation, Cowichan Tribes, 
and  Pacific Salmon Commission. 2007. Cowichan Basin Water Management Plan. http://cvrd.
bc.ca/DocumentView.aspx?DID=1097.

2   Nelitz, Marc, Douglas, Tanis, and Murray Rutherford (2009). Freshwater For Fish and People: Moving 

Towards “Living Water Smart”. Pacific Fisheries Resource Conservation Council, Vancouver, BC.

3    Environmental Protection Agency (2008). Handbook for Developing Watershed Plans to Restore and 

Protect our Waters. EPA 841-B-08-002 http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/nps/handbook_index.cfm.

4     West Coast Environmental Law, BC Guide to Watershed Law and Planning www.bcwatersheds.org/

issues/water/bcgwlp/o3.shtml [Accessed May 2010].

5    Turner, R.J.W., R.G., Taylor, B., Ceh, M., Grasby, S.E., Symonds, B. Adams, M., Armour, G., 

Carmichael, V., Curtis, J., Davis, D.  Epp, P., Harlow, C., Journeay, M., Machin, D., Molyneux, T., 
Neilsen, D., Simpson, R., Stephens, K., & van der Gulik, T., (2006) Okanagan Basin Waterscape; 
Geological Survey of Canada.  Miscellaneous.

7


