7.3 stORmWA teR (RAinWA teR) 
mAnAGement PlAns
Another important aspect of water and watershed 
planning is the management of rainwater or 
stormwater. All communities in BC are subject 
to rainfall events and need to provide adequate 
drainage to prevent localized flooding. It is widely 
recognized that urban development can increase 
impervious surfaces, impacting the hydrology of 
local streams. Rural resource activities such as 
forestry can also influence land cover, and thus 
impact, hydrology.

Projections of increased stormwater runoff as a 
result of climate change and urban development 
have led some municipalities to seek additional 
funds for infrastructure upgrades, while other 
communities are examining alternative approaches 
to managing rainwater. In addition to, or instead 
of, building bigger pipes, ditches and pumps 
to convey water from bigger storms, some 
communities are taking the approach of “store it, 
spread it, and sink it”. Rainwater and stormwater 
can be viewed as a valuable resource that can 
be stored in wetlands and detention ponds and 
infiltrated into the ground to recharge water tables. 
This can reduce or avoid many of the economic 
and environmental costs associated with the 
traditional model of conveying rainwater as quickly 
as possible from roads, rooftops and parking lots 
into storm sewers, drainage ditches and streams. 
Urban stormwater runoff can adversely impact 
stream hydrology, fish habitat and watershed 
health by eroding stream banks, by causing water 
turbidity and siltation of spawning and rearing 
habitat, and by introducing other pollutants, such 
as oil from roads, into the system.

Under the Local Government Act, municipalities 
are responsible for the provision of drainage, 
and in some cases, Regional Districts may 
also have associated responsibilities. How we 
handle stormwater has a huge impact on aquatic 
ecosystems. Integrated stormwater management 
planning is a proactive process that utilizes land 
use planning tools to protect property and aquatic 
habitat from stormwater flows, while at the same 
time accommodating urban growth. Ideally, the aim 
of these plans is to ensure that stormwater runoff 
resembles natural runoff patterns (i.e., volume 
and timing of surface water runoff), and does not 
transport pollutants or sediment from the land into 
watercourses. Stormwater management plans are 
typically completed at the local government level, 
with guidance from the Province. 5

BC’s Stormwater Planning Guidebook,  
released in 2002, is premised on the idea that 
land development and watershed protection  
can be compatible. It assumes that municipalities 
exert control over runoff volume through their  
land development and infrastructure policies, 
practices and actions. 

Liquid Waste and Resource Management Plan. To help facilitate 
this, Metro Vancouver developed a comprehensive ISMP 
Template (consistent with the provincial guide) to guide member 
municipalities with this process. The updated LWMP is pending 
approval from the Minister of Environment.

Outdated approaches to stormwater management, which fail to 
respect natural systems and water cycles, have been accused 
of being one of the largest water pollution challenges in the 
province. In recent years, rainwater management has emerged 
as a new way of thinking about the precipitation that falls on the 
land. Instead of viewing stormwater as a site-specific problem 
that is best solved by piping water away from properties into 
streams, rainwater management considers the dynamics of 
the entire watershed and identifies how development can use 
“green infrastructure” to maintain natural systems and protect 
buildings. Green infrastructure is a concept that emphasizes 
the importance of the natural environment in decisions about 
land use planning. For example, the installation of permeable 
pavements, rain gardens, bioretention ponds and constructed 
wetlands help reduce the volume of runoff that enters sewer 
systems and increase absorption. Instead of relying heavily on 
pipes and concrete, green infrastructure takes advantage of the 
natural absorption, storage, evaporation and filtration services 
that nature provides. As opposed to the quick, high-impact 
flush that comes with traditional approaches to stormwater 
management, lower impact green development seeks to mimic 
the natural water cycle by allowing water to infiltrate down 
through the ground and slowly release into the watershed. 

The release of Beyond the Guidebook: Context for Rainwater 
Management and Green Infrastructure in British Columbia 
in 2007 has helped shift the focus of traditional stormwater 
management to the integrated, holistic approach that rainwater 
management embodies. 

Climate change—and in particular the potential for more 
frequent and more intense extreme precipitation events—is 
an important consideration in this type of planning. Urban 
flooding is now the leading cause of home insurance claims 
in Canada, and is a priority of the insurance industry. For 
more details refer to Hazard Perceptions: Public Education 
Can Help Snap Flooding, from the Institute for Catastrophic 
Loss Reduction. There is limited science on which to base 
projections for a specific location; however, some jurisdictions 
have identified voluntary planning contingencies for extreme 
precipitation based on the best science available. For example, 
on Vancouver Island, the Capital Regional District has identified 
a planning contingency of a 15% increase in frequency and 
duration of winter storms for the next 100 years. These 
contingencies should inform decisions about which stormwater 
management techniques to adopt and what the management 
goals should be in terms of rate of runoff.

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
Under the Environmental Management Act (Municipal Sewer 
Regulation), stormwater management planning is a formal 
requirement of Liquid Waste Management Plans, which is one of 
several mechanisms used by the Province to regulate stormwater 
in BC. Although municipalities are generally not required to have 
Liquid Waste Management Plans, they often opt to complete 
such plans because the plans allow a suitable length of time to 
develop and implement effective and affordable solutions. 

Integrated Stormwater Management Plans 
(ISMPs) are required to be developed and 
implemented by Metro Vancouver’s member 
municipalities in accordance with the Integrated 

The outcome of integrated stormwater planning includes regional 
or watershed level objectives and priorities, integration of these 
objectives into community planning, and implementation of on-
site practices that reduce volume and rate of run-off and improve 

36


