Local governments have contributed to water 
management planning across the province by 
initiating, managing and participating in various 
activities related to water management and 
planning, including:

 ▪  Developing water conservation plans  

and drought management plans;

 ▪  Participating in or leading multi-sector  

water planning initiatives;

 ▪  Developing floodplain management  

plans and strategies;

 ▪  Developing liquid waste management plans  

and integrated stormwater management plans; 

 ▪  Developing integrated watershed  

management plans; and

 ▪  Developing official community plans and  

regional growth strategies. 7  

Local governments also promote community and 
economic development, which has the potential to 
impact water resources. 8  

In addition to the planning processes listed 
above (and those discussed in Sections 5 
through 7 of the guide), local governments across 
BC are drawing on other innovative tools and 
approaches to help protect watersheds and plan 
for water resources. 

4.5 OtheR ORGAnizA tiOns
Many other organizations have important roles 
to play when it comes to water. The following are 
some of these organizations and their roles and 
responsibilities in water management and planning:

Industry
 ▪  Relies on water as a vital component of 

production; and,

 ▪  Develops plans, policies, procedures and 

practices regarding water use, efficiency and 
wastewater for individual business operations.

BC Hydro
 ▪  Is licensed to use the largest amount of surface 

water in the province, with operations that depend 
on reliable, carefully managed water supplies;

 ▪  Works to reduce the need to expand hydropower 

operations by encouraging consumer energy 
conservation; and,

 ▪  Develops water use plans, which modify 

hydropower dam operations to mitigate their impact 
on downstream fish habitat and other values.

Academic Institutions
 ▪  Conduct critical research on topics such as water quality and 

quantity, impacts of climate change, watershed functioning, 
groundwater and aquifer function, governance policy, demand 
management; and,

 ▪  Provide education and training to future water managers.

Professional Associations
 ▪  Provide policy advice, planning support, technical support, 

knowledge sharing and a wide range of services related 
to water planning, management, and operations (e.g. BC 
Water and Wastewater Association, the BC Ground Water 
Association, and the Canadian Water Resources Association, 
geo scientists, engineers, planners, biologists, geographers 
and many other professionals.

Community Organizations and Individuals
 ▪  Provide vital services through outreach, conservation, 

restoration of source water, and maintenance or restoration  
of aquatic habitat;

 ▪  Are enabled to take greater responsibility for water stewardship 

through new, collective shared stewardship approaches; and,

 ▪  Work to advance sustainability across local and regional 

watersheds, help resolve stakeholder conflicts and educate the 
public about water issues.

4.6 mOVinG fORWARd in W AteR PlAnninG, 
mAnAGement & GOVeRnAnCe
As will become evident in later sections of this guide, a wide 
array of planning processes have been developed to assist 
local governments and other organizations in navigating the 
challenges of water management. In some regions of the 
province, significant momentum is building towards collaborative 
decision-making regarding watershed health in the face of 
economic and environmental change. As policy makers analyze 
and adjust management strategies with the current social, 
political, economic and environmental context, and as managers 
strategize to resolve conflicts between human and ecosystem 
needs, communities are learning to live water smart. The 
outlook is encouraging. In addition to the emergence of a new 
Water Act for BC, an overarching provincial policy framework 
presently exists comprised of Living Water Smart and the Green 
Communities Initiative, two complementary initiatives. Living 
Water Smart provides the vision of the framework, and the Green 
Communities Initiative complements the Local Government 
Act tools to enable the vision. As a package, the framework 
provides guidance for aligning local actions with provincial and 
regional goals to “design with nature”, in order to create greener 
communities, live water smart and prepare for climate change. As 
observed in Beyond the Guidebook 2010, “BC is now at a tipping 
point. Implementation of a new culture for urban watershed 
protection and restoration is within our grasp”. 9

18


