water demand is nearing or exceeding water 
supply. The characteristics of water supply and 
demand are community specific, and depend on 
many factors. The following are a few examples of 
topics and factors to illustrate the range of water 
supply and demand challenges experienced in 
communities across BC.

Total and Seasonal Population Growth 
Some communities and regions, such as the 
Lower Mainland, the east coast of Vancouver 
Island and parts of the Thompson-Okanagan 
region, are experiencing significant population 
growth. This growth puts increased demand and 
pressure on existing water supplies, particularly 
where supplies are already stressed. Communities 
that are heavily influenced by seasonal tourism 
may have unique challenges in managing seasonal 
fluctuations in demand for domestic use. For 
example, in Tofino, the population grows 10-fold in 
the summer because of the significant amount of 
tourism in the area. This is the same time when the 
creeks are at their lowest flow-levels. 

Drought Conditions
When communities are faced with water 
shortages or drought conditions, conflicts 
between different water users may emerge or 
increase. For example, in 2003, Summerland’s 
water supply was substantially depleted, which 
resulted in a significant conflict between the 
provision of water in streams to ensure fish 
survival and the provision of water for farmers 
and food production. In extreme cases, senior 
levels of government may intervene in water 
allocation issues. In the spring of 2010, the BC 
Ministry of Environment used its authority under 
the Water Act, to change the regulated amount 
of diversion and use of water, and invoked 
priority rights in the Chimney Lakes area. 

Surface and Groundwater Interactions
Conflicts may also arise between users of 
surface water and users of groundwater because 
these sources are often closely linked. For 
example, excessive withdrawal of groundwater 
may reduce groundwater contribution to 
instream flows, particularly in the dry summer 
months when streams, aquatic ecosystems and 
other users of surface water are most vulnerable 
to low flows. Also excessive surface water 
withdrawal can lead to groundwater sources 
being depleted, as some aquifers are recharged 
from surface supplies such as rivers.

Aging and Inadequate Infrastructure
Many BC communities are also facing challenges 
associated with aging infrastructure, such as 
inadequate supply capacity or leaky distribution 
systems. Water infrastructure is very expensive 
to replace and upgrade, and often water 
conservation is viewed as a preferable alternative 
to increasing capacity. Because of the wider 
infrastructure deficit throughout BC and Canada, 
water infrastructure – for water supply and 
distribution, wastewater treatment, drainage and 
flood protection – has to compete with other 
types of infrastructure for limited capital funds. 

21

Why Plan for Water Supply and Demand?
There are many pressures on watershed that are placing – and will 
continue to place – pressures on water supply and demand. Common 
pressures throughout BC include population growth, land use practices, 
community and economic development, climate change and other 
changes in ecosystems (such as the Mountain Pine Beetle infestation). 
Therefore the extent of existing water use requirements and the 
hydrological characteristics of watersheds are important considerations in 
managing supply and demand. 

BC communities are adopting a wide range of strategies to manage 
water. Water planning processes can help communities understand 
challenges by improving knowledge about water supplies and demands 
including sharing the allocation of water across various human activities 
and also ensuring that environmental needs (i.e. instream flows) are also 
met. For a comparison of three water management techniques (supply 
side, demand management, and the “soft path” approach) see the 2005 
POLIS publication At a Watershed. These approaches can be especially 
helpful in managing community conflicts during times of water shortages 
and drought. The process of water management planning also serves to 
increase awareness in a community, and stakeholders will be more likely 
to promote responsible water management practices in their homes, 
businesses and neighbourhoods.

Water supply, demand and allocation management are primarily about 
balancing water use. These include human water uses for domestic, 
agricultural, hydroelectrical, commercial and industrial consumption, 
as well as natural system water uses to support healthy ecosystems, 
particularly fish and fish habitat. Good water management can allow for 
human use without compromising the environment. Desired outcomes 
of water planning may include:

 ▪  Managing water use and consumption rates to account for seasonal and 
annual changes (e.G. Reducing use in months that are especially dry and 
in years with lower snowpacks and less recharge of water supplies)
 ▪  Managing water use and consumption rates for long term changes in 
an area, such as climate change and population growth
 ▪  Developing and managing water supplies in ways that do not 
compromise the health and biodiversity of fish, wildlife, ecosystems  
and watersheds in general
 ▪  Managing for recreational non-consumptive water uses, such  
as swimming, fishing and canoeing
 ▪  Managing the future allocation of water in ways that support a variety 
of high-value water uses, including human consumptive and non-
consumptive uses as well as environmental needs.

Challenges and Pressures
Water supply is a significant issue in many communities in BC and 
around the world. Water supply is particularly important in regions 
where supplies may be limited, storage capacity is limited, and/or 


