2. Planning  
for Water &  
Watersheds

“A new relationship between people and water 
needs to be established to ensure that there 
will be water supplies for human use, thriving 
ecosystems and a healthy economy… both now 
and in the future.” 
  –Cowichan Basin Water Management Plan, 2007 1

Every living organism, ecosystem and community requires water 
for life, health and functioning. The water cycle also influences 
the availability of many natural resources for communities and the 
exposure of those communities to water-related hazards. Biodiversity, 
ecosystem functioning and most sectors of the economy are highly 
dependant on water resources and watershed health.

A watershed refers to a region or area of land that drains into a 
stream, river system or other body of water. Watersheds capture 
precipitation, filter and store water, and influence the timing and 
volume of water flows. They are integrated systems, with actions in 
one part of a watershed often impacting other parts of the watershed; 
therefore, the watershed is an important unit for planning and 
managing water. Watershed planning and management seeks to 
ensure the wise and effective use of water and land resources, and in 
particular, the quantity, quality and timing of water flows. 

Communities rely on water and watersheds for a safe, secure and 
adequate supply of water for many uses; a receiving environment 
for wastewater discharges; provision of fish, wildlife, habitat and 
biodiversity; moderation of flooding, erosion and sedimentation 
processes; and a host of other social, cultural, economic and 
spiritual values. Communities and watersheds are experiencing 
unprecedented changes at many different scales related to 
population growth, settlement patterns, use of natural resources, 
release of waste products into the environment and a changing 
climate. These changes can lead to impacts on water resources, 
watershed health and community sustainability.

Water and watershed planning is about defining and achieving a 
desired future vision for water resources and watersheds. Planning 
plays a critical role in how communities define their vision of the 
future and their path to achieve this vision. 

4


