3.2.3 eVAluA tinG lOCAl And ReGiOnAl Risk RelA
ClimA te ChAnGe

ted tO 

What climate-related risks are priorities for my community in terms of the hazards  
and consequences? 

Many communities are familiar with risk assessment and risk management. 
Preparing for climate change can be approached as just another aspect of risk 
management. Risk is the product of the likelihood of a hazard (e.g., flood, fire, 
drought, water contamination, landslide) occurring, and the consequences of 
exposure to that hazard. Communities can manage risk by reducing exposure to a 
hazard or by minimizing its consequences. 

Sometimes climate change will introduce a new hazard (for example sea level rise, 
glacier loss), or a new consequence (for example new, invasive species). More often, 
climate change will increase or decrease the likelihood that a hazard will occur.

Water and watershed planners can use their knowledge of regional climate changes 
and its impacts to inform a basic risk assessment. Planners should also consider 
whether climate change presents new hazards or consequences relevant to water 
and watershed planning.

3.2.4 identifyinG ClimA te Risk mAnAGement stRA teGies 

What are the most important short, medium and long-term strategies that my 
community can implement to reduce the risks and impacts of climate change?

Once communities have a deeper understanding of past and future climate change, 
potential impacts, local vulnerabilities, and priority risks, they will be in a good position 
to identify, evaluate and select strategies that will minimize local or regional climate-
related risks. Most of these strategies will look familiar.

Where climate change will likely reduce supply, communities can:

 ▪  Develop water conservation and/or drought management plans.
 ▪  Reduce demand through conservation meausres or more efficient water use.
 ▪  Expand the storage capacity of existing water supplies.
 ▪  Develop new water supplies or retention structures.
Where climate change will have negative effects on Water Quality, communities can:

 ▪  Change design capacity of drainage infrastructure such as storm sewers, catch basins, 

and erosion protection structures.

 ▪  Manage rainwater on-site to ease demands  

on drainage infrastructure.

 ▪  Where climate change will negatively affect Other Water and Watershed Values 

communities can:

 ▪ Protect wetlands and other sensitive habitats.
 ▪ Restore riparian and instream habitat.
Currently, there is no list of “best practices” for adaptation. This is because climate 
change and its impacts vary from one location to another, and communities vary in 
their exposure and ability to cope. In addition, vision, values, risk tolerance, priorities, 
resources, and other factors vary from one community to another, so even those facing 
similar risks and opportunities may make different adaptation choices. Thus, while many 
adaptation options are theoretically possible, communities should evaluate to the extent 
possible the likely local costs and benefits of specific strategies before selecting those 
they wish to implement. 

Where climate change exacerbates existing management challenges, such as water 
shortages, water use conflicts, protecting water quality and managing natural hazards, 
consideration must be given to the degree to which climate change is compounding 
those problems and to how strategies and responses need to be refined to address 
additional pressures related to climate change. “No regrets” actions that address both 
current and future risk are particularly popular.

12


