Legislature  
& policy  
frameworks

G
IN
R
O
T

I

N

O

M

 
 

Source  
water 
protection

Public involvement & 

awareness

Clean, safe, reliable 

drinking water

Drinking water  
distribution system

Research, science 

& technology

Drinking  
water  
treatment

M

A

N
A
G
E
M
E
NT

Guidelines, 
standards & 
objectives

Figure 2. Components of a Multi-barrier Approach to Drinking Water Protection. 1

In many cases other water uses, such as those related to agricultural, commercial, institutional 
and industrial operations, are connected to drinking water supplies. In addition, there are many 
ecological, recreational and other non-consumptive water uses that must be managed along with 
drinking water supplies. Often, protecting drinking water can have important co-benefits related 
to environmental, cultural, spiritual and aesthetic values.

Desired outcomes of water quality planning may include:

 ▪  Ensuring a safe, secure supply of quality water for a wide variety of uses;
 ▪  Ensuring that water supply is robust and resilient to climate change impacts and other factors;
 ▪  Managing wastewater discharges to be within the capacity of receiving waters to absorb  
and assimilate wastes;
 ▪  Managing land and resource development practices (and day to day human activities)  
in ways that maintain and protect water quality; 
 ▪  Practicing urban and rural development in ways that do not adversely affect natural  
processes (e.g. Leaving floodplains in natural states and promoting natural functions  
such as sediment transport); and
 ▪  Raising public awareness of the value and importance of fresh water.
Because these planning processes consider threats to water quality, they present opportunities 
to consider the impacts of climate change along with other pressures on water quality.

Community Watersheds (CWs) are another potential watershed planning unit for consideration 
in some areas. The province has established 467 CWs in response to the Forest and Range 
Practices Act, (Government Action Regulation) which provides an added level of protection for 
water quality in association with forestry operations. However, more research may be required to 
determine whether there are CWs with completed watershed plans, or there is a desire, capacity 
and benefits associated with watershed planning at this scale.

28


