Some examples of information sources to support water and watershed planning 
are listed below (in alphabetical order). In many cases, further analysis of available 
information and/or more detailed local information will be necessary to support 
planning processes. See Section 9 of this guide Tools and Resources for more 
information (including web links) about where to go for relevant information on 
water, watershed and climate science.
 ▪ BC Hydro – Regional Hydromet Data 
 ▪ BC Ministry of Environment – Environmental Protection Division, Water Quality 
 ▪ BC Ministry of Environment – Groundwater Wells and Aquifer Database
 ▪  BC Ministry of Forests, Lands & Natural Resource Operations  
– River Forecast Centre 
 ▪ Environment Canada – Meteorological Service 
 ▪ Environment Canada – Real-Time Hydrometric Data 
 ▪ Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium – Plan2Adapt 

8.5.2 infORmA tiOn GAPs And limit AtiOns
Data for water, watershed and climate change planning is not available consistently 
across the province. Numerous information gaps present a challenge to water and 
watershed planning. For example, there may be gaps or limitations in:

 ▪  Spatial coverage (e.g., available information may not cover a particular river, 
stream, lake or watershed);
 ▪  Temporal coverage (e.g., a full range of historical or current information,  
or future projections may not be available); and,
 ▪  Measured parameters (e.g., information may be available for only a subset  
of the necessary water quantity or quality variables).

Basic hydrological information is not available for many streams, lakes and aquifers in 
BC. Similarly, water quality information is limited. Although there are requirements for 
measuring and reporting on drinking water quality, there are many information gaps 
on instream water quality for waterbodies that are not used for drinking water.

In some regions, such as the Capital Regional District, where communities 
are close to academic institutions, there is a relatively good supply of data 
and information to inform planning efforts. However, in small to mid-sized 
communities, less data is available both for climate and water and watershed 
planning. Also, in some cases, loal governments do not always know what data 
are available or how to source or use the data. 

While it is widely recognized that in many regions of the province aquifers are 
vulnerable to multiple sources of depletion and pollution, groundwater data are 
relatively limited. The submission of well log information, which is housed by the 
Province, is voluntary, and people are often slow in submitting the data or they 
provide incomplete information. Accessing data for privately held upland areas 
in watersheds is another significant challenge for local governments. Forest 
companies are required to file detailed environmental plans for every cutblock; 
however, this information typically is not made available. 

Communities may be able to acquire data, but in many cases it is not in an 
accessible format. Local governments have experienced considerable challenges 
related to the format and completeness of data. Often, data are developed for 
specific purposes and are not compatible with other purposes or a particular 
study area. In other cases, available data may not be specific enough for 
developing plans for a particular region or watershed. Regional districts report 
that it is sometimes challenging to work with data from various member 
municipalities because there is no standardized format for the data. Finally, the 
level of detail in which data are presented is not always useful. For example, 
in a community such as Tofino, which has very localized weather cells, it is 
difficult to use general climate data because the nearest weather station is not 
representative of the weather in Tofino. 

Information gaps and limitations grow significantly when it comes to 
understanding the complexity of watershed resources, health and function. In 
an ideal scenario, a watershed inventory and assessment is undertaken to build 
a broad understanding of the full resources, functions and characteristics of a 
watershed. In many cases, watershed inventories and assessments have not 

been undertaken or they have been limited in 
scope. There is no single, comprehensive source 
of watershed data.
Information resources should be considered in 
a similar light as financial and human resources. 
As with funding and people, information is a 
critical element to support a water or watershed 
planning process. However, there can be 
significant limitations and constraints that need 
to be understood and addressed in order to 
acquire and use the information necessary to 
develop and implement watershed plans.

8.6 RefeRenCes

1   Brandes, Oliver et. al. (2005). At A Watershed: Ecological 

Governance and Sustainable Water Management in Canada.  
The POLIS Project on Ecological Governance. Victoria, BC.

2   Global Water Partnership (2007). Integrated Water Resource 
Management At A Glance (Brochure). Stockholm: Sweden.  
www.gwp.org.

3   Stephens, Kim (2010). “Water Centric Planning: Looking At  

Water Quality and Quantity In All Aspects”.  
www.waterbucket.ca [Accessed September 2010].

4   Okanagan Water Stewardship Council (2008). Okanagan 

Sustainable Water Strategy: Action Plan 1.0. Coldstream, BC.

5   Stephens, Kim (2007). South Okanagan Regional Growth 

Strategy: Pilot for Water-Centric Action in British Columbia. www.
waterbucket.ca/cfa/redirect.asp?sid=51&id=185&type=single 
[Accessed January 2011].

6   Wallace, M., L.E. Woo and S. Boudreauet. (1997). Involving 

the Public: Learning from Watershed Planning in Ontario. In D. 
Shrubsole and D. Tate (Eds.).

7   Stephens, Kim (2010). Shared Responsibility: Community 

Perspectives on Developing and Implementing the 100-Year 
Action Plan for Watershed Restoration. Community Values 
Influence Bowker Creek Blueprint Process and Outcome. Story #3. 
Published on Water Bucket website, February 2010.  
www.waterbucket.ca.

8   Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources (2010). First 

Nations Water Security and Climate Change: Workshop Report.

9   UBCM. (2005). Regional District and First Nation Governments: 
Building Effective Relationships: Summary Report of June 29, 
2005 Workshop in Richmond, BC.

10   AVI (2007). CAVI: Convening for Action on Vancouver Island—

Leadership in Water Sustainability. www.waterbucket.ca/cfa/?sid=
19&id=176&type=single. 

11  Nowlan, Linda and Bakker, Karen (2007). Delegating Water 

Governance: Issues and Challenges in the BC Context. A paper for 
the BC Water Governance Project. Vancouver, BC: UBC Program on 
Water Governance. 

12  Okanagan Basin Water Board (2008). OBWB Backgrounder.  

www.livingrivers.ca.

13  Fraser Basin Council. 1997. Charter for Sustainability. www.

fraserbasin.bc.ca/publications/charter.html [Accessed Feb. 2011].

14  Water Policy and Governance Group (2010). Water Challenges 

and Solutions in First Nations Communities: Summary of Findings 
from the Workshop “Sharing Water Challenges and Solutions: 
Experiences of First Nations Communities, April 15-16, 2010, 
Kitchener-Waterloo, Ontario.

15  Rutherford, Susan (2007). Green Infrastructure Guide: Issues, 
Implementation, Strategies and Success Stories. Published by 
West Coast Environmental Law. 

16  Okanagan Water Stewardship Council (2008). Okanagan 

Sustainable Water Strategy: Action Plan 1.0. Coldstream, BC.

47


