water use reporting process have already been 
achieved. Many of the actions identified in the plan 
require inter-jurisdictional arrangements so that 
communities of the basin can prepare for climate 
change and population growth in the watershed. 
The OBWB is the mechanism for bringing these 
groups together on a regional basin scale to plan 
and manage water resources. 12

8.3.3 fRAseR bAsin COunCil
In the Fraser River Basin, the Fraser Basin  
Council (FBC) strengthens regional and 
watershed-based approaches to address a wide 
variety of sustainability issues. Formed in 1997, 
the FBC is a charitable, not-for-profit organization 
with a primary mandate “to advance sustainability 
in British Columbia with a core focus on the 
Fraser River Basin.” FBC has a collaborative 
governance structure, which is led by 37 directors 
from the four orders of government—federal, 
provincial, local and First Nations—and from the 
private sector and civil society. 

Well into its second decade of service, the FBC 
works to bring people together to find practical, 
common sense solutions to long-standing 
and emerging sustainability issues, such as 
community planning, watershed health and 
climate change adaptation. 

To achieve its goals, the FBC serves as an impartial, 
trusted facilitator operating under a unique model 
of collaborative leadership. The FBC was founded 
on the belief that the major sustainability priorities, 
including management of the Fraser Basin, cannot 
be effectively addressed by any one jurisdiction but 
rather by bringing together the diversity of interests 
and jurisdictions to solve complex problems. 
The reason so many contentious issues remain 
unresolved is often because leaders in different 
sectors are working in isolation of each other. 

The overall framework for the Fraser Basin Council’s 
work is the Charter for Sustainability. The charter 
is a good-faith agreement, signed in 1997, by 
representatives from multiple sectors across the 
Fraser Basin who believed in collaborative action for 
a more sustainable future. 

From the charter comes FBC’s vision statement and guiding principles, along with a definition 
of sustainability, described as:

“Living and managing activities in a way that balances social, economic, environmental and 
institutional considerations to meet our needs and those of future generations.”  

The Fraser Basin Council delivers programs and projects in each of the five regions of the 
Fraser River Basin: Upper Fraser, Cariboo-Chilcotin, Thompson, Fraser Valley and Greater  
Vancouver-Sea to Sky. 

The following are a few highlights of Fraser Basin Council accomplishments, all of which were 
undertaken with regional and collaborative approaches. The FBC:

 ▪  Worked with more than 100 local governments and 26 first nations across bc on community 
sustainability planning and climate change adaptation;
 ▪  Improved fraser basin salmon habitat, stock management, fisheries information and re¬lated 
outreach with a high level of aboriginal engagement and many working partnerships for the 
health of bc fisheries;
 ▪  Launched and contributed directly to the development of a land use planning process for 
the shuswap lakes system to encourage development in less sensitive areas of shuswap 
and mara lakes, to improve waste¬water management and to study recreational impacts. 
Current priorities and next steps include protecting and restoring foreshore habitat, 
maintaining and improving water quality, informing and educating the public and industry 
groups, and initiating coordinated development and recreation plans;
 ▪  Led a panel of independent experts, result¬ing in canada’s first provincial legislation on 
drinking water protection;
 ▪  Published four comprehensive sustainabil¬ity snapshot indicators reports, and several 
regional reports, on the health of the fraser basin and province of bc to raise awareness and 
encourage action across sectors on economic, social and environmental issues; and,
 ▪  Developed the strategy for, and created bc’s first council on, invasive plants, which has 
received national recognition.

8.4 humAn And finAnCiAl ResOuRCes
“Water is a liquid more precious than oil”  –Tony Blair, former British Prime Minister 

Integrated water and watershed planning requires a dedicated and skilled team of people. 
Ongoing involvement in a collaborative planning process is a significant commitment for local 
governments and others, who often cite inadequate resources and overtaxed staff as primary 
limitations on being more proactively engaged in certain aspects of watershed protection. Some 
local governments also note that watershed planning is a specialized skill that is beyond the 
training of many people. Without the necessary financial and human resources it is challenging 
for some communities to effectively manage and/or participate in collaborative processes. 

Within this challenging context of limited financial and human resources, the BC experience 
is showing that success in advancing water and watershed planning often comes down to 
creative initiatives and well-conceived projects. While an increase in both financial and human 
resources is desirable, it may not be realistic in many communities. Instead, communities are 
required to work more creatively with both internal and external resources in order to advance 
their goals for water and watershed protection. 

44


