4. Who does  
What in Water?

This section of the guide provides an overview of the wide range 
of roles and responsibilities of all orders of government and other 
organizations in water management in BC. 

Depending on the scope of a particular water or watershed planning 
process, many of these organizations will have a role in planning. 
The diversity of responsibilities reinforces the value of implementing 
collaborative approaches to planning and governance.

It is important to understand how and where water and watershed 
planning fits within the larger context of water management and 
governance. For this guide, water management is described as 
including the following components:

 ▪ Policies (e.g., legislation, regulations and other types of policies);
 ▪  Governance arrangements (e.g., formal agreements and protocols, 
financial mechanisms, collaborative decision-making processes,          
and consultation, advisory and public participation processes);
 ▪  Planning (e.g., a variety of processes to develop water plans, watershed 
plans, and other types of plans such as official community plans); and
 ▪  Implementation (e.g., implementation of policies and plans,  
operation of water and wastewater facilities, compliance and 
enforcement of regulations).

Resources such as information, financial and human resources can 
also be considered to be a key component of water management. 

This guide focuses on the planning component of water management. 
However, it also speaks to other components as they relate to 
planning. For example, this section includes an overview of the range 
of water management roles and responsibilities that exist among a 
wide variety of organizations.

Governance can be described in terms of who makes decisions and 
how they are made. While government is critical to governance, the 
concept is broader than government. 

There are a wide range of regulatory and non-regulatory roles, 
responsibilities and jurisdictions that span federal, provincial, local 
and First Nations governments. In addition, water user groups, 
watershed stewards, the general public and other stakeholders 
are increasingly becoming involved in planning, management and 
decision making for our water resources. 

14


