 ▪  Leverage funds. Grant leveraging entails using one 
source of funds to attract and match funds from 
other sources. It is an effective means of bringing in 
additional money to support an expanding project 
or one with an extended timeline. 
 ▪  Consider what can be accomplished without 
financial contributions. Participants in the 
Theodosia Stewardship Roundtable state that 
planning groups do not need a lot of money to 
initiate watershed planning. In-kind contributions 
can be a significant source of resources for 
getting a project started. Once successes 
start to be demonstrated through the use 
of these contributions, it becomes easier to 
attract funds from other sources. Participants 
in the Theodosia planning process expect that 
down the road, when they have established a 
good mechanism for making watershed-based 
decisions, their Roundtable will actually attract 
money rather than cost money. They expect that 
outside funders will see value in the process, and 
will want to support it. 

Consider Alternative Sources of Funds
Various means of generating funds for water 
management projects have been tried in different 
communities. Some of these are listed below. It 
is important to consider the potential that these 
may bring, within the context of each community. 
Conducting an economic analysis of which 
mechanisms are most appropriate to a community 
would be beneficial, as would an assessment of 
public and political support for those mechanisms. 

 ▪  Development Cost Charges (DCCs) have been 
used in some BC communities to support 
operational initiatives in water management. As 
a pilot project, the town of Oliver, BC received 
approval to use DCC funds collected from new 
development to help establish water meters for 
existing homes with the resulting water savings 
becoming available to provide water services to 
new homes. DCCs have also been a key part of 
the City of Surrey’s strategy to build sustainable 
drainage infrastructure. Surrey has used the funds 
to pay for a roadside storm water management 
swale/multi-use greenway in a new development, 
rather than the usual purchase of 5-6% of the 
area for the purposes of a detention pond. 
 ▪  Volume-based Water Use Fees can be applied 
either to individuals or water suppliers to target 
heavy-use water consumers and to provide 
incentives for water conservation. The fee structure 
needs to be equitable to avoid creating economic 
hardship for low-income residents and the 
agricultural community. 
 ▪  Municipal Drainage Utilities can be formed as 
an alternate source of raising funding. This 
approach can help ensure dedicated funding for 
drainage and stormwater planning, infrastructure 
and operations.

46

 ▪  Water Licence Fees collected by the Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural 
Resource Operations currently go into provincial general revenue. In theory, 
a portion of these funds could be directed to specifically support water and 
watershed planning. If local government becomes actively involved in licence 
administration at any level, some of these funds could be used to fund water 
conservation and management projects at the local level.16 
 ▪  Recreational User Fees applied to powerboat or off-road vehicle rentals are a 
means of targeting polluting activities of tourists or seasonal residents who do 
not otherwise contribute funds to water management in a region.16
 ▪  Reserve Funds can be established by implementing changes in service delivery 
systems (e.g., contracting out a regional service), which can sometimes translate 
into savings for a local government. In the Region of Peel, in Ontario, such a savings 
translated into a permanent, annual cost reduction of 1.5% on water rates. Staff 
commitment and forward thinking leadership enabled these savings to be channeled 
into a fund, which is not constrained by the normal budget cycle. The City of Toronto 
directed revenue from property sales into the “Toronto Atmospheric Revolving Fund”, 
which finances innovative greenhouse gas emission reduction projects. Interest and 
royalties from these projects are returned to the fund. One merit of this approach is 
that it does not require any additional taxation. 

8.5 infORmA tiOn And knOWledGe
The importance of accurate, relevant and meaningful data, information and 
knowledge cannot be underestimated in relation to water and watershed planning. 
Although subtle nuances differentiate data from information and knowledge, for the 
purposes of this section of the guide, the term “information” will be used explicitly, and 
data and knowledge will be considered as being related implicitly.

Information is critical to water and watershed planning in a variety of ways. Information 
about current (or historical) water issues, challenges and conflicts alerts communities 
and decision makers about the need for planning, policy and/or operational 
management actions. Information about future scenarios, such as population 
projections or climate change scenarios, can help inform planners and others about 
possible issues they may need to address. Information about the effectiveness of 
management options can be used to assess recommended actions in response to 
current or future challenges.

8.5.1 infORmA tiOn needs And sOuRCes
The following are some examples of data and information that may be beneficial 
or necessary to inform a water and watershed planning process:
Current and projected future water supply:
 ▪ Seasonal and annual streamflow (volume and timing);
 ▪ Surface and groundwater reserves (extent and volume);
 ▪ Changes to precipitation and evapotranspiration as a result of climate change; and,
 ▪ Changes to storage and distribution capacity associated with water supplies.
Current and projected future water demand:
 ▪ Current water use by all human consumptive and non-consumptive uses;
 ▪  Current instream flow requirements for fish, wildlife, habitat and ecosystem 
functions; and,
 ▪  Changes to water demand as a result of population growth, community and 
economic development and/or climate change.

Current and projected future threats to water quality:
 ▪ Changes to settlement patterns, land use and associated pollutants; and,
 ▪  Changes to hydrology and geomorphology as a result of land use, land cover 
and/or climate change.

Data and information are also needed to monitor and measure performance in relation to 
the objectives and desired outcomes of a water or watershed plan (or related regulatory 
requirements). For example, it may be necessary to monitor compliance with water 
licences, instream flow requirements, water use restrictions, wastewater discharges, 
riparian area regulations and/or water quality standards or objectives. If performance 
measures are not established and assessed, it may not be possible to determine if the 
goals and objectives of a water or watershed plan are being achieved.


