www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/documents/bmp/wetlandways2009/ 
wetlandways_docintro.html.

Curran, Deborah (2007). Green Bylaws Toolkit for Conserving Sensitive 
Ecosystems and Green Infrastructure. Prepared for the Wetland Stewardship 
Partnership, Ducks Unlimited Canada, Grasslands Conservation Council of 
BC, Environment Canada, and The Province of BC. www.greenbylaws.ca.

Drinking Water Leadership Council (2007). Drinking Water Officers Guide. 
Victoria, BC. www.health.gov.bc.ca/protect/dwpublications.html.

Fraser Basin Council (2005). Authorities Affecting Source Water Protection 
in British Columbia: Research Paper. Prepared for Environment Canada. 
Vancouver, BC.

Heathcote, Isoble W., Integrated Watershed Management, Principles and 
Practice. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1998.

Inter-Governmental Partnership (2007). Beyond the Guidebook: Context for 
Rainwater Management and Green Infrastructure in British Columbia.  
www.waterbucket.ca/rm/?sid=43&id=486&type=single.

Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd. (2005). Template for Integrated Stormwater 
Management Planning. Prepared for Metro Vancouver. Burnaby, BC. www.
metrovancouver.org/about/publications/Pages/default.aspx.

McGuire, Gordon, N. Wyper, M. Chan, A. Campbell, S. Bernstein and J. 
Vivian (2010). Re-inventing Rainwater Management: A Strategy to Protect 
Health and Restore Nature in the Capital Region. A Submission to the Capital 
Regional District on behalf of the Veins of Life Watershed Society by the 
Environmental Law Clinic, University of Victoria. Victoria, BC. 

Okanagan Basin Water Board (OBWB) (2009) Groundwater Bylaws Toolkit: 
An Appendix to the Green Bylaws Toolkit. Kelowna, BC.

Okanagan Water Stewardship Council (2008) Okanagan Sustainable Water 
Strategy: Action Plan 1.0. Coldstream, BC.

POLIS Water Sustainability Project (2010) Action H20 Water Sustainability 
Charter and WaterSmart Toolkit. Victoria, BC.  
Available at: www.poliswaterproject.org/toolkit.

Province of BC (1998). Water Use Plan Guidelines. Victoria,BC. www.env.gov.
bc.ca/wsd/plan_protect_sustain/water_use_planning/index.html.

Rosenau, Dr. Marvin L and Angelo, Mark (2000). Water Use Planning: A Tool 
to Restore Salmon and Steelhead Habitat in British Columbia. Prepared for 
the Pacific Fisheries Resource Conservation Council. Vancouver, BC. 

Rutherford, Susan (2009). Bill 27: Opportunities and Strategies for Green 
Action by BC Local Governments. West Coast Environmental Law, 
Vancouver, BC.

US Environmental Protection Agency (2008). Handbook for Developing 
Watershed Plans to Restore and Protect our Waters.

Water Sustainability Committee of the BC Water and Waste Association 
(2004). Water Sustainability Action Plan for British Columbia: Framework for 
Building Partnerships.

Watershed Watch Salmon Society et al (2009). Fish Out of Water: Tools to 
Protect British Columbia’s Groundwater and Wild Salmon. Vancouver, BC. 

West Coast Environmental Law, BC Guide to Watershed Law and Planning. 
http://watershedguide.wcel.org/.

Wetlands Stewardship Partnership (2007) Green Bylaws Toolkit for 
Conserving Sensitive Ecosystems and Green Infrastructure. (Environmental 
Law Clinic, University of Victoria).

Wong, Jennifer, Porter-Bopp, Susanne and Oliver M. Brandes (2009) Water 
Conservation Planning Guide For British Columbia’s Communities. The POLIS 
Project on Ecological Governance. University of Victoria. Victoria, BC.

9.4 WAteRshed PlAnninG And fiRst 
nAtiOns

Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources 
(2011). First Nation Watershed Management Tool. 
Winnipeg, Manitoba. “This three-year project will 
result in a First Nation Watershed Management Tool, 
comprised of a relevant and integrated framework, 
citizen workbooks and in-person and online training 
workshops to implement the framework and 
the management cycle for watershed planning, 
developed and piloted with our First Nation 
partners.” www.cier.ca/protecting-lands-and-water/
current-initiatives.aspx?id=1658

Coastal Guardian Watchmen – on line support, 
resources and networking opportunities for BC 
coastal First Nations Guardian Watchmen Programs 
to monitor, steward and protect their lands and 
waters. http://coastalguardianwatchmen.ca.

FORREX Watershed Planning Toolkit for First 
Nations – Forrex is in the process of developing 
a watershed planning toolkit for First Nations. 
The toolkit focuses on 100-150 agreements 
between the Province of BC and First Nations in 
forestry, looking at issues relating to economic 
access agreements, logging, forest tenure etc. 

Lower Mainland Treaty Advisory Committee 
(LMTAC) – provides support services to member 
local governments dealing with broader Aboriginal 
issues, including land management, servicing, inter-
governmental relations, and communications with 
First Nations (in addition to coordinating the interests 
of 26 municipalities and regional governments in the 
Lower Mainland treaty negotiations). 

New Relationship Trust Fund – In March 2006, the 
BC government enacted the New Relationship 
Trust Act as part of an overall initiative to start a new 
relationship between government and First Nations. 
The Trust holds a fund that is designed to provide 
First Nations with tools, training, and skills so they 
can participate in land and resource management 
as well as land use planning processes, and also 
to develop social, economic, and cultural programs 
for their communities. The independent Board of 
Directors is appointed by the First Nations Summit, 
Union of BC Indian Chiefs, the BC Assembly of First 
Nations, the First Nations Leadership Council, and 
the BC Government. 

Union of BC Municipalities – On line Policy 
Documents and Initiatives for local governments 
and First Nations relating to Treaty, Governance, 
Memoranda and Protocols, and Building Relations. 
www.ubcm.ca/EN/main/resolutions/policy-areas/first-
nations-relations/policy-documents-initiatives.html.

51


