8.1 Re-thinkinG W AteRsheds And PlAnninG

“When we try to pick out anything by itself, we find it hitched to everything else in the universe” 
– John Muir, Naturalist, Conservationist

Historically, the traditional approach to water management has been fragmented, not integrated to 
reflect the connections within a watershed. Water quality and water quantity have been managed 
separately, and decision making around water resources has been governed more by political 
boundaries than by natural ones. More recently, however, watersheds have received renewed attention 
as an important unit for planning, and there is wide acceptance that the management and planning 
of water should occur at a watershed level. For example, at a national level, Canada’s Federal Water 
Policy adopts watersheds as the preferred spatial unit for water resource planning.  

An integrated approach to watershed planning considers the interactions between the biophysical, 
constructed and human landscapes within a watershed (Figure 4). An integrated approach 
recognizes the interdependencies in both natural and human systems, as detailed in the table below.   

Integration in the Natural System 

Integration in the Human System

Between land and water use 

 

Mainstreaming water in the national economy

Between surface water and groundwater  

Ensuring coordination between sectors

Between water quantity and quality 

Between upstream and downstream 

 

 

Between freshwater and coastal waters 

Ensuring partnership between public and private sector management

Involving everybody

Integrated watershed planning provides a means for coordinating decisions among government and 
private agencies in order to resolve land use and resource management conflicts and issues. The 
resolution of these issues is typically done through multi-stakeholder collaborative planning; through 
monitoring, research and consultation; by negotiating consensus; and by ensuring accountability 
through open communication, education and public access to information. Integrated watershed 
planning combines scientific and technical information with cultural and social values to resolve 
conflicts and identify a desirable future outcome.

Integrated watershed management is also 
referred to in some regions as ecosystem-based 
management. By this approach, “instead of 
managing a watershed as an adjunct to the 
water supply, maintaining healthy watersheds is 
considered a prerequisite to water management; 
water allocations are constrained by the larger 
need to ensure that the natural processes are 
maintained”.1 More recently, the terms “water 
centric planning”, “design with nature”, and the 
“soft path” approach have been used in BC to 
discuss and promote the concepts embedded in 
integrated watershed management. Water centric 
planning is described next. See the web version 
of this guide for information on design with nature 
and the soft path approach.

Watershed

Humans

Integrated 
Watershed 
Management

Buildings

Landscape

Figure 4 – Components of Integrated  
Water and Watershed Management

39


