Three types of plans may be developed to assist with the protection of 
water quality in British Columbia. Drinking Water Protection Plans are 
established under the provincial Drinking Water Protection Act by the 
government to prevent a substantial threat to water supplies that would 
result in a health hazard. Also under the Drinking Water Protection Act, an 
Assessment Response Plan can be required if a Drinking Water Officer, 
orders a water supplier to prepare an assessment where potential threats 
to water quality have been identified, that might adversely impact water 
supply. Well Protection Plans, which may also be a requirement under the 
Drinking Water Protection Act, are developed to minimize impacts of land 
use activities on groundwater supplies that are used by community wells. 
Well Protection Plans can be expanded to the protection of entire aquifers, 
or perhaps multiple aquifers. For this reason, these plans are referred to as 
Well (Aquifer) Protection Plans in this guide. Section 7 of the guide explores 
the scope and value of water, watershed and storm water management 
plans, which are also relevant to the protection of water quality.

Why Plan for Protecting Drinking Water Quality?
In anticipation of and/or response to mounting challenges, pressures 
and changes in their watersheds, it is important for BC communities to 
plan for protection of their drinking water. Water planning can help BC 
communities understand and address current and expected challenges 
by improving knowledge about threats to water quality. Protecting source 
water and drinking water quality is primarily about ensuring that point 
and non-point sources of pollution do not adversely impact water for 
human consumption. Source water includes surface waters, aquifers, or 
groundwater recharge areas. 

For an overview of roles and responsibilities for the protection of drinking water 
quality see the Ministry of Health website for Drinking Water Quality.

Considerable time, money and effort go into treating water and wastewater 
to protect water quality for various uses. Recently, attention has turned to 
the importance of protecting water sources as a fundamental approach to 
managing water quality. Source water protection seeks to identify means of 
preventing, minimizing, or controlling potential sources of water pollution. It is 
the first step in a multi-barrier approach to drinking water protection, which 
provides benefits on a watershed scale by protecting public health, ecosystem 
functions, and a variety of social, economic, cultural and spiritual values. Figure 
2 illustrates different components of a multi-barrier approach to protecting 
drinking water. For information on the multi-barrier approach see the Interior 
Health Authority website on Drinking Water Source Protection and Multiple 
Barriers of Drinking Water Health Protection.

127


