Why Undertake Integrated Planning  
for Water, Land and Watersheds
BC communities are undertaking integrated 
watershed planning and are adopting a wide 
range of strategies to manage a multitude of 
current and future challenges, pressures and 
changes in watersheds. Many of these pressures 
may be effectively addressed within plans that 
recognize the interconnections within a watershed 
system, including:
 ▪ surface water and groundwater connections;
 ▪ water quantity and quality connections;
 ▪ land and water connections; and
 ▪ community and watershed connections.
Watershed planning can help BC communities 
understand and address these challenges by 
improving knowledge about the current and future 
threats to water quantity and quality for human 
and environmental uses, and threats to overall 
watershed health and community sustainability.

The desired outcomes of integrated planning for 
water, land and watersheds may include:

 ▪  Managing water uses and rates of consumption 
within available water supplies seasonally, 
annually and over the long term;
 ▪  Developing and managing water supplies in ways 
that do not compromise the health and biodiversity 
of fish, wildlife, ecosystems and watersheds;
 ▪  Managing the allocation of water in ways 
that support a variety of high-value water 
uses, including human consumptive and 
non-consumptive uses as well as instream 
environmental uses;
 ▪  Ensuring a safe, secure supply of water for a 
wide variety of uses;
 ▪  Managing wastewater discharges within the 
capacity of receiving waters to absorb and 
assimilate those wastes;
 ▪  Managing land development and resource 
management practices (and day to day human 
activities) in ways that do not adversely impact 
water quality;
 ▪  Managing human development patterns in 
ways that stabilize rather than destabilize the 
hydrologic cycle;
 ▪  Managing human development patterns in ways 
that reduce rather than increase the vulnerability 
of communities to water-related hazards, such 
as flooding and erosion; and,
 ▪  Maintaining and strengthening community 
resiliency by preparing for climate change and its 
impacts on water and aquatic ecosystems.

Challenges and Pressures
Integrated water and watershed planning is 
important in communities, particularly where 
there are multiple threats to, or pressures 
on, the quantity and/or quality of community 
water supplies, where infrastructure capacity 

is limited in relation to those threats, and where the health of 
aquatic ecosystems is threatened by multiple pressures on water 
quality or quantity. Depending on the community or region of the 
province, and on land and resource uses, climate change impacts 
and planning can influence these issues in a variety of ways. The 
following are a few examples of the challenges experienced in 
communities across BC where integrated approaches to planning 
may beneficial or necessary.

Growing Demands on Limited Water Supplies
A variety of land and water uses can impact water supply and 
demand, stream hydrology, groundwater tables, surface and 
groundwater quality, and the overall health of watersheds. For 
example, in the Township of Langley, multiple community wells 
and private wells withdraw water from the same aquifer. Managing 
demand within the available supply requires an integrated approach 
to understand the complexity of the challenges associated with water 
use and groundwater recharge, particularly in relation to population 
growth, economic development and climate change impacts.

Changes in Land Use and Land Cover
In many communities across BC, changes in land cover due to 
activities such as forestry, and increased imperviousness as a result 
of urban development can result in more “flashy” stream and river 
hydrology and increased rates of erosion and sediment transport. 
For example, in watersheds with reduced forest cover or increased 
impervious surfaces, a greater proportion of rainfall quickly enters 
storm sewers, drainage ditches and streams, resulting in high 
peak flows and less groundwater infiltration. In the Central Interior 
of BC, the mountain pine beetle (MPB) outbreak has resulted in 
many dead, standing trees, significant salvage logging, and forest 
fires, all of which have dramatically impacted hydrology, erosion 
and sedimentation, aquatic habitat, and overall watershed health. 
Many see the MPB outbreak as being caused or exacerbated 
by climate change because average winter temperatures have 
warmed. Historically, cold winters have kept mountain pine beetle 
populations in check in BC, thereby preventing a significant 
outbreak. Over the long term, forest cover may return to more 
natural conditions and watershed health may recover; however, 
in the interim, communities may need to manage the impacts 
associated with these pressures. In the case of urban development, 
human intervention may be required to restore watershed health. 
With respect to the effects of BC’s MPB infestation on hydrology 
note the 2008 Ministry of Environment report: Mountain Pine Beetle 
Infestation: Hydrological Impacts.

Climate Considerations 
Climate change is impacting, and will continue to impact, many 
aspects of water, land and watersheds in BC. Some of the most 
significant impacts on watersheds expected from climate change 
include reduced annual and/or seasonal precipitation, reduced 
snowpack, loss of glaciers, changing surface and groundwater 
hydrology, increased frequency and severity of drought and 
flood events, low summer flows, warm freshwater temperatures, 
reduced dilution / assimilative capacity of receiving waters, and 
increased erosion, turbidity and sedimentation. These and other 
climate-related impacts should be addressed in plans that aim to 
consider medium to long-term pressures on water quantity, quality, 
and ecosystem health. The plans should develop solutions for 
dealing with those pressures. See sections 3 and 9 of this guide 
for information, tools and resources about climate change impacts 
on water, related community vulnerabilities and risks, as well as 

33


