available, communities have been able to obtain it by engaging consultants or the Pacific 
Climate Impacts Consortium, or by working with academic researchers and students.  

While many communities believe they need accurate information about future climate and future 
impacts on water and watersheds, in many cases general information about the direction of these 
impacts will be adequate for initial planning purposes. The following information, for example, can 
guide water and watershed management decisions:

 ▪  Whether or not regional snowpack (a low-cost water storage mechanism)  

will likely decrease in future;

 ▪  Whether or not summer flows will likely be lower in future, with impacts for  

water temperature and health of fish stocks; or

 ▪  Whether or not heavy rainfall events – sociated with flooding and stream  

turbidity – are becoming more frequent.

3.2.2 exPlORinG lOCAl And ReGiOnAl VulneRAbility 
tO ClimA te ChAnGe

 

How will the impacts of climate change affect water supply, demand, quality and watershed 
health in my region?

Science alone cannot provide all the information water and watershed planners need to prepare 
for climate change. In many cases it is local people who are in the best position to identify the 
water and watershed values they care about, how sensitive those values are to year-to-year 
changes in climate, and local capacity to address existing problems.

Some of the adaptation planning methodologies identified in Tools and Resources (section 9 
of this guide) describe two types of assessment: vulnerability assessment and risk assessment. 
Vulnerability assessment looks specifically at the ability of the community to address emerging 
pressures related to climate. Questions for water and watershed planners to consider in assessing 
vulnerability related to climate change are:

 ▪  What aspects of climate are currently important to our water supply or our  

watershed? In particular, how have extreme weather events affected our water  
supply or watershed in the past?

 ▪  Given projected climate change and related impacts: Is the community water supply likely  
to increase or decrease? Is damage to water infrastructure likely to increase or decrease?

 ▪  How prepared is our community to projected changes? Are we resilient or vulnerable?
In many cases, climate change will exacerbate existing management challenges, such as 
water shortages, water use conflicts, protecting water quality and managing natural hazards – 
things that communities are already struggling to address.

management plans. Some of these methodologies 
are listed in in Section 9 Tools and Resources. 
More resources are available on the community 
adaptation first-stop website “ReTooling for Climate 
Change at www.retooling.ca/.

This guide suggests that many water and watershed 
planning processes should consider climate change 
and its impacts, focusing on how climate has 
changed and is likely to change within the planning 
region, and the impacts of a changing climate on 
water and watersheds within the planning region.

Users of this guide are referred to existing 
generic methodologies identified in Tools and 
Resources and on the ReTooling website 
for details on the steps involved in identifying 
regional impacts, vulnerabilities, and risks, and 
relevant risk management strategies. The 
sections that follow provide additional information 
that specifically addresses adaptation in the 
context of water and watershed planning.

3.2.1 leARninG AbOut ReGiOnAl 
ClimA te ChAnGe imPACts

What are the impacts of climate change on water 
and watersheds in my region?

Information about climate change and its impacts 
on water and watersheds in BC is available, 
although the amount and level of detail varies from 
one region to another. 

Information about changes in climate, changes in 
hydrology, and changes in aquatic and terrestrial 
ecosystems in BC during the past century is 
available from reports published by the BC Ministry 
of Environment, Natural Resources Canada, and 
the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium. See Tools 
and Resources for links to key publications.

The planning tool Plan2Adapt provides a good 
starting point for learning about future climate.  
It provides regionally relevant information about 
projected climate for 2020s, 2050s, and 2080s, 
based on a standard set of climate model 
projections. It presents this information in the form 
of simple-to-understand maps, graphs and text.  
Users can view the information online as well as 
download material for use in presentations and 
reports. Users with more technical knowledge can 
also download the data used to create the maps 
for further analysis. See http://plan2adapt.ca/.

It’s not enough to know what future climate will 
look like. Equally important is to understand the 
implications of future climate to future stream 
flows, water availability, and watershed health in the 
planning region. Much of the existing information on 
these topics is provincial in scope. There are only a 
few regions – including the Okanagan, the Columbia 
Basin, and the Lower Mainland – for which detailed 
information on water and watersheds exists. Not 
all of the existing information is written in simple 
language.  Section 9 Tools and Resources provides 
links to key sources of information about impacts on 
water and watersheds.

Where detailed local or regional information 
about future climate or hydrology is not readily 

11


