4.1 PROVinCiAl GOVeRnment
Under the Canadian Constitution Act, provinces 
and territories have primary responsibility for 
water management, with a number of ministries 
and agencies sharing responsibility for different 
aspects of water management. The Province is 
the lead jurisdiction for setting policy, legislating 
prices, permitting uses, and managing water 
sources in BC. Provincial jurisdiction includes 
public lands, municipal institutions, local works 
and undertakings, non-renewable resources, 
property and civil rights, and shared jurisdiction 
over agriculture.1 Typically, the Province devolves 
the responsibility of community-scale water 
management to municipalities or other local 
organizations such as water suppliers. In British 
Columbia, the BC Water Act (administered by the 
Ministry Forests, Lands and Natural Resource 
Operations) and the Drinking Water Protection 
Act (administered by the Ministry of Health) 
provide the basic regulatory framework for water 
management. The following are some of the 
key provincial roles and responsibilities in water 
management and planning.

Ministry of Environment (MoE)
The MoE provides leadership for water 
stewardship and promotes responsible water 
use, community health and safety, maintenance 
of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems, and other 
priorities. The Ministry applies a stewardship 
approach based on the principles of integrated 
water resource management. The Ministry of 
Environment works in partnership with other 
agencies (such as the Ministry of Forests, Lands 
and Natural Resource Operations) to deliver this 
mandate and ensure the health of the province’s 
water resource. MoE roles include:
 ▪ Parks, wilderness and protected areas;
 ▪ Air, land and water quality standards;
 ▪ Pollution prevention and waste management;
 ▪ Species and ecosystem protection policy;
 ▪ Water protection and water sustainability policy;
 ▪ Water and air monitoring and reporting;
 ▪  Conservation and resource management 

enforcement;

 ▪ Climate action secretariat;
 ▪ Environmental assessment office;
 ▪ State of environment reporting; and,
 ▪ Environmental monitoring.
The MoE also provides the following support roles 
in water stewardship, including:
 ▪ Assists with policy and plan development;
 ▪  Assists with continual evolution of 

legislation and policy;

 ▪  Develops innovative approaches to  

water governance;

 ▪  Assists with the development of regulatory  

and non-regulatory tools;

 ▪  Leads and reports on living water  

smart implementation;

 ▪ Provides source water protection;
 ▪  Provides groundwater monitoring and 

protection; and,

 ▪ Provides water quality and quantity monitoring.

The Ministry provides information, research and  
knowledge about BC’s water resources:
 ▪ Collects water-related data;
 ▪  Provides scientific analysis and guidance in support of  

planning and stewardship;

 ▪  Provides forecasts and models to support risk management  

and decision making; and,

 ▪ Collaborates in water science research.
Ministry of Environment branches have responsibilities for protecting 
and restoring fish habitat, monitoring ambient water quality, permitting 
activities that affect water quality, monitoring aquifer levels, and 
enforcing water regulations.

Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations  
Water-related responsibilities of the MFLNRO include:
 ▪  Administering the water act and the water protection  

act and associated regulations

 ▪ Aquaculture licensing and regulation;
 ▪ Water use planning and authorizations;
 ▪  Aboriginal consultation and coordination– 

natural resource operations;

 ▪ Provincial hatchery and stocking program;
 ▪ Watershed restoration;
 ▪ Fish, wildlife and habitat management;
 ▪ Drought management;
 ▪ Dam and dyke safety and regulation; 
 ▪ Floodplain management;
 ▪ Resource management compliance;
 ▪  Manages and protects water as a forest resource  

under the forest and range practices act;

 ▪  Integrated land management bureau considers water in  

regional land and resource planning; and,

 ▪  Front counter bc provides clients with information on water  

licences and approvals and assists with processing their applications.

Ministry of Health 
 ▪  Administers the drinking water protection act and associated regulations;
 ▪  Mandate for drinking water protection under the drinking  

water protection act;

 ▪  Interagency memorandum of understanding for the protection of 

drinking water commits all provincial agencies to consider drinking  
water protection in their statutory decisions and approvals; and,

 ▪  Drinking water protection officers have statutory authority to ensure 

potable water supplies are protected.

Ministry of Agriculture
 ▪  Supports agricultural industry water requirements used in the  

production of food and agricultural products.

Ministry of Energy
 ▪  Develops energy policy and works to sustainably support industry 

water requirements.

Oil and Gas Commission
 ▪  Issues approvals for short-term water use and for changes in  
and around a stream in connection with authorizations for oil  
and gas development.

15


