AnCOuVeR islAnd

8.3.1 COnVeninG fOR ACtiOn On V
Convening for Action on Vancouver Island (CAVI) is an exciting initiative that has 
emerged in response to the need to plan for sustainable water resources within the 
context of a rapidly growing population. CAVI is not a formal organization; rather, it could 
be considered as an “ad hoc group” designed to provide leadership, coordination, 
research and education for practitioners, specifically local government administrators, 
engineers, planners and elected officials.
CAVI’s focus is to build an understanding about how we should be dealing with water 
as it relates to conservation, development and land use. CAVI does not use a particular 
planning tool or process. Instead, it uses the informal process of collaboration to build 
capacity and a network of like-minded individuals across Vancouver Island so these 
individuals can harness the tools of local government (e.g., Official Community Plans, 
bylaws) to bring about positive change in local watersheds. Education and communication 
are other key tools that CAVI uses. Its aim is to move from talk to action by developing 
tools, providing training and building capacity. 

At the heart of the initiative is the concept of water centric planning. Through education and 
awareness-building initiatives, including learning lunches, CAVI demonstrates how water centric 
approaches and specific tools can be integrated into existing planning processes. 

“At CAVI, we bring together those who plan and regulate land use (local governments), those 
who build (developers), and those who provide the legislative framework (the Province). We 
provide the expertise and support to municipalities and organizations with a focus on achieving 
water sustainability and then help them to share their ideas and successes so that others can 
see how they too can get on board”  

Since its launch in September 2006, CAVI has witnessed considerable success in getting 
its message out, and is seeing mindsets beginning to shift towards water centric thinking, 
planning and decision-making. Participants in the CAVI process include the BC Water and 
Waste Association, Real Estate Foundation of BC, Ministry of Environment, Ministry of 
Community and Rural Development (now Community, Sport and Cultural Development), 
municipalities and regional districts, POLIS, private consultants, developers, academics, First 
Nations and citizens’ groups.

Participants attribute some of this success to the fact that “CAVI has no baggage, no 
requirements, no regulatory authority—it simply provides a forum for people to talk about 
common problems and solutions, and interact through workshops, the Waterbucket website, 
conferences, and seminars”. The emphasis on collaboration within CAVI, and focus on 
integration across the Vancouver Island region have also been critical success factors. Finally, 
many of CAVI’s activities fulfill the principles of Living Water Smart, British Columbia’s Water 
Plan, and aligning with these principles has proven beneficial for local governments that are 
seeking funding to support water planning and management. 

“On Vancouver Island, local governments are demonstrating what can be accomplished through 
partnerships and collaboration. Success in moving from awareness to action is ultimately keyed 
to a regional team approach that is founded on the notion of shared responsibility” 

–John Finnie, CAVI Chair

8.3.2 OkAnAGAn bAsin WA teR bOARd
The Okanagan Basin is one of BC’s fastest growing regions. With increasing demands for water 
by residents, tourists, and agricultural producers (which accounts for as much as 70% of water 
use in the basin), it is a region under pressure. Significant water shortages occur in the summer 
months, and groundwater resources are vulnerable to contamination and drawdown. 

In the Okanagan Valley, a regional approach has proven useful for advancing water management 
decisions. “The Okanagan Basin Water Board (OBWB) was initiated in 1968 (legislated in 1970) 
as a water governance body tasked with identifying and resolving critical water issues at the 
scale of the Okanagan watershed…The overall objective of the organization is to undertake 
strategic projects and programs at the Basin scale that meet the collective needs of Okanagan 
citizens for long-term sustainable water supplies while supporting the capacity of member 
jurisdictions to meet their own water management goals” (www.obwb.ca/about/). 

The Board is comprised of representatives from each of the three regional districts in the 
basin: Okanagan-Similkameen, Central Okanagan and North Okanagan. The Board also has 
representation from First Nations, the Water Supply Association of BC, and the Okanagan 
Water Stewardship Council, which was formed in 2006. The Board is unique in its powers 
to tax and pass bylaws, and is supported through annual property tax assessments within 
the basin. The Board does not have regulatory authority but seeks to improve water 
management by providing a basin-wide perspective and improving communications among 

regions to reduce fragmentation in policy and 
planning. The Board also works to improve 
links between local and senior governments by 
participating as a partner in Okanagan water 
research and infrastructure funding.

Whereas municipalities and regional districts 
continue to plan for local water needs, watershed-
scale considerations are addressed at the regional 
level through the leadership of the OBWB. Some 
key activities of the Board include:

 ▪

 ▪

 ▪

 ▪

 ▪

 ▪

 Implementing basin-wide programs for millfoil 
control, sewage infrastructure funding, water 
science and management;
 Acting as a hub for water information by 
increasing communication, building partnerships 
and reducing duplication;
 Acting as a voice for okanagan water interests 
by advocating and representing local needs to 
senior governments;
 Providing science-based information to 
decision makers;
 Expanding local capacity by providing a stable 
source of funding and in-kind partnerships, 
and by being a single organizing body for 
coordinating watershed projects; and
 Providing a forum for debate about  
watershed priorities.  

Through its work, the OBWB has sought to 
integrate Okanagan water policy and planning on 
a basin-scale by bridging the interests of multiple 
jurisdictions and shifting towards implementing 
policies and agreements that protect water 
supplies. The Okanagan Sustainable Water 
Strategy (2008), which identifies top priorities for 
implementation in the basin in the coming years, 
illustrates how a regional approach can be applied 
to water planning and management. Numerous 
recommendations made in this action plan are 
being implemented incrementally, and successes 
in groundwater monitoring and establishing a 

43


