8.1.2 WAteR CentRiC PlAnninG
Water centric planning refers to planning with a view 
to water, on any scale. The underpinning premise 
of water centric planning is that resource use, land 
use and community design will be done with an eye 
towards their potential impact on a watershed. This 
approach puts water stewardship and sustainability 
at the centre of land use, development, or resource 
planning initiatives. Water centric decisions consider 
the amount of water available, the amount of water 
needed, the use of innovative efficiency strategies, the 
quality of water leaving an area, how rain and snow 
water are managed, and the impact of development 
on the natural environment. As such, it requires 
that missions, mandates and accountabilities of 
participating agencies be ultimately integrated. 

Water centric planning is founded upon an earlier 
concept used in BC— the watershed landscape-
based approach to planning. Water centric planning 
can be used at the watershed, sub-watershed, or site 
level. Its objectives include:

 ▪  Protection of people and property from  
natural hazards;
 ▪  Preservation and conservation of  
self-sustaining ecosystems;
 ▪  Continuation and growth of resource-based 
economic activity; and
 ▪  Provision of an affordable, sustainable  
and maintainable infrastructure.

Many policies and tools are available to local 
governments to implement water centric  
planning, including: 

 ▪  Regional conservation strategies that identify land 
and water to be protected;
 ▪  Official Community Plans that include development 
permit areas around all types of watercourses and 
associated habitats;
 ▪  Liquid Waste Management Plans that have an 
increased emphasis on non-point source pollution 
and water;
 ▪  Zoning bylaws that promote high-density 
developments;
 ▪ Regional Growth Strategies;
 ▪  Regulatory bylaws, such as watercourse protection 
bylaws and subdivision bylaws;
 ▪ Watershed and Well (Aquifer) Protection Plans;
 ▪  Tax incentives for land conservation, brownfield 
development, infill and low-impact development;
 ▪  Infrastructure funding directed to designated growth 
areas; and, 
 ▪  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design 
(LEED) Green Building Rating System. 

The water centric approach also builds on lessons 
learned from past and recent practices related 
to integrative planning and implementation 
of planning decisions. It operates within the 
context of existing regional and municipal 
strategies, such as Regional Growth Strategies 
and Official Community Plans. It can also involve 
inter-municipal cooperation where watershed 
boundaries cross local government boundaries. 3

The South Okanagan Regional District’s Regional Growth Strategy (RGS) was used as a 
pilot for water centric action in BC. The policy clearly recognizes the relationship between 
land and water, both in terms of water use and water runoff. A toolkit was developed to 
accompany the RGS and to guide decision making on the ground in terms of how land 
will be developed and water will be used, and to assist with benchmarking, monitoring and 
measuring key objectives within the policy.   

8.2 COmmunity COllAbORA tiOn And enGAGement

“The hope for achieving sustainability in water management lies in the establishment of 
interdependent, community-based partnerships and increased stakeholder involvement.”  

“Simply put, transformational change will result when decision-makers in government 
collaborate with grass-root visionaries in the community to create a legacy”  

The value of collaboration among, and engagement with, different orders of government, 
different water use sectors, stewardship organizations, and the multitude of community 
stakeholders is a recurring theme throughout this guide. Collaboration is often cited as 
a key success factor in watershed planning. Basically everyone has a role to play, and a 
responsibility to fulfill when it comes to the use, protection and sustainable management 
of water resources and healthy watersheds. Specific benefits associated with community 
engagement and collaboration include:

 ▪  Stronger relationships between participants in terms of trust, respect, information sharing, 
and improved negotiation; 
 ▪  More comprehensive and widely accepted land use decisions as a result of improved 
communications, demonstrated commitment, and information sharing;
 ▪  Greater likelihood of successful implementation of the plan as a result of the involvement of 
all stakeholders, whose values and interests are reflected in the plan; and, 
 ▪  Greater accountability of all community members involved in the planning process with 
regards to their own actions and behaviours in a watershed. 

These benefits of collaboration are considered by many to be critical success factors for 
effective planning and implementation.

The sections that follow identify some key aspects of collaboration in water and watershed 
planning in BC. Recommendations for developing collaborative planning processes with local 
governments in BC are provided, the importance of working with First Nations is discussed, 
and suggestions for strengthening these critical relationships are profiled. Finally, some of the 
concerns, challenges and barriers associated with collaborative planning are highlighted, along 
with some of the opportunities or breakthroughs that BC communities have experienced when 
navigating through these challenges.

Multiple Planning Partners of Local Governments in BC
A growing interest and willingness within BC communities to get involved in watershed 
planning has emerged over the last two decades. Whether for site-specific issues or for 
broader regional land use considerations, collaboration is becoming a preferred model of 
decision making in many parts of the province. At the community level, a greater emphasis on 
collaborative planning for watersheds has put local governments in touch with a wide range 
of partners from different government organizations as well as representatives from both the 
business and stewardship communities. The following are a few examples of the partners that 
work with local governments in planning as well as some common roles these partners play. 
This information is from 21 in-depth interviews with local government staff from across BC. 
See also Section 4 of this guide for information on roles and responsibilities in water planning, 
management and governance.

 ▪  Federal Departments (Environment; Fisheries and Oceans; Health; Aboriginal Affairs and 
Northern Development and others) – Regulatory and/or approval roles; infrastructure funding; 
advisory roles; monitoring and reporting; research and educational roles.
 ▪  Provincial Ministries (Environment; Health; Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations 
and others) – Regulatory and/or approval roles; water licenses and allocation; infrastructure 
funding and planning grants; advisory roles; monitoring and reporting; research and 
educational roles.
 ▪  First Nations, Municipalities and Regional Districts – Provision of water services and 
related infrastructure and/or service agreements (drinking water, wastewater treatment, 
stormwater/drainage); advisory roles; monitoring and reporting; coordination and liaison; 
shared planning and co-management; funding partners; information sharing; and research 
and educational roles.

40


