Acknowledgements

This publication was produced with provincial funding support from 
the BC Ministry of Environment and federal funding support from 
Natural Resources Canada’s Regional Adaptation Collaborative 
Program. The guide was launched and distributed through a series 
of regional workshops throughout BC, with funding contributions 
from the Fraser Salmon and Watersheds Program, Environment 
Canada and the Real Estate Foundation of BC.

The project is part of the wider initiative, the BC Regional 
Adaptation Collaborative (RAC) to help communities, 
governments and other organizations adapt to climate change. 
The RAC Program < adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca > enables 
Canadians to be better prepared to adapt to changes in the 
climate by providing them with adaptation knowledge, tools, 
networks and other resources. The Program recognizes that 
making adaptation-focused decisions now will help ensure that 
our economy, communities and natural resources sectors are 
better prepared for climate change impacts in the future.

Fraser Basin Council staff Sheila Creighton and Steve Litke led 
the development of the guide. The Council is very appreciative of 
the wide range of input, advice, guidance and support that was 
offered through the project Advisory Committee.

We would like to extend sincere thanks to all members of the 
Advisory Committee, who provided comment and input throughout 
the development of the Guide, helping to strengthen its relevance 
and usefulness. (see list of advisors on inside back cover).

The guide was informed by a review of relevant literature 
including reports, guides, and other print and web-based 
publications. In addition, interviews were conducted with local 
government staff and other individuals involved in water or 
watershed planning. This helped to ground the Guide in the 
issues, priorities, experiences, circumstances and needs within 
communities across BC. In some cases, special advisors 
were engaged on a specific basis to bring their expertise on 
issues such as climate change adaptation and First Nations 
perspectives. A special thanks to Tracey Hooper, for editing 
services; Roxy Design, for graphic design services; and ExWare 
for the development of the web version of this guide.


