5. managing 
Water supply 
& demand

There are many diverse pressures and challenges 
to consider in water supply and demand 
planning and management. These include 
(but are not limited to) population growth, 
community and economic development, 
infrastructure and asset management, and the 
need for environmental stewardship. 

It is also becoming increasingly important to consider the 
impacts of climate change when planning and managing 
water supply and demand. Climate change is having, and will 
continue to have, far-reaching implications on all aspects of 
water management.

In Canada, water allocation and licensing decisions are the 
responsibility of the provincial government. In BC, these 
responsibilities are administered by the Ministry of Forests, 
Lands, and Natural Resource Operations (MFLNRO), which 
issues water licences. MFLNRO balances responsible use, 
community health and safety, maintaining terrestrial and 
aquatic ecosystems and other priorities.

Once water licences are issued, the management of water 
supply and demand becomes largely the responsibility of 
those that hold the licenses including local governments, First 
Nations, and other community-scale water suppliers. These 
groups develop and manage community water supplies as well 
as treatment and distribution systems. Local and First Nations 
governments also have roles in developing and implementing 
various water-related plans and programs. These include 
strategies to conserve water and manage demand and also 
to mitigate the impacts of drought. Local governments, First 
Nations and other water suppliers also participate in, or lead, 
multi-sector water and watershed planning initiatives. We all 
use water, so as citizens, farmers, ranchers and countless other 
businesses and industries that use water, we all share in the 
responsibilities to manage our water use.

Types of Water Supply & Demand Plans
This section of the guide profiles four specific types of plans:
 ▪ Water Conservation Plans
 ▪ Drought Management Plans
 ▪ Water Use Plans
 ▪ Water Allocation Plans

20


