Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development
 ▪  Provides water infrastructure and planning funding;
 ▪  Supports local government activities under the local 

government act;

 ▪  Assists with the development of regional growth strategies  

and relations between local government and first nations. 

Ministry of Public Safety and the Solicitor General
 ▪  Coordinates response to water-related emergencies such as 

floods, and provides funding to mitigate hazards.

Ministry of Aboriginal Relations and Reconciliation
 ▪  Leads the negotiation of treaties that consider water as  

a resource of interest.

Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure 
 ▪  Approves rural subdivision developments, including the 

assessment of potential risks and obstacles involving water 
supply and sewage disposal.

Environmental Assessment Office
 ▪  Coordinates the assessment of proposed major projects 

under the environmental assessment act to ensure they are 
conducted in a sustainable manner.

In addition to these roles and responsibilities, new  
provincial plans and policies are emerging. The following  
are two key developments.

Living Water Smart:
In June 2008 the provincial government released Living Water 
Smart: British Columbia’s Water Plan. The plan establishes new 
provincial water priorities to keep our water healthy and secure 
for the future by taking into consideration the challenging context 
of water management in BC today. In anticipation of continuing 
competing demands for water, a growing population, and the 
effects of climate change on our communities, Living Water Smart 
outlines 45 new commitments, divided into three categories: 
 ▪ Doing Business Differently.
 ▪ Preparing Communities for Change.
 ▪ Choosing to Be Water Smart.
The plan sets specific commitments and targets to help 
ensure that a finite supply of water (or potentially a reduced 
supply) will go further without compromising nature’s needs. 
For example:
 ▪  By 2012, government will regulate groundwater use in priority 

areas and large groundwater withdrawals.

 ▪  Government will support communities to do watershed 

management planning in priority areas.

 ▪  By 2020, water use in BC will be 33% more efficient.
 ▪  Government will improve the quality and protection of drinking 

water sources.

 ▪  50% of new municipal water needs will be acquired through 

conservation by 2020.

Many of these commitments and targets will have direct 
impacts on communities across the province. To help 
advance these commitments, the plan draws on a variety 
of policy “tools”, including planning, regulatory change, 
education, and incentives like economic instruments  
and rewards. 2 See Living Water Smart:  
http://livingwatersmart.ca/ for more information.

16

Looking Ahead – Modernizing the Water Act
As part of the commitment to Living 
Water Smart, and in response to new 
water management challenges including 
population growth and climate change, the BC 
Government is looking at ways to modernize 
the Water Act. Initiated in 2008, this significant 
undertaking is considering new arrangements 
to address water management challenges in 
BC, with the following goals:

1.  Protect stream health and aquatic 

environments;

2. Improve water governance arrangements;
3.  Introduce more flexibility and efficiency in  

the water allocation system; and,

4. Regulate groundwater extraction and use.
The initiative has included a public engagement 
process, distribution of a Discussion Paper, 
Technical Background Report, and a Report 
on Engagement. In December 2010, the BC 
Government released a Policy Proposal on 
BC’s new Water Sustainability Act for public 
comment. See www.livingwatersmart.ca/water-
act/ for more information.
At the time this Guide was published, 
Government was further refining the proposal 
and assessing implications. Every effort will 
be made to update this Guide to reflect any 
changes to planning related to the Water 
Sustainability Act if and when it is enacted.
Key policy areas under consideration and 
relevant to water and watershed planning 
include: 

 ▪   Protecting stream health and aquatic 

environments through the protection of 
instream flows through enforceable terms 
and conditions in water licences;

 ▪  Establishment of Provincial Water Objectives 
to guide decisions made by statutory decision 
makers under the new Act and other laws 
affecting land and resource use on Crown and 
private land;

 ▪  Regulation of groundwater extraction and use 

for all large groundwater withdrawals across 
BC and smaller withdrawals in problem areas. 
All existing and new large groundwater users 
throughout the province will be required to 
obtain a licence or an approval;

 ▪  Regulating water during times of scarcity 

using a staged approach that includes 
efficiency and conservation measures, priority 
date and proportional reduction targets;

 ▪  Enabling a range of economic instruments, 

incentives and best management practices to 
improve water security, water use efficiency, 
conservation and beneficial use;

 ▪  Additional requirements for measuring and 

reporting on water use;

 ▪  Enabling a range of governance 

 approaches to support increased 
collaboration and participation in activities 
and decision processes, including the ability 
to delegate responsibility for activities and 
decisions to others;


