Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
A Water Use Plan is a formal agreement that clarifies how water will 
be shared among water licensees while still providing adequate flows 
for fish and wildlife. A water licensee leads the planning process. 
The overarching goal of a Water Use Plan is to find “a better balance 
between competing uses of water, such as domestic water supply, 
fish and wildlife, recreating, heritage and electrical power needs, 
which are environmentally, socially and economically acceptable 
to British Columbians”. As such, Water Use Plans can help resolve 
conflicts among competing water users. To be effective, the plans 
need to consider all water uses and water licencees within a specified 
watercourse or watershed, as well as instream flow requirements for 
fish and aquatic ecosystems. 

A watershed-based approach is particularly relevant because it 
includes all water uses, including instream environmental flows. The 
water use planning process has provided valuable information about 
environmental flow requirements in many of BC’s water systems. 
Water Use Plans may result in an agreement to amend a water license, 
resulting in a change in legal rights. They can also support water use 
regulation through voluntary changes to water use within existing water 
rights. The Guidelines state that if there are financial impacts on the 
licensee related to a reduction in water rights, compensation for losses 
will be an important consideration.

The Water Use Plan process could be broadly applied to other licence 
holders in BC because it has shown “great promise in dealing with 
conflicts among owners of water licences and non-licenced users 
of water, such as fish and aquatic resources”. Local and regional 
governments may also develop Water Use Plans. For example, the 
District of Summerland in the Okanagan region used the water use 
planning process for Trout Creek (Summerland Water Use Plan). “Metro 
is developing a Joint Water Use Plan for the Seymour and Capilano 
Watersheds. This Water Use Plan is about how the reservoirs and 
dams are operated, how water is released from the reservoirs and how 
it is allocated (as examples: drinking water, fisheries habitat, proposed 
power generation)... The planning process will explore whether and how 
hydropower generation from existing reservoirs can be accommodated 
within Metro Vancouver’s commitment to: continue to supply clean, 
safe drinking water, protect fish habitat, adapt to climate variability and 
climate change. Other community interests such as recreation, culture 
and heritage, and safety, will be reviewed within the context of the 
planning process.“ (Metro Vancouver Water Use Plan).

To date, all Water Use Plans have been prepared for surface water 
resources. This type of planning process is unlikely to be applicable 
to groundwater resources within current contexts. Although the Water 
Act vests ownership of both surface and groundwater to the province 
of British Columbia, the Act does not require a licence to withdraw 
and use subsurface water. However, groundwater regulation is within 
the scope of the Water Act Modernization initiative. Assessing the role 
of groundwater resources in maintaining instream flows and related 
surface water values is extremely complicated. Therefore, Water Use 
Plans may be an inappropriate or impractical approach to planning 
for groundwater resources at this time. However, some of the other 
characteristics and benefits of Water Use Plans could potentially be 
adapted to plan for and manage groundwater resources. Facilitating 
collaborative, multi-sector planning to achieve a balance across multiple 
water users and management goals is a key attribute of Water Use 
Plans that could be adapted to groundwater strategies. 

As of 2010, 24 Water Use Plans had been completed for BC Hydro 
facilities. For more information on these plans see: Water Use Planning 
or BC Hydro Water Use Planning www.bchydro.com/planning_
regulatory/water_use_planning.html?WT.mc_id=rd_wup. 

Key Elements and Steps
The following are some of the key elements and steps in  
preparing a Water Use Plan:

24

 ▪  Develop the plan in accordance with the provincial water  
use plan guidelines; 
 ▪  Ensure the plan is consistent with the water act and the fisheries act;
 ▪  Develop the plan through an inclusive, consultative, multi-stakeholder 
planning process associated with a water act licence, and include 
local, provincial, federal and first nations governments, local citizens, 
industrial users, water licence holders and other interest groups;
 ▪  Undertake hydrological studies, modeling, and assessments 
of instream flow requirements to develop a water budget that 
characterizes water supply and demand within the planning area;
 ▪  Define the proposed operating parameters to be applied in the day-
to-day operations of hydroelectric or other water storage facilities;
 ▪  Under the water act the comptroller’s responsibility relates 
to amending waterpower licences and issuing orders to help 
implement: “operational changes, monitoring studies and physical 
works outlined in the plan”; and,
 ▪  Implement the plan in accordance with conditions stated in the 
water licence renewal or amendment, or through an engineers’ 
orders under the water act.

5.4 WAteR AllOCA tiOn PlAns
When planning for water allocation, a wide variety of human and 
ecosystem needs must be identified and balanced. Water allocation 
planning is an approach to achieving this balance in the future for 
a specified watershed or for a large water source. For example 
the Lemieux Creek Water Availability Report - 2004 is a water 
availability study that is used to some extent as a WAP. It is very 
important to undertake this type of planning before a watershed 
approaches its limits of available supply relative to future demands, 
and before drought or other extreme conditions threaten good 
relationships between stakeholders.

Water Allocation Plans were first developed on Vancouver Island, 
as a means to facilitate making water allocation decisions by the 
Regional Water Manager under the Water Act. WAPs for other 
regions of the province may follow. See Water Allocation Plans.

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
The Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations 
(MFLNRO) may lead or provide assistance to the WAP planning 
process. The plan allows for information about the Ministry’s position 
on water allocation decisions to be made available to future water 
license applicants and the public. By providing greater clarity, 
consistency and transparency regarding water allocation decisions, 


