 ▪  Water resource assessments that consider available and anticipated water supply and 

demand, and potential conditions for water use;

 ▪  Watershed sustainability plans in areas where degraded watersheds require recovery action 

and will affect both land and water development and use.

4.2 fedeRAl GOVeRnment
The Constitution Act assigns the federal government a specific set of water management 
responsibilities, including navigable waters, commercial fisheries and fish habitat, water 
on First Nations land, transboundary flows, international relations, trade and commerce, 
agriculture, and federal lands. 1 The federal government also develops water policy. For 
example, refer to: Federal Water Policy. The following are some of the key federal roles and 
responsibilities in water management and planning:

Environment Canada 
 ▪  Operates hydrometric, climate and water quality monitoring  

networks in partnership with the provincial ministry of environment; 

 ▪  Undertakes research on water quality and quantity, watershed  

management and climate change.

Fisheries and Oceans Canada
 ▪  Administers the fisheries act, which protects anadromous and marine fish habitats.

Aboriginal Affairs & Northern Development Canada
 ▪  Manages water on indian reserves jointly with First Nation governments.

Health Canada
 ▪  Sets drinking water standards for canadians.

Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
 ▪  Conducts research and provides information on water use in  

agriculture and agricultural impacts on the water resource.

Transport Canada
 ▪ Regulates transportation on water.

Natural Resources Canada
 ▪  Conducts research on groundwater and hydrologic impacts of climate change.
Over the years, the federal government has also had roles in funding infrastructure, including 
water, wastewater and flood protection infrastructure. In 2011, at the time this guide 
was completed, these functions were implemented through the Building Canada Fund, 
administered by Infrastructure Canada.

4.3 fiRst nA tiOns GOVeRnment
At present, the roles of First Nations in water planning, management and governance relate 
to legally assigned responsibilities in the administration of federal water policies, and the 
management of provincially or federally assigned roles. While Aboriginal rights to water 
have not been eliminated, and governance (i.e. jurisdiction) of water resources is a goal 
for many BC First Nations, few if any existing forums formalize Aboriginal rights to, and 
governance of, water. 

First Nations hold more than 700 active provincial water licences for a wide range of 
purposes associated with Indian Reserves. These licences are held either by a First Nation 
or jointly by the First Nation and Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada.

Legally, the protection and provision of water to First Nations is a responsibility of the federal 
government, specifically Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada (AANDC). 
Band Councils, AANDC and Health Canada share responsibilities for providing water services 
to Aboriginal communities. Band Councils are responsible for ensuring that drinking water 
systems are run in accordance with the Protocol for Safe Drinking Water in First Nations 
Communities (developed by AANDC), and for implementing drinking water monitoring 
programs on reserves. AANDC provides financial assistance for water facilities, and Health 
Canada works with communities to ensure water quality monitoring programs are in place, 
trains the monitors, and provides community-based education on water issues.3 However, 
concerns about the extent to which the federal government has met these responsibilities 

are well documented. Many First Nations have 
been left with limited capacity to manage water 
resources, and as a result, their populations are 
disproportionately vulnerable to water-borne 
diseases, drinking water advisories and health 
effects associated with poor water quality. 4  

Legally, the provincial government is obligated 
to consult with First Nations on water use 
decisions that might affect them. This relationship 
is defined by the Supreme Court of Canada 
(e.g., Delgamukw and Haida), and is reflected in 
the “New Relationship” that was struck in 2005 
between the Province and the First Nations 
Leadership Council. 5 

4.4 lOCAl GOVeRnment
Local governments have significant roles to play 
in water and watershed management. In BC, 
local government includes municipalities, regional 
districts, and improvement districts. In order 
for local governments to have jurisdiction over 
specific subjects, they first need authorization 
from the Province under the Community Charter 
and the Local Government Act. It is important to 
note that municipalities and regional districts have 
somewhat different jurisdictions and procedures. 
For example, for some water-related functions 
such as drainage and flood protection, regional 
districts may need to first establish a specific 
function and service delivery area following a 
referendum to confirm (or deny) public consent. 

In BC, local governments are gaining more 
discretionary powers over local matters, as 
demonstrated by changes to the Community 
Charter.6 The following are some of the key local 
government roles and responsibilities in water 
management and planning:

 ▪  Development and management of municipal water 

supplies, including treatment and distribution 
systems. This includes provision of safe drinking 
water in accordance with the public health act;
 ▪  Development and management of municipal 
drainage and wastewater treatment systems;

 ▪  Responsibility for floodplain management under 

the flood hazard statutes amendment act;

 ▪ Delivery of local water conservation programs;
 ▪  Responsibility for local land use planning and 
development on private lands, including the 
protection and management of riparian areas, 
wetlands and other sensitive habitats;

 ▪  Responsibility for the operation and maintenance 

of flood protection infrastructure in their local 
areas; and,

 ▪ Water and watershed planning.

17


