3.3 inteGRA tinG AdAPt AtiOn intO W AteR And W AteRshed PlAnninG – sOme exAmPles 

How can my community integrate climate science and adaptation 
into water and watershed planning to help prepare for, and 
manage the impacts of climate change?

Minimizing vulnerabilities and managing climate-related risks  
are only two of a number of criteria considered in water and 
watershed planning processes. 

In many cases, climate change exacerbates existing management 
challenges, such as water shortages, water use conflicts, 
protecting water quality and managing natural hazards. Therefore, 
when adaptation is integrated into water and watershed plans, 
consideration must be given to the degree to which climate 
change is compounding those problems and to how strategies 
and responses need to be refined to address additional pressures 
related to climate change. 

The ways in which adaptation is integrated into water and watershed 
planning will be influenced somewhat by the scope and detail of a 
particular plan. For example, if the plan presents broad goals and 

objectives, references to climate change adaptation may be general. 
However, if very specific targets and strategies are identified, the 
climate change scenarios, impacts, vulnerabilities and risks should 
inform those targets and strategies. The following are a few examples 
of how plans can be informed by considering climate change:

 ▪  A water conservation or drought management plan would be 
informed by future climate scenarios of drought events or water 
shortages rather than by historical levels of drought (e.g., an 
increased frequency and severity of drought).
 ▪  A stormwater, drainage, or flood management plan would 
be informed by current hydrological information and by an 
understanding of how the hydrological regime is anticipated to 
shift in response to climate change.
 ▪  A drinking water protection plan would be informed by 
information and knowledge about all possible threats to water 
quality, including climate-related impacts such as increased  
peak flows and turbidity. 

3.4 RefeRenCes

1  Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources (2010). First Nations Water Security and Climate Change: Workshop Report.

2   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007. IPCC Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007.  

www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_and_data_reports.htm#1 [Accessed November, 2010].

3   Kharin, V. V., F. W. Zwiers, X. Zhang & G. C. Hegerl (2007) Changes in Temperature and Precipitation Extremes in the IPCC Ensemble 

of Global Coupled Model Simulations. Journal of Climate, 20, 1419-1444. The summary of future climate change also includes 
information from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium Regional Analysis Tool and Plan2Adapt sites [Accessed October 2011].

4    Brown, G., T. van der Gulik, R. Fung, J. Finnie, M. Tanner, and J. Bradley. 2010. Beyond the Guidebook 2010: Implementing a New 

Culture for Urban Watershed Protection and Restoration in British Columbia.  
www.waterbucket.ca/rm/?sid=45&id=642&type=single [Accessed December 2010].

5    Haley, D. and H. Auld. 2000. Integration of Climate Change into Watershed Management. Paper presented at the  

Ontario Water Conference, Challenges and Solutions, April 2000.

6  Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources (2010). First Nations Water Security and Climate Change: Workshop Report.

13


