 ▪  Consult with those affected to improve the 

quality of decisions and build community 
confidence in the fairness of outcomes.

 ▪  Give high priority to ensuring that the values and 

interests of indigenous peoples are included.

 ▪  Develop capacity for learning and improving over 

time and the ability to evaluate the process.

 ▪  Provide adequate resources to develop  
and implement water plans and evaluate  
their outcomes.

 ▪  Improve monitoring and compliance of the use 

of water and other watershed resources. 

Ideally, watershed plans and the organizations 
involved in implementing the plans should 
emerge from the planning process with:

 ▪  Improved understanding of the watershed  

and how it functions

 ▪  Clear objectives of how to manage the water 

sustainably and in an integrated manner

 ▪  Clearly specified community and 

environmental outcomes

 ▪  Decisions that are based on the best  

available information

 ▪  Adequately resourced management  

and implementation

 ▪  Good integration with other regional and 

resource-based plans

It should be acknowledged that planning would 
not solve all of the water-related challenges 
and conflicts throughout BC. However, it is an 
important component of the management and 
governance of water resources and watersheds.

2.3 An intROduCtiOn tO  
WAteRsheds
Everything in the natural world is connected to 
other parts. Changes made to one element of 
a system affect many other elements and/or 
process throughout the system. A watershed—
an area of land that contributes runoff to a lake, 
river, stream, estuary or bay—is a complex 
and dynamic natural system. Changes to land 
cover in upland regions of a watershed affect 
downstream hydrology; waste inputs from 
one community can affect water quality further 
downstream. Impacts to an aquifer, such as 
water withdrawal, may ultimately affect the flow 
and health of a nearby stream. The various 
resources that interact within a watershed—the 
land, the surface and ground water, the air and 
the organisms within the watershed—cannot 
be considered in isolation. By recognizing the 
interconnections between the components of a 
watershed and by integrating this understanding 
into planning and decision making within and 
across watershed boundaries, negative human 
impacts on watershed health are more likely to 
be more effectively managed. 

 ▪  Involve key decision makers and partners. 

Consider who should be engaged in the process 
in order for it to work. Strong partnerships make 
for a strong plan.

 ▪  Characterize the area / issue to identify problems. 

If a problem is defined too narrowly, innovative 
solutions may be overlooked.

 ▪  Model or analyze the situation or problem. It is 

important to understand the causes of the problem, 
as well as the dynamics that may help solve it.

 ▪  Set goals and identify potential solutions, 

including resource requirements, and 
implementation and feedback procedures.

 ▪  Evaluate potential solutions in terms of technical 

feasibility, cost effectiveness, probable effects  
and political acceptability

 ▪  Make decisions and design an  

implementation program.

 ▪ Implement solutions and take action.
 ▪  Monitor and evaluate the success of the plan and 

its implementation.

 ▪ Modify the plan as required.
Planning with water in mind, or water centric 
planning, is a primary objective of Living Water 
Smart, British Columbia’s Water Plan. Historically, 
the provincial government coordinated planning 
for water resources. More recently, First Nations, 
local governments, stewardship groups and 
other community stakeholders have shared 
this responsibility. Examples of collaborative 
approaches to planning are profiled throughout 
this guide. Living Water Smart advocates for 
water and watershed planning to continue to be a 
shared, collaborative endeavour.

There is no absolute template to follow for water 
and watershed planning. Every planning process 
and every plan is different. There are, however, 
many elements that are critical to the success of 
watershed plans. With this in mind, recommended 
guidelines for watershed planning processes 
include the following: 

 ▪  Develop a clear vision, goals, objectives and action 

items; and set priorities among these.

 ▪  Seek involvement and support from elected 
decision-makers and those with legislative or 
regulatory responsibilities. The relevant decision 
makers have much to offer towards a plan that 
can be implemented.

 ▪  Ensure full representation of all affected parties, 
while keeping the size of the process workable. 
 ▪  Ensure that the planning process is understood, 

used and broadly supported.

 ▪  Provide access to appropriate technical and 

analytical skills and information resources.

 ▪ Obtain sustainable funding.
 ▪  Strive for planning that is done before  
further development will undermine the 
effectiveness of the plan. 

 ▪  Factor in the impacts of climate change and 

interception activities (e.g., farm dams and forestry) 
on future water inflows and recharge.

 ▪  Include socio-economic analyses to  

inform planning.

6


