Communities and ecosystems in BC are 
experiencing unprecedented changes at many 
different scales related to population growth, 
settlement patterns, use of natural resources, 
release of waste products into the environment, 
and a changing climate. From these changes, 
flow many impacts, including impacts to water 
resources, watershed health, and community 
health and sustainability.

Communities rely on water and watersheds for 
several immeasurable values including:

 ▪  A safe, secure, and adequate supply of water  

for domestic, agricultural, commercial, industrial,  
recreational and tourism uses;

 ▪  A receiving environment for wastewater 

discharges;

 ▪ Provision of fish, wildlife, habitat and biodiversity;
 ▪  Provision of ecosystems services including 

moderation of flooding, erosion and  
sedimentation processes;

 ▪  A host of other social, cultural, economic and 

spiritual values.

Planning plays a critical role in how communities  
define their vision of the future and their path to 
achieve that vision. Planning can be reactive or 
responsive, helping to make course corrections 
in response to existing issues and challenges. It 
can also be proactive in anticipating emerging 
issues on the horizon and helping communities 
to prepare for and manage those issues. When 
it comes to communities and watersheds, there 
may be as many different approaches to planning, 
as there are communities. 

However, there are many common principles, 
practices and desired outcomes across the 
spectrum of different planning processes used in 
BC and beyond. These are discussed in further 
detail in the sections that follow. 

Section 2 of this guide provides an overview of 
planning for water and watersheds. The rationale 
for and benefits of water and watershed planning 
are described, and examples of the desired 
outcomes of planning are identified. Overall 
guidelines for designing a planning process are 
described as well as some general challenges and 
opportunities associated with watershed planning 
processes. Ten different planning processes are 
profiled. These are described in more detail in 
later sections of the guide (5, 6, 7). See section 
8 for a more detailed discussion about several 
concepts that are relevant to planning for water 
and watersheds, including integrated watershed 
planning, water centric planning, design with 
nature and the soft path approach.

Section 3 provides general information about 
the impacts of climate change on water and 
watersheds in BC. Some basic information 
about how to identify local and regional climate 
vulnerabilities, risks and risk management 
strategies, and how to integrate climate change 
into these strategiesis also provided. 

Lastly, this section includes general comments about  
how climate change information might influence water and 
watershed planning processes, resulting in plans that help 
communities address the impacts of climate change.

Section 4 provides information about the roles and  
responsibilities of different agencies and organizations in  
water planning, management and governance. 

These include:
 ▪ Provincial Government
 ▪ Federal Government
 ▪ First Nations Government
 ▪ Local Government
 ▪ Other Organizations

In addition to roles and responsibilities, Section 4 includes some 
additional information regarding Living Water Smart: BC’s Water 
Plan and modernization of the Water Act. 

Sections 5, 6 and 7 provide information about a variety of 
specific approaches to water and watershed planning. These 
sections provide an introduction and overview of each of the 
different approaches to water and watershed planning, including 
a general description, an overview of the key elements and 
steps, as well as the characteristics, benefits and applications 
of each planning process. The planning processes have been 
grouped into the following three themes:

Section 5: Managing Water Supply & Demand
1. Water Conservation Plans 
2. Drought Management Plans 
3. Water Use Plans 
4. Water Allocation Plans

Section 6: Protecting Drinking Water Quality
1. Well / Aquifer Protection Plans 
2. Source Water Assessments and Assessment Response Plans 
3. Drinking Water Protection Plans

Section 7: Integrating Water, Land & Watersheds
1. Water Management Plans (Water Act, Part 4) 
2. Watershed Management Plans 
3. Rainwater and Stormwater Management Plans

Section 8 provides a synthesis of several relevant issues to 
consider in relation to water and watershed planning. Several 
common themes emerged from the literature that was reviewed 
in the preparation of this guide, from project advisors, from 
interviews with communities and from water and watershed 
planning case studies. These broad themes are shared to help 
communities build a deeper understanding about the dynamics  
of watershed planning. These themes include:
1. Rethinking Watersheds and Planning 
2. Community Collaboration and Engagement  
3. Regional Approaches 
4. Resourcing Water and Watershed Initiatives  
5. Data, Information and Knowledge Resources

Section 9 of the guide includes several Tools and Resources to 
provide additional sources of information to support individuals and 
organizations on their path through water and watershed planning.
Find the web version of this guide at www.rethinkingwater.ca. The 
web version includes more details on climate change, lessons 
learned and tools and resources. 

3


