Key Elements and Steps
In partnership with the BC Ground Water Association, the Province of BC published 
the Well Protection Toolkit, which was updated in 2006. Over the last five years, 
communities in BC have been using the toolkit to develop protection plans for their 
wells and aquifers, and to prevent contamination of their groundwater supply. The 
toolkit presents a six-step approach to developing and implementing a protection plan 
to prevent well water contamination. The six steps, briefly summarized, are as follows:  
1. Form a community planning team;
2.  Define the capture zone (recharge area) of the community well or aquifer;
3.  Map potential sources of pollution in the capture zone;
4.  Develop and implement protection measures to prevent pollution;
5.  Develop a contingency plan for any accidents; and 
6.  Monitor, evaluate and report on the plan annually.

These six steps can be incorporated as a policy commitment into Official Community 
Plans or as part of Water Management Plans.4 However, there is some uncertainty 
about the authority of local governments to invoke the protection measures referred to 
above, as well as the resource capacity to enforce these protection measures.

6.2 sOuRCe W AteR Assessments & Assessment ResPOnse PlAns
Drinking water source and system assessments are a critical starting point for drinking 
water protection, and are integral to understanding the state of BC’s drinking water 
supplies, and what needs to be done to improve them. Water providers often do not 
have any control over land uses in the watersheds from which they get their drinking 
water. They may not be aware of natural conditions or human activities within a 
watershed that affect surface and subsurface water quality. Proper assessments can 
help identify opportunities for preventative or remedial action, and give both the water 
providers and their customers confidence that source protection is a management 
priority in the region. 

Under Part 3 of the Drinking Water Protection Act, a drinking water protection officer 
may order a water supplier to complete a water source and system assessment.        

The purpose of the assessment is to:

 ▪  Assess the drinking water source in relation to land uses within the  
watershed and activities that may affect the source;
 ▪  Inventory the water supply system, including treatment options and  
operational procedures;
 ▪  Assess the monitoring requirements for the drinking water source and  
water supply system; and;
 ▪  Identify current and potential future threats to drinking water. 
The Ministry of Health has produced both the Source to Tap Screening Tool, which 
can be used to used as a secondary method for assessing risk in drinking water 
systems, and the Comprehensive Drinking Water Source-to-Tap Assessment 
Guideline, which serves as a tool to help water system managers develop a better 
understanding of the risks to drinking water safety and availability. The guideline 
provides a structured and consistent approach to evaluating and managing risks to 
drinking water. The outcomes of a Source Water Assessment determine whether or 
not an Assessment Response Plan is required. 6

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
After reviewing a completed source and system assessment, a drinking water protection 
officer may order a water supplier to complete an Assessment Response Plan, as outlined 
under Section 22 of the Drinking Water Protection Act. These plans are intended to identify 
measures that can be taken to address identified threats to drinking water. 

Currently, the regulations do not state when source water assessments will be 
required; however, the Drinking Water Officer’s Guide outlines some of the conditions 
under which an assessment may be required. It is not yet clear what role, if any, the 
public will have in this process. 

Key Elements and Steps
Assessment Response Plans are intended to 
identify reasonable measures that can be taken 
to address threats to drinking water, as identified 
in a Source Water Assessment. Some of the 
provisions that a drinking water protection officer 
may ask to be addressed in the plan include: 

 ▪  Increasing public engagement and  
awareness to encourage the protection of 
drinking water sources;
 ▪  The preparation of guides relating to best 
management and conservation practices;
 ▪ Minor or major infrastructure improvements;
 ▪  The initiation of cooperative planning and/
or voluntary programs related to water 
conservation; and
 ▪  Recommendations regarding local authority 
zoning and/or land use regulations.1

6.3 dRinkinG W AteR   
PROteCtiOn PlAns
Drinking Water Protection Plans (DWPPs) are 
designed to protect water quality and quantity 
from a wide range of pressures. The plans are 
typically developed for a specific source of 
drinking water supply, such as a watercourse, 
watershed, reservoir or aquifer. Therefore, they 
are relevant to area-based planning for both 
surface water (watersheds) and groundwater 
(aquifers), where the threats to water quality and 
quantity are dispersed across a wide landscape. 
Within these plans, it is important to consider all 
potential threats to the water source; therefore, a 
watershed-based approach – at the appropriate 
scale – is particularly relevant. 

As of 2011, no DWPPs had been completed 
or designated in BC. They are considered 
to be a last resort because of the stringent 
requirements associated with them, and should 
only be considered where it can be established 
that regulatory tools are required to achieve 
the planning objectives. DWPPs should only 
be required when other plans fail to address or 
prevent a threat to drinking water. However, there 
are circumstances where threats to drinking water 
could lead to negative consequences (such as a 
health hazard) where no other measures under the 
Drinking Water Protection Act would prevent the 
health hazard from occurring.

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
DWPPs are authorized under Part 5 of the 
Drinking Water Protection Act and are intended 
to address concerns about water quantity and 
water quality. Based on the recommendation of 
a drinking water protection officer, the Provincial 
Health Officer may recommend that the Minister 
of Health designate an area for a DWPP. Drinking 

30


