7. integrating Water,  
land & Watersheds

There are many diverse pressures and challenges 
on water resources and watersheds in BC.

In this section, we examine the full spectrum of water and watershed issues 
and explore the value of adopting an integrated approach to planning and 
management. The context for integrated planning includes the breadth 
of issues that were raised in sections 5 (water supply and demand) and 
6 (protecting drinking water quality). In addition, integrated watershed 
planning considers issues related to watershed functions, ecosystem 
health, connections between land use and water, as well as water quality 
within lakes, rivers and streams. 

The challenges and pressures associated with watershed health include 
population growth, community and economic development, and a wide 
variety of point and non-point sources of pollution. It is also becoming 
increasingly important to consider the impacts of climate change when 
developing planning processes, implementing those plans and making 
water management decisions.

As noted in section 6, healthy watersheds, riparian areas, wetlands, 
floodplains and natural land covers such as forests provide important 
habitat for fish and wildlife, help to filter and process pollutants, slow 
water down, reducing stormwater runoff and flooding while allowing for 
the deposition of suspended sediments. When the natural functioning of a 
watershed is compromised by human activities, integrated approaches to 
water and watershed planning can be helpful, and may well be necessary. 

The responsibilities for protecting watershed health and the 
interconnections between water quantity and quality are widely distributed 
among federal, provincial, First Nations, and local governments, and other 
organizations. In many BC communities, the challenge of navigating highly 
complex water and land use issues is pointing to the need for an integrated 
and collaborative approach to watershed planning and governance. 
Integrated planning involves a broad-based analysis of local and regional 
water quantity, water quality and other watershed issues, as well as the 
interconnections between these issues.

Types of Integrated Water & Watershed Planning

The following planning processes encourage more integrated and holistic 
approaches and can help to address a variety of water supply, demand, 
and quality issues, and include: 

 ▪ Water Management Plans (Water Act, Part 4)
 ▪ Watershed Management Plans
 ▪ Stormwater (Rainwater) Management Plans

32


