Key Elements and Steps
The Dealing With Drought Handbook – 
published by the BC Ministry of Environment in 
2004 and available online – provides a common 
template for developing Drought Management 
Plans. The following are some of the key 
elements and steps in preparing such a plan:

 ▪ Establish a local drought management team;
 ▪  Document the membership and  
operating procedures of the local drought 
management team.
 ▪ Document the water system profile;
 ▪  Evaluate the potential impacts of drought  
on the region’s economy;
 ▪  Evaluate the potential impacts of drought  
on the social & environmental well-being  
of the region;
 ▪  Identify data requirements, frequency of data 
collection and reporting protocols on local 
water supplies and climate;
 ▪  Develop clear definitions of local drought stages 
and corresponding local responses; and
 ▪ Prepare communications plans. 
The province of BC has established a Drought 
Management Framework – refer to Drought 
Information, for information on: 

 ▪ Drought Advisories;
 ▪  Levels of Water Shortages and  
Drought Conditions;
 ▪ The Provincial Drought Response;
 ▪ Individual Drought Response Measures;
 ▪ Resources; and
 ▪  Snow Surveys and Additional Important Info.

5.3 WAteR use PlAns
When it comes to water planning and 
management, a wide variety of human uses 
and instream environmental needs must be 
considered and balanced. Water use planning 
is one approach to achieving this balance 
for a specified watercourse, watershed and/
or water facility such as a reservoir. To date, 
Water Use Plans (WUP) have for the most part 
been associated with waterpower licences 
that are held by BC Hydro. The Comptroller of 
Water Rights or other appropriate authorities 
under the Water Act may require that a WUP 
be prepared for any existing licence. Expected 
priorities for the completion of plans are power 
developments, municipal water systems, and 
larger-scale industrial operations. WUPs may 
also be required for other water control facilities 
where there is an undesirable effect on fish, 
aquatic habitat, or other important values. While 
WUPs for existing licences may be required as 
needs are identified, plans may also be required 
as a condition of proponents seeking new 
licences for larger-scale operations (industrial, 
agricultural, municipal, or other facilities), or 
for works located on particularly valuable or 
sensitive streams.

23

Significant drought is characterized by particularly low stream flows. 

“In British Columbia, drought may be caused by combinations of insufficient snow 
accumulation, hot and dry weather or a delay in rainfall. Hydrological drought is associated 
with the effect of low precipitation on water levels in rivers, reservoirs, lakes and aquifers. 
Hydrological drought affects uses which depend on ground and surface water levels and 
stream flows.”  –Living Water Smart 3   

BC communities have experienced drought in the past and will continue to do so in 
the future. Drought is a projected impact of climate change in BC so communities 
might experience more frequent or severe drought conditions than in the past. Drought 
circumstances can have profound impacts on the socio-economic and environmental 
health of communities including agriculture and food. Aquatic ecosystems and fisheries 
are also affected by drought conditions. When water availability is very low, there can also 
be concerns about water quality, because pollution levels are relatively concentrated, and 
more bacteria can survive in warmer water. Lower water availability can also lead to higher 
costs of water, and restrictions on water use. Water use restrictions can in turn impact 
business operations, employment, personal use and tourism. There is a strong rationale for 
undertaking a broad assessment and analysis of overall water allocation in a community or 
region to help inform the development and implementation of a Drought Management Plan. 

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
Drought management plans are an important means of minimizing the impacts of water 
shortages and drought in a region. Similar to water conservation plans, they focus on 
managing demand, reducing consumption and improving efficiency of water use. Like 
conservation plans, effective drought management plans need to consider all water uses 
(including household, industrial, commercial, institutional and agricultural). These plans 
place an emphasis on reducing water demand but are developed to address the extreme 
circumstances associated with drought. 

Drought management plans are typically developed at the community or regional scale. It is 
important to consider all uses of a particular water supply such as a watershed or aquifer, and 
the interactions between water supplies. A watershed-based approach is particularly relevant 
because a drought event typically affects a large area and all types of water supplies.

A key characteristic of drought management plans is that they identify drought stages 
and trigger appropriate response actions. The Province of BC uses a four level drought 
classification (normal, dry, very dry and extremely dry) to describe the severity of drought 
conditions and appropriate levels of response. Drought management plans develop specific 
responses to these drought stages and triggers (e.g., limiting lawn watering if a reservoir 
drops to a specified level).

Drought management plans should be developed before conditions require their use. 
Because of the potentially severe socio-economic and environmental impacts of droughts, 
emotions can run very high during these events. Therefore, planning well in advance of a 
drought will allow more time for thoughtful, rational and comprehensive planning than when 
a community is already experiencing a drought situation. A proactive approach also enables 
farmers, ranchers, other businesses, institutions and households to assess the plans in 
advance of a drought and offer feedback. These groups of stakeholders can also take 
measures to prepare for the challenges and opportunities associated with implementing 
drought management and water conservation measures.


