water quality. Stormwater management plans need to be integrated with Official Community  
Plans and zoning bylaws that regulate the location of development and density of use. 5

Some benefits of undertaking stormwater management planning and implementing  
completed plans include:
 ▪  Protection of the aquatic environment, including water quality and stream flow,  
and protection from flooding;
 ▪  Protection of community assets and infrastructure from localized flooding;
 ▪  Protection of water supply (e.g., groundwater recharge areas); 
 ▪  Management of erosion and sedimentation processes; and
 ▪  Protection of aesthetic values and recreational uses of water.

Key Elements and Steps
The Stormwater Planning Guidebook provides a detailed explanation of the various  
stages of preparing a plan. It outlines three key steps and associated methods that  
work towards integrated stormwater management solutions, and five guiding  
principles to uphold in the process, as outlined below. They include the following:

Stormwater Planning Steps
1.  Identify at-risk catchments;
2.  Set preliminary performance targets; and,
3.   Select appropriate stormwater management site design solutions.

Guiding Principles of Integrated Stormwater Management (ADAPT)
1.  Agree that stormwater is a resource;
2.   Design for a complete spectrum of rainfall events;
3.  Act on a priority basis in at-risk catchments;
4.   Plan at four scales (regional, watershed, neighbourhood and site); and,
5.   Test solutions and reduce costs by adaptive management.

7.4 RefeRenCes

1   Watershed Watch Salmon Society et al (2009). Fish Out of Water: 
Tools to Protect British Columbia’s Groundwater and Wild Salmon.

2   BC Ministry of Environment (2010). British Columbia’s Water 

Act Modernization: Discussion Paper. Victoria, BC. www.
livingwatersmart.bc.ca [Accessed February 2010]. 

3   Okanagan Water Stewardship Council (2008). Okanagan 
Sustainable Water Strategy, Action Plan 1.0, Burnaby, BC.

4   Environmental Protection Agency (2008). Handbook for Developing 

Watershed Plans to Restore and Protect Our Waters. EPA 841-B-
08-002 http://water.epa.gov/polwaste/nps/handbook_index.cfm.

5    West Coast Environmental Law (2009). BC Guide to Watershed 

Law & Planning http://watershedguide.wcel.org/ [Accessed 
February 2010].

6    McGuire, Gordon, N. Wyper, M. Chan, A. Campbell, S. Bernstein 

and J. Vivian (2010). Re-inventing Rainwater Management: a 
Strategy to Protect Health and Restore Nature in the Capital 
Region. A submission to the Capital Regional District on behalf 
of the Veins of Life Watershed Society by the Environmental Law 
Clinic, University of Victoria. Victoria, BC.

37


