3.1 ClimA te ChAnGe imPACts On W AteR
Climate, in a narrow sense, is usually defined as the ”average weather” over a period of 
time. Some of the most familiar climate parameters are temperature, precipitation, humidity, 
cloudiness, and wind. Climate change refers to a change in the state of the climate which 
can be identified by changes in the mean and/or variability of these parameters, and which 
persists for a period of decades or longer. 2   

Climate change science suggests that by the middle of the century (2050s), mean annual 
temperatures across BC will be 1-3° C warmer on average. Extremely warm temperatures 
will become more frequent. A warmer climate will increase growing degree days and frost 
free days – increasing the potential for plant growth. In winter, most parts of BC will receive 
up to 20% more precipitation. In summer, northern BC will be up to 10% wetter, and 
southern BC will be up to 15% drier. In winter and spring, snowfall will decrease. 3 These are 
significant changes from a water perspective.

Water resources and the hydrologic cycle are significantly influenced by the climate. 
Therefore, water resources are highly sensitive to year-to-year climate variability as well as 
long-term changes in climate. Changes in air temperature and precipitation patterns are 
noticeably affecting our weather, water cycles and ecology, and are creating impacts on 
forests, fisheries, agriculture, recreational opportunities and communities across the province. 

Climate change includes changes in the average climate, such as a general warming in 
mean annual air temperature, and changes in the frequency of extreme temperature and 
precipitation events. Changes in climate will affect physical systems, including stream flows.  
Impacts will vary from one location to another and will include lower “normal” stream flows 
(i.e., average seasonal and annual flows) and more frequent drought and flood conditions. 
There may also be larger streamflows in some regions including larger and earlier peak flows. 
Changes in both climate averages and extremes may have a wide range of impacts on 
water and watershed resources and these impacts will vary between different regions of the 
province. Therefore, we need to consider these impacts within water and watershed plans to 
strengthen the ability of communities to manage such impacts. Projected changes are highly 
dependent upon location, topography, and watershed type. Some examples of impacts 
related to climate change are:

 ▪  Decreased seasonal and/or annual water supplies, which may lead to increased conflict among 

water users and between human consumption and water uses within the natural environment;

 ▪  Degraded water quality, which may impact the suitability of water for drinking and for 

agricultural, commercial, industrial, recreational and environmental water uses; and

 ▪  Increased frequency and severity of drought, flood and extreme rainfall events, which may 

impact water supplies, drainage infrastructure, other critical infrastructure, public and 
private property, and—in extreme circumstances— human health.

These and other climate-related impacts will be discussed in more detail in Sections 3, 5, 6 
and 7 of this guide, along with suggestions on how to integrate and address these issues 
within water and watershed plans. 

As expressed in Living Water Smart, British Columbia’s Water Plan,“we need to design 
our communities to adapt to our changing climate while thinking long term to revitalize 

our natural systems”. At a 2008 conference 
of the BC Water and Waste Association, Jim 
Mattison, former Assistant Deputy Minister, 
Water Stewardship Division, BC Ministry of 
Environment, spoke to water managers about the 
two responses to climate change: mitigation and 
adaptation.“Mitigation and adaptation are both 
necessary and complementary strategies to cope 
with the climate change challenge. If mitigation 
(alleviating the effects of climate change through 
reducing greenhouse gasses) is about carbon, 
then adaptation (preparing for the changes that 
occur) is about water”. 4 While human systems 
within impacted watersheds “may adapt to climate 
change, albeit at some cost, natural ecosystems 
and wildlife cannot adapt very quickly to a sudden, 
large change and hence are at risk.” 5  

Climate change impacts on water resources, 
watershed health, and communities are 
anticipated to be complex and significant, and 
are expected to vary for different regions of 
the province. Projected changes are highly 
dependent upon location, topography, and 
watershed type. In general there are four different 
types of watersheds with different hydrological 
regimes, and differences in how these 
watersheds are affected by climate change need 
to be considered within water, watershed, and/or 
adaptation planning:
 ▪ Rain-dominated watersheds
 ▪ Snow-dominated watersheds
 ▪ Transition watersheds
 ▪  Coastal watersheds (rain and transition, but with 

added the impact of sea level rise).

The range of potential climate-related impacts on 
water, watersheds and communities across BC 
include the following (see also setion 9. Tools and 
Resources for other sources of information on 
climate impacts):

Hydrology and Geomorphology
 ▪  Changes in the hydrology of rivers, streams and 
watersheds, including the volume and timing of 
water discharge (e.g., increased frequency and 
magnitude of both peak [flood] flows and low 
[drought] flows)

 ▪  Changes in the geomorphology of rivers, streams 

and watersheds, including the volume, sources 
and destinations of sediment transport (e.g., 
increased rates and shifting locations of erosion 
and sedimentation processes)

Water Quantity
 ▪  In some regions, more frequent water shortages 
and increased potential for competition among 
water uses (e.g., hydroelectricity, irrigation, 
communities, recreation and instream flow needs 
for aquatic ecosystems), with implications for 
transboundary agreements in some cases.

 ▪  In some regions there may be an overall reduction 

in annual water supply, particularly where water 
supplies are partially dependent on snowpack or 
glaciers and where water storage is limited.

9


