6. Protecting  
drinking Water Quality

Drinking water in BC communities comes from a 
variety of surface and groundwater sources.

There are diverse pressures and challenges to be considered when 
planning and managing for drinking water quality. These include 
a wide variety of point sources (e.g. wastewater discharges from 
sewage treatment, commercial and industrial facilities) and non-
point sources (e.g. runoff from urban development, agriculture, 
forestry and other land uses) of pollution. Natural processes, such 
as flooding, landslides, erosion and sediment transport can also 
impact water quality with turbidity and water-borne pathogens 
(such as E. coli, Cryptosporidium, and Giardia). It is also important 
to consider the impacts of climate change when planning and 
managing for drinking water in BC.

Healthy watersheds can contribute significantly to clean surface 
and groundwater sources because healthy watersheds purify 
water, and vegetated riparian areas filter and process pollutants 
such as heavy metals, oils, sediment and waste products. Aquatic 
ecosystems, such as wetlands and rivers, filter water, allow for 
the deposition of suspended sediments and provide extra storage 
capacity in times of high precipitation. Natural states of land 
cover, such as forest ecosystems, also help to naturally manage 
stormwater runoff and reduce flooding risks, and provide important 
habitat for fish and wildlife. When the health and functionality of 

a watershed is compromised by human intervention, changes to 
water quality can occur and additional planning and management 
may be needed.

The primary responsibilities for protecting water quality are shared by 
all orders of government including federal (departments of Aboriginal 
Affairs and Northern Development, Environment, and Fisheries and 
Oceans), provincial (ministries of Health and Environment), regional 
health authorities, First Nations, municipalities, regional districts, 
other water suppliers. When you consider the variety of pressures on 
water quality, we all have roles in the protection of water quality. The 
roles and responsibilities for drinking water treatment vary across 
the province, but lie primarily with municipalities, regional districts, or 
other water suppliers, with oversight by the BC Ministry of Health and 
Regional Health Authorities.

Types of Planning for Protecting Drinking Water Quality

This section of the guide profiles three specific types of plans:
 ▪ Well (Aquifer) Protection Plans
 ▪ Source Water Assessments and Assessment Response Plans
 ▪ Drinking Water Protection Plans

26


