Challenges and Pressures
Water quality is a significant issue in some 
communities, particularly where there are threats 
to, or pressures on, community water supplies. 
In some regions in BC drinking water treatment 
capacity is limited due to supply issues, and the 
health of aquatic ecosystems is threatened by 
point or non-point sources of pollution.

For some local governments meeting provincial 
drinking water standards is a challenge. All BC 
Health Authorities are required to meet or exceed 
the Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water 
Quality. The Vancouver Island Health Authority 
developed its own interpretation of the guidelines 
with the introduction of the 4-3-2-1 Initiative. This 
initiative is now used by Health Authorities across 
BC to ensure compliance. In some communities, 
compliance with the guidelines will require the 
installation of new treatment plants, which 
can be a considerable added cost. Because 
the pressures on water quality are so diverse, 
ultimately it is everyone’s responsibility to take 
care of our water resources, including protection 
of water quality at the source.

Boil Water Advisories
Boil water advisories are issued to residents 
and other water users when a drinking water 
source is contaminated or there is a known 
risk of contamination. Advisories consider the 
water source, water quality, and distribution 
and filtration processes. Therefore, the number 
of boil water advisories issued reflects both the 
quality of drinking water sources in the area and 
the adequacy of treatment systems to provide 
clean water. Over the past decade, the number 
of boil water advisories in BC has increased. This 
may be due to several reasons related to actual 
deterioration of water quality, or greater focus on 
monitoring and attention to risk. In 2008, the BC 
Ministry of Health documented 530 boil water 
advisories. Most of those advisories were on 
smaller water systems that were serving between 
15 and 5000 people. 2 

Land Use and Non-Point  
Sources of Pollution 
Urban, industrial and agricultural activities can pose 
serious threats to water quality. These land uses 
are associated with a variety of pollutants including 
nitrates from manure and synthetic fertilizers 
applied to agricultural lands, sedimentation from 
eroding soils and stream banks through urban 
development, and toxic chemicals from a variety 
of industrial, commercial and household sources. 
Development activities near shallow wells or above 
unconfined aquifers (e.g. aquifers that do not have 
an impermeable layer above them to protect the 
water from surface pollutants), increase the risk of 
contamination, and are of particular concern. 

Vulnerable Aquifers
Presently, no permits are required to drill a well or 
extract well water in BC. This lack of groundwater 
regulation is a key challenge; however, this may 

change with modernization of the Water Act. Drinking water quality concerns may be elevated 
in communities that rely primarily on groundwater sources. This is because groundwater 
sources are difficult to clean once contaminated, contamination can more easily occur 
without anyone knowing about it, and because they require more time for natural recycling 
and replacement of water than do surface water sources. Therefore, once water quality is 
degraded, it takes much longer for contaminants to be diluted or removed. This is a concern 
to communities such as Langley BC, which sources 80% of its drinking water from wells.

Source Protection and Upstream Activities
In many cases, resource-related activities on private and Crown lands, such as forestry, 
ranching, agriculture and mining, can effect nearby or downstream community water 
supplies. Often these activities take place “upstream” of community water supplies, 
and may be outside of the jurisdiction of local or regional governments. Typically, local 
governments do not have the authority to regulate or stop these resource practices. There 
is also a limitation of government authority when it comes to agriculture even within local 
government boundaries. For example, farm bylaws require approval by the Province of BC 
before coming into effect.

Climate Considerations
Climate change is impacting, and will continue to impact, water quality through a variety of 
mechanisms throughout BC. Increased frequency and severity of drought and flood events, 
low summer flows, warmer freshwater temperatures, reduced dilution / assimilative capacity, 
and increased erosion, turbidity and sedimentation are just a few examples. These and 
other climate-related impacts should be addressed in plans that consider medium to long-
term pressures on water quality. The plans should develop solutions for dealing with those 
pressures. See sections 3 and 9 of this guide for information, tools and resources about 
climate change impacts on water, related community vulnerabilities and risks, as well as 
considerations about how climate impacts can be managed through water and watershed 
planning as well as adaptation. 

6.1 Well (AQuifeR) PROteCtiOn PlAns
Well Protection Plans can be developed to provide protective measures for minimizing and 
preventing undesirable impacts from land use activities on subsurface community water 
sources. Many wells that provide water to communities or municipalities are located in areas 
where human activities can affect water quality. The impact is most severe where these 
“community wells” draw water from shallow aquifers that are vulnerable to contamination 
from land use activities and non-point sources of pollution. Protecting source water through 
a well protection plan is one of the steps in the multi-barrier approach to drinking water 
protection. Approximately 40 Well Protection Plans have been established in BC. The 
Ministry of Environment is the lead agency for the Well Protection Toolkit.

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
Well or aquifer protection plans focus on protecting groundwater quality from potential 
pollution sources. These sources of pollution may come from the land above or near to the 
aquifer or well, or they may infiltrate into the groundwater source from elsewhere. These 
plans examine water quality threats from a variety of sources, including residential, industrial, 
commercial, institutional and agricultural land uses as well as natural resource development. 
Aquifer-wide plans are more likely to be effective and deliver water quality benefits than 
a plan that is focused on an individual well without looking at the broader connections of 
multiple wells and pollution sources across an entire aquifer.

In BC, Well Protection Plans may be required under the following circumstances:

 ▪  By health authorities when they review an operating permit for a large drinking  
water system that includes wells;
 ▪  By the provincial government as a condition of granting infrastructure funding for  
new municipal/regional district wells; and,
 ▪  As a condition of a provincial environmental assessment for proposed large withdrawals.3 
Well protection plans are developed for an area that includes the recharge area for a well or 
aquifer. It is important to consider all land uses and associated threats to groundwater quality. 
Therefore, the use of a holistic approach to planning is encouraged. A more holistic approach 
may aim to address multiple aquifers within a region or community and it may also aim to 
address both quality and quantity issues. Depending on the water and land use pressures, 
and water-related vulnerabilities, a more comprehensive Groundwater Management Plan may 
be appropriate in some areas. 

29


