First Nations Concerns

First Nations in Canada have also identified and expressed 
concerns about these potential climate change impacts.  
In workshops held in Toronto and Vancouver in the summer  
of 2010, 18 First Nations from across Canada identified  
potential policy directions related to First Nations, water  
security and climate change. A report emerging from these 
workshops indicated that First Nations in rural areas are 
experiencing various impacts of climate change on water 
resources, including: 6
 ▪ Poor water quality;
 ▪ Increasing drought;
 ▪ Rapid glacier melt;
 ▪ Widespread thawing of permafrost;
 ▪ Earlier peak streamflows;
 ▪ Changing water temperatures; and 
 ▪ Shifting marine ecosystems.
Other climate change impacts on water and watersheds  
identified as being of relevance to First Nations in BC include: 

 ▪  Increased flood damage to buildings,  
roads, bridges, rail lines;
 ▪  Increased air pollution and exposure to  
water- and food-borne pathogens;
 ▪  Increased risk to water quantity due to  
low water levels; and
 ▪  Increased risk to water quality due coastal  
erosion and storm surges.

Climate change has also impacted First Nations’ ability  
to harvest fish, both commercially and for subsistence  
purposes, due to significant changes in fish habitat,  
migratory patterns and spawning beds, and to changes 
 in water quality and temperature.

Water Quality
 ▪  Increased risk, frequency and magnitude of extreme precipitation events 

and related natural hazards such as flood and erosion, resulting in 
loss or degradation of land; deposition of silt, sand, gravel and debris; 
damage to and disruption of critical infrastructure, property, community 
services, farmland, businesses and the environment. 

 ▪  Increased risks of other water-related hazards such as debris flows, 

landslides and avalanches.

 ▪  During periods of low water flows, normal waste discharges will 
result in higher concentrations of pollutants within water bodies  
that receive those wastes

 ▪  Saltwater intrusion in coastal regions due to a rise in sea level, in 

particular in combination with reduced groundwater tables.

 ▪  Increased water turbidity from increased flooding, erosion and sediment 

transport, with potential health impacts from water-borne pathogens.

Aquatic Ecosystems
 ▪  Continued stresses on fish migration patterns and survival rates of some 
populations due to a variety of impacts to freshwater and marine habitat, 
including warming water temperatures, low freshwater flows in late 
summer and early autumn in some regions, degradation of spawning 
and rearing habitat, and changes to food availability and predators in 
the marine environment 

10

 ▪  Forests that are stressed— for example, from reduced water 

supply —are more vulnerable to diseases and pests such as the 
mountain pine beetle. Climate change can therefore lead indirectly 
to changes in forest cover over large regions, which in turn can 
affect watershed functions and processes.

 ▪  Longer and drier summers in BC with increased severity and length 
of the fire season. Forest fires reduce forest cover, and in turn, may 
contribute to faster runoff, and affect stream and river hydrology, 
and water quality

Infrastructure
 ▪  Increased risk of damage and disruption to drinking water and 

wastewater collection, treatment and distribution infrastructure to 
due to flooding and erosion.

 ▪ Increased impacts on drainage systems.
 ▪  Increased risk of damage and disruption to transportation,  

energy, communications, and other critical infrastructure due to 
flooding and erosion.

The impacts above can interact with a variety of different community 
and/or ecosystem vulnerabilities such as:

 ▪  Vulnerability of water supplies (quantity and quality) to flooding, 

erosion, turbidity, drought and saltwater intrusion;

 ▪  Vulnerability of all water use sectors to reduced water supplies  

and increased conflict;

 ▪  Vulnerability of aquatic and marine ecosystems to warming water 

temperatures, shifting hydrological and geomorphological regimes, 
low instream flows and shifts in the food web; and 

 ▪  Vulnerability of people, infrastructure (including but not limited to 

drinking water, wastewater and drainage infrastructure), community 
services and property due to water–related natural hazards such as 
flooding, erosion, debris flows, landslides and avalanches.

In many cases, there can be a cascade of climate-related impacts. 
For example, more frequent and/or extreme rainfall events are a 
highly probable impact of climate change in many areas of BC. This 
can lead to high flows in streams, rivers and drainage systems, 
which can cause flooding, erosion, mobilization of contaminants and 
downstream sedimentation. Depending on the location and design 
of community water and wastewater systems, flooding may impact 
the quality of community water supplies, damage or disrupt the 
operation of water or wastewater treatment systems, and damage 
or disrupt other infrastructure and property. There may also be a risk 
to life or injury due to flood events. Although flooding and erosion 
are natural processes, extreme rainfall events can have adverse 
impacts on the environment, including degradation of water quality, 
habitat, and other ecosystem functions and services. This can, in 
turn, adversely impact social, cultural and economic values that 
are derived from healthy and abundant watershed resources. Thus, 
a single storm event can result in devastating, widespread and 
long-lasting impacts to the health, resiliency and sustainability of 
communities, water resources and watersheds.

 

3.2 PRePARinG fOR ClimA te ChAnGe – 
the AdAPt AtiOn PROCess And W AteR And 
WAteRshed PlAnninG
Because of the many, significant, current and projected impacts of 
climate change on water resources and watersheds, the value of 
planning and adaptation should be self-evident. The better we are 
able to understand the changes that are coming and how they are 
affecting communities and ecosystems, the better we will be able to 
plan for, manage and adapt to these changes.

Many methodologies have been developed to help communities 
learn more about the regional impacts of climate change, prioritize 
associated risks and opportunities, and develop climate risk 


