Collaboration with First Nations
Intergovernmental relations around water and 
watershed management are challenging, and 
the case is no different with First Nations. A 
key observation that emerged from workshops 
held with First Nations in the summer of 2010 is 
that “First Nations are often not consulted, not 
consulted enough, or not consulted soon enough”. 
In some cases, this is attributed to existing policies 
and structures that limit participation by First 
Nations, and there is a sense that addressing 
First Nations’ rights can slow down a planning or 
decision-making process.

There is significant concern among First Nations 
that “although First Nations across Canada are 
already experiencing the impacts of climate 
change, they are often left out of policy discussions 
that will affect water health and security in their 
territories”. 8 Although stakeholder engagement 
sessions were conducted specifically for direct First 
Nations input some Bands have indicated the need 
for more direct participation in the modernization of 
BC’s Water Act.

In some cases, limited participation by First Nations 
relates to limited capacity within their communities. 
It can be challenging for smaller First Nation 
communities who have limited resources to keep 
up with government invitations to participate in 
a multitude of referrals, and other planning and 
decision-making processes. There is also concern 
that participating in such processes can sometimes 
be misinterpreted as “representing the First Nation 
community”—a mandate that may not actually be 
afforded to one individual. 8

Working towards more effective collaboration 
with First Nations requires building government-
to-government relationships that acknowledge 
Aboriginal title and rights. To foster these 
relationships, it is important to develop a shared 
vision that celebrates differences as well as areas 
of common ground. A shared vision enables the 
identification of key issues, shared goals, and action 
plans, and a commitment to shared decision-
making. Through trial and error, experiences 
across BC have culminated in the identification of 
some beneficial practices for collaboration with 
First Nations. A series of recommended best 
management practices for building successful and 
positive relationships between First Nations and local 
governments was developed at a workshop with 
regional districts in 2005. Many of these practices 
also apply to other relationships within collaborative 
decision-making processes:

 ▪ Establish a relationship before there is a problem;
 ▪  Respect each other’s differences  
(i.e., do not try to change each other);
 ▪  Recognize and understand that history and  
past experiences impact current perceptions  
and opinions;
 ▪  Focus on learning about each other’s history 
and initiate information-sharing events early in 
the process to learn about the respective roles, 
responsibilities and history of each  
other’s organizations;

42

 ▪ Recognize the importance of a First Nations Chief and Council;
 ▪  Focus on slow, incremental steps and recognize that success  
cannot be measured in the short term;
 ▪  Work towards the project agenda after individual relationships are 
solidified and unified;
 ▪  Define the nature and scope of the relationship early (including an 
understanding of each other’s needs and the reason for interaction);
 ▪ Focus on areas of common concern or interest;
 ▪  Identify the elements of uncertainty and work towards addressing  
them before they create friction in the relationship;
 ▪ Be prepared to resolve disputes and agreements;
 ▪ Establish a process and forum for communication and dialogue;
 ▪  Exchange staff lists to allow for quick and effective contact between 
organizations; and, 
 ▪  Confirm expectations and assumptions throughout the relationship.

Leadership and Local Champions
Collaborative planning processes benefit significantly from good 
leadership. Having a champion behind a planning initiative can really 
help motivate a group, and keep it focused on the end goal. This can 
be particularly important to sustaining interest, support and momentum 
over the long term during the development and implementation of 
the plan. Planning can take time, patience and persistence, and a 
committed and passionate champion can help build and maintain the 
necessary momentum. This is especially important during periods of 
conflict or other challenges. 

A widely respected and credible leader can also inspire broader 
participation and collaboration within a planning process. For example, 
someone who has the respect of farmers, business owners and 
community activists can strengthen the credibility of a planning process, 
and thus inspire these and other stakeholders to participate in it. A leader 
may be a mayor, chief, or chair of a regional district or other prominent 
board. However, local champions can also be highly respected citizens, 
volunteers, retired professionals, or other community leaders with less 
official designations. 

If there is no apparent single leader within a process, it can be helpful to 
bring in people from around the region and/or country who have relevant 
experience and expertise on key issues. For example, in the early stages 
of developing the planning process for the Coquitlam River Watershed 
Strategy, people from outside the watershed were invited to share their 
successes and failures with their roundtable processes. This helped 
set the bar and create inspiration within the planning group. From this 
foundation, leadership emerged from different factions of the community, 
including government and beyond. 

8.3 ReGiOnAl APPROAChes
Being proactive by planning for watersheds and climate adaptation can 
be especially challenging for communities that have limited human and 
financial resources. Introducing water centric thinking can be particularly 
challenging when facing common issues such as jurisdictional conflicts 
or a lack of expertise. Changing the “old way of doing business” does 
not happen overnight, and achieving water sustainability is less likely to 
happen if communities work in isolation of each other. 

In some cases, local leadership can be supplemented and/or strengthened 
with collaborative approaches at the regional scale. This can be particularly 
appropriate when implementing a watershed-based approach and an 
integrated approach. For example, Convening for Action on Vancouver 
Island, the Okanagan Basin Water Board and the Fraser Basin Council 
offer several opportunities to collaborate at regional scales to strengthen 
community resiliency, protect watershed health, prepare for climate change 
and advance sustainability. 


