 Some of the key elements and steps in preparing a Drinking Water 
Protection Plan are as follows:

 ▪  A Provincial Health Officer triggers initiation of the plan, and the plan  
is customized to address the specific water health hazard identified  
by the Officer;
 ▪  The plans are initiated, and have their terms of reference established 
by an order issued by the Minister of Health;
 ▪  The plans are required to consider existing provincial or local 
government planning processes. These may include strategic, 
operational, land use or water use plans;
 ▪  Preparation of the plans must include an extensive public  
consultation process;
 ▪  The plans are subject to review by the provincial Cabinet and approval 
by an order of the provincial Cabinet;
 ▪  Water suppliers are legally responsible for putting the plans into action; and
 ▪  They are implemented through regulatory actions, which are  
legally enforceable.

water protection officers are required to consider all other options 
available under the Drinking Water Protection Act before asking the 
Provincial Health Officer to consider recommending a plan. To date, 
no plans have been completed. However, the creation of a Drinking 
Water Protection Plan has been under consideration for the Comox 
Valley on Vancouver Island for the past two years. For such plans to be 
authorized, there would have to be significant impairments to source 
waters, and an associated health hazard to trigger a planning effort. 

Because they are fairly comprehensive, DWPPs have the potential to be 
very powerful and effective. They can consider threats to water sources, 
different methods of treatment, and all matters related to the delivery of safe 
drinking water. DWPPs are similar in scope to Water Management Plans, 
which are established under Part 4 of the Water Act (see Section 7 in this 
guide). Because there is potential for the two types of plans to overlap, the 
Drinking Water Protection Act and Water Act state that if both types are to 
be initiated within one particular area, they can be developed jointly. 3

Key Elements and Steps
Drinking Water Protection Plans are issued by the provincial government 
(the Lieutenant Governor with advice from Cabinet) to do one  
or more of the following:

a)    Require other specified provincial government or local authority 

strategic or operational planning processes, or classes  
of such processes, to consider the DWPP;

b)   Require the results of specified provincial government or local 

authority strategic or operational planning processes,  
or classes of such processes, to be consistent with the DWPP;
c)    Provide that specified provincial government or local authority 

strategic or operational plans, bylaws, or other planning documents, 
or classes of such plans, bylaws, or other documents do not have 
legal effect to the extent of any inconsistency with the DWPP; and

d)    A provision under subsection (1) c) applies despite any other enactment.

6.4 RefeRenCes

1  Okanagan Water Stewardship Council (2008). Okanagan Sustainable Water Strategy: Action Plan 1.0. Coldstream, BC.

2   Eggertson, L. (2008). Investigative Report: 1766 Boil-Water Advisories Now in Place across Canada. Canadian Medical  

Association Journal. www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2335191/ [Accessed February 2011].

3  Okanagan Basin Water Board (2009). Groundwater Bylaws Toolkit: an Appendix to the Green Bylaws Toolkit. Kelowna, BC.

4    Ministry of Environment, Water Stewardship Division website: www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/plan_protect_sustain/groundwater/wells/

well_protection/wellprotect.html [Accessed May 2010].

5  BC Ministry of Environment, Lands and Parks (2001). Drinking Water Protection Plan – a Discussion Document. Victoria, BC.

6  BC Ministry of Health Services website: www.health.gov.bc.ca/protect/source.html [Accessed February 2011].

7    BC Ministry of Healthy Living and Sport (2007). Drinking Water Officers’ Guide. Prepared by the Drinking Water Leadership Council. 

www.health.gov.bc.ca/protect/dwoguide_updated_approved%202007.pdf.

8    West Coast Environmental Law (2009). The BC Guide to Watershed Law & Planning.  

http://watershedguide.wcel.org/ [Accessed February 2010].

9    Nowlan, Linda and Karen Bakker (2007). Delegating Water Governance: Issues and Challenges in the BC Context.  

A paper for the BC Water Governance Project. Vancouver, BC: UBC Program on Water Governance. 

31


