Climate Considerations
Climate change is impacting, and will continue 
to impact, many aspects of water supply and 
management in BC. Reduced annual and 
seasonal precipitation, reduced snowpacks, 
loss of glaciers, changing surface and 
groundwater hydrology, increased drought and 
increased demand for irrigation are just a few 
examples. These and other climate-related 
impacts should be addressed in plans that aim 
to consider medium to long-term pressures 
on water supply and demand. The plans 
should develop solutions for dealing with those 
pressures. See sections 3 and 9 of this guide 
for information, tools and resources about 
climate change impacts on water, related 
community vulnerabilities and risks, as well as 
considerations about how climate impacts can 
be managed through adaptation and water 
and watershed planning. 

5.1 WAteR COnseRVA tiOn PlAns
Water conservation planning is receiving 
more and more attention in BC. There is a 
growing appreciation of the limited availability 
of water supplies, and an increasing concern 
about the impacts of climate change on water 
supply and demand. Water conservation is 
one of the best mechanisms to manage water 
demand within existing supplies, and avoid 
the cost of developing additional supplies. 
Rainwater harvesting, leak detection and 
repairs, and greywater recycling are just a 
few water conservation strategies that can 
reap significant benefits for communities. 
Conservation is particularly important in areas 
that are experiencing population growth, 
economic development and other changes 
that lead to increased demand for water. 
Water conservation is important in areas where 
there may be a reduced water supply in the 
future as a result of climate change. 

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
Water conservation plans focus on managing 
water demand, reducing consumption, and 
improving efficiency of water use. These plans 
extend beyond household water savings to 
include industrial, commercial, institutional and 
agricultural water users. The plans, are relevant 
to both surface and groundwater sources.

Water conservation plans can help 
communities manage the impacts of water 
shortages that are less severe than drought 
conditions. These plans can also deliver 
benefits to communities that are not presently 
experiencing water shortages. Through 
conservation, water suppliers can reduce the 
costs associated with developing new water 
supplies, drinking water treatment, drinking 
water distribution, wastewater treatment and 
associated pumping and energy costs. 

provincial capital grant funding for drinking 
water and wastewater infrastructure.

Water conservation plans are typically 
developed at the geographic scale of 
a community or region. It is important 
to consider all water users (residential, 
agricultural, industrial), all water supplies 
(surface and groundwater) and how these 
users and supplies interact with, and 
affect, each other. Therefore, the use of 
a holistic approach or “watershed eye-
view” to water conservation planning is 
beneficial. This translates into considering 
entire watersheds in the decision-making 
process, and integrating all aspects of 
water management into the plan.  

Key Elements and Steps
The following are some of the key 
elements and steps in preparing a Water 
Conservation Plan:

 ▪  Developing a comprehensive community 
water use profile that outlines the 
amounts of water used by different 
sectors (such as household, industrial, 
agricultural, municipal and other use);
 ▪  Forecasting future water supplies  
and demands;
 ▪  Developing a future vision of water  
use and supply for the community;
 ▪  Quantifying and understanding the 
impacts of different water conservation 
measures; and,
 ▪  Integrating the water conservation plan 
with other plans (e.g., Regional growth 
strategies, official community plans, 
land use plans, transportation plans, 
integrated community sustainability 
plans and watershed plans).

The POLIS Project on Ecological 
Governance is a BC-based organization 
that has undertaken significant research on 
water issues and has recently published a 
guide on water conservation planning. 

Local governments in BC are now required to 
have water conservation plans to be eligible for 

POLIS characterizes a strong water 
conservation plan as having:

22

 ▪ At least a 20–50 year time frame;
 ▪  A comprehensive and thoughtful rationale  
for water conservation;
 ▪  An integrated approach to water 
conservation, which is linked to other plans 
such as wastewater, land use, and asset 
management plans; and
 ▪ An effective implementation strategy.
POLIS characterizes an excellent water 
conservation plan, as one that goes further to:

 ▪ Place ecological health at its core;
 ▪  Be tailored to a community’s watershed 
context and consider the community’s impact 
on the watershed;
 ▪  Blend innovative legal tools such as water 
restrictions and land use planning bylaws 
with practical measures such as rebate and 
metering programs;
 ▪  Make managing demand a part of daily 
business rather than a stop-gap measure 
designed merely to buy time needed to 
increase supply;
 ▪  Build in measures that are geared towards 
rainwater capture and wastewater 
reclamation, reuse and recycling to better 
match water quality to end uses;
 ▪  Implement outreach and education programs 
that go beyond information dissemination to 
engage and inspire citizens to permanently 
change behaviour; and,
 ▪   Use a “triple bottom line” approach to  
valuing water. 2

While it may not be possible or practical in 
all cases for communities to achieve these 
characteristics, it is important to consider them 
during the development and implementation  
of water conservation plans to ensure the 
plans are effective, comprehensive and 
successfully implemented.

5.2 dROuGht mAnAGement PlAns
The Province of BC defines drought as a 
period of sustained low precipitation and high 
evaporation, resulting in low stream flows and 
groundwater levels, and water shortages. 


