 

8.4.1 stRenGthen humAn 
ResOuRCes
Human resources, both in terms of availability 
and expertise, can be a limitation to water and 
watershed planning and to climate adaptation. 
Both areas require a strong team of experts with 
specialized knowledge, expertise and skill sets. 
Contracting out portions of the work to supplement 
or complement staff skills and expertise may be 
possible in some circumstances; however, this 
option is not always available to local governments, 
which often have limited funds. 

Capacity may be limited in smaller BC 
communities, where there may be only one or two 
municipal staff to cover planning responsibilities, 
and where funds may be too limited to cover the 
costs of hiring consultants. This may be a particular 
challenge for proactive initiatives, such as water 
and watershed planning, and for integrating climate 
change adaptation into such plans. 

First Nations also have limited capacity to undertake 
water planning, management and governance due 
to small staff sizes and limited resources for training 
community members in key water planning and 
management skills. Compounding these challenges 
are circumstances where there are many other 
priorities for First Nations that compete for limited 
resources and staff capacity.  

In contrast, larger local governments, such as Metro 
Vancouver and the Capital Regional District, which 
have greater staff capacity, are able to attract more 
funds, and advance planning and management 
initiatives. These larger communities are also better 
able to interact with other initiatives and institutions, 
which can lead to more learning opportunities. 

The Value of a Coordinator
Many communities have found that having a 
project coordinator is often key to the success 
of water and watershed planning initiatives. 
In the case of the Bowker Creek Urban 
Watershed Renewal Initiative, having a part-time 
Coordinator, whose salary is cost-shared by all 
three participating municipalities, has been key 
to securing project funding. This person is able 
to dedicate time to writing grant applications, 
and having a Coordinator has given the project 
greater credibility. A Watershed Coordinator 
has also helped secure funds for the Theodosia 
Stewardship Roundtable and Watershed Recovery 
Plan, and as a result, he is able to focus on both 
land and water management within the watershed. 

8.4.2 stRenGthen finAnCiAl 
ResOuRCes
Resourcing can significantly influence the success 
of planning, and is commonly cited as a limiting 
factor in planning processes. Resources are 
needed to establish and manage a planning 
process, and to implement its outcomes (i.e., 
the plan’s recommendations). Effective strategies 
for resourcing water and water planning 
arrangements include:

 ▪  Working with the financial resources that you and your partners have;
 ▪  Using consultants only when necessary (often best for technical work);
 ▪  Writing the plan with in-house staff can save money; and 
 ▪  Hiring a coordinator to oversee the planning process. 
Whether a planning initiative is just beginning, in mid process, or ready for implementation, 
financial resources play a significant role in the timing, momentum, and in some cases, the 
outcomes of the process. The funding environment for water and watershed planning in BC is 
challenging and competitive. Funds are limited; therefore, competition for grants is high. Local 
governments indicate that funds are available for infrastructure work but are more difficult to 
obtain for watershed based planning work unless the work relates specifically to drinking water. 
Local governments also have limited human resources for developing project proposals and 
writing and submitting grant applications. 

The situation is similar for climate adaptation planning processes. While funds may be 
available for climate adaptation planning, it is more difficult for local governments to 
secure funds to implement adaptation measures. Even in communities that have been 
actively developing climate adaptation plans, it is difficult to justify spending substantial 
sums of money on implementing those plans. For example, making proactive choices 
to upgrade municipal utilities may make sense on one level, but when there may be no 
immediate, tangible benefits, it can be difficult to persuade taxpayers and elected officials 
to commit to large investments. 

Develop a Financial Strategy
Planning processes invariably take longer than expected. Thinking the process through 
in terms of phases and how those phases will be financed is an important step. It is first 
necessary to know what needs to be accomplished and what the measurable objectives are 
for the various aspects of the project. For each objective, consider: 
 ▪ When will the money be needed? 
 ▪ Where will it come from? 
 ▪ How will it be directed? 
“If you wait until you have enough money, you’ll never do it.”   
–  ToM ruTherFord,  Georgia Basin Living Rivers Program

When developing a funding model or strategy it is important to be creative. There is no single, 
certain way of securing funds for a watershed project. Each community has its own set of 
challenges and opportunities. A successful financial strategy will take both challenges and 
opportunities into consideration. The following are recommendations, gathered from various 
communities across the province, for successfully obtaining project funding:

 ▪  Be strategic; look at the bigger picture. Design your project so that it can advance multiple 
objectives, such as climate change mitigation and/or adaptation and environmental 
enhancement. Recently, the integration of climate change adaptation into planning projects 
has become strategic from a funding perspective. Local governments, such as the Capital 
Regional District, intend to draw on this to the best of their abilities by tapping into funds for 
pilot initiatives. Another “big picture approach” is to integrate watershed planning within land 
use decisions. This may open up new opportunities by diversifying funding sources. 
 ▪  Align with common objectives. Identifying how various departments and/or external 
organizations can contribute to project objectives is important for moving a project forward, 
both within the planning process and during implementation. The approach adopted within 
the Whistler 2020 Plan was intended to allow the community to use community resources 
in a more strategic and coordinated way. The community of Whistler invested time in 
identifying common goals and a shared vision across organizations within the community. 
Rather than requiring new resources, the Whistler2020 approach is based on the alignment 
of existing budgets and resources to ensure that all relevant organizations and individuals 
are dedicated to moving toward a shared goal rather than working inefficiently or at cross-
purposes. This approach seeks to make the best use of existing resources. 
 ▪  Be realistic about project timelines and budgets. The Bowker Creek Initiative adopted 
a 100-year timeline because the work that needs to be done in the watershed is too 
costly to be funded all at once. Rather than getting bogged down in the high costs of 
implementation, the team developed a long-term plan that focuses on specific reaches 
of the creek and on achieving incremental progress. Municipalities can agree in principle 
about the scope and direction of the plan without being held responsible for spending 
a specific amount of money. The idea behind this strategy is not to deflect responsibility 
and “do nothing”; rather, once the regional district saw past the financial challenges, they 
committed to moving the plan forward by working on key short-term actions now that 
would set them up for bigger things in the future. 

45


