2.1 the V Alue Of PlAnninG
Through water-related planning processes, decision makers and the broader 
community will be better able to understand current and future pressures on water 
quantity and quality. They will be better able to manage in the face of those pressures. 
For example, population growth projections can inform the potential for growth in water 
use and demand relative to available supply. Similarly, future climate scenarios can help 
users understand if future water supplies might decrease. By exploring future climate, 
population, and development scenarios, planners can identify when water use might 
be projected to exceed supply and can help make the case for water conservation 
and other strategies to contain demand within supply limits. There can also be public 
education benefits associated with planning processes, which can lead to public 
support in implementing plans and any associated strategies.

The following section will explain what water and watershed planning is, why it is 
important, when it is needed and the range of options available in BC. Sections 5, 6 
and 7 then describe in more detail the characteristics and requirements associated 
with different planning options.

 A community vision for a sustainable watershed commonly includes one or more of 
the following desired outcomes:

 ▪  Managing water uses and rates of consumption within available water supplies 

seasonally, annually and over the long-term 

 ▪  Developing and managing water supplies in ways that do not compromise the health 

and biodiversity of fish, wildlife, ecosystems and watersheds

 ▪  Managing the allocation of water in ways that support a variety of high-value water 

uses, including human consumptive and non-consumptive uses as well as instream, 
environmental uses 

 ▪ Supporting a wide variety of economic development activities 
 ▪  Managing wastewater discharges within the capacity of receiving waters to absorb 

and assimilate those wastes

 ▪  Supporting renewable energy sources while minimizing impacts on the environment
 ▪  Managing human development patterns in ways that stabilize rather than destabilize 

the hydrologic cycle

 ▪  Managing development in ways that reduce rather than increase the vulnerability of 

communities to flooding and erosion

 ▪  Maintaining and strengthening community resiliency and preparedness for change, 

including changes in climate

Planning can be reactive and responsive to longstanding issues and challenges. Planning 
can also be proactive in anticipating challenges that may be emerging on the horizon.

A significant new challenge for water and watershed planning is how to deal with 
climate change. Changes in temperature, precipitation and extreme weather events 
have already influenced hydrology, and subsequent drought, and flooding and 
erosion effects. These in turn contribute to a variety of impacts on communities 
and ecosystems. Scientists project that more changes will come. Identifying, 
understanding and preparing for these changes (sometimes referred to as climate 
change ‘adaptation’) should become an important component, or a relevant lens to 
apply, within water and watershed planning processes.

In sections 5, 6 and 7 of this guide the following approaches to planning for water 
and watersheds are profiled:

 ▪ Water Conservation Plans
 ▪ Drought Management Plans
 ▪ Water Use Plans
 ▪ Water Allocation Plans
 ▪ Well/Aquifer Protection Plans
 ▪ Drinking Water/Source Protection Plans
 ▪ Assessment Response Plans
 ▪ Water Management Plans (Water Act, Part 4)
 ▪ Watershed Management Plans
 ▪  Liquid Waste/Integrated Stormwater  

Management Plans

The suitability of these plans for a community, 
region or watershed will vary significantly depending 
on the nature and scope of the issues that need to 
be addressed. For example, the following are some 
key considerations:
 ▪ Water quantity or quality?
 ▪ Surface or groundwater?
 ▪ Drinking water or instream water?
 ▪  Water use, wastewater discharge, and/or use?

2.2 An intROduCtiOn tO PlAnninG
Simply put, planning attempts to logically solve a 
specific problem or issue and identify steps that can 
be taken to reach desired future outcomes. Planning 
can be initiated either through voluntary means or 
by regulation. According to the Canadian Institute of 
Planners, planning involves the scientific, aesthetic, 
and orderly disposition of land, resources, facilities 
and services with a view to securing the physical, 
economic and social efficiency, health and well-being 
of urban and rural communities.2 

The goals of planning are oriented towards the future. 
Therefore, planning is an ongoing, dynamic process 
that needs to be attuned and adaptive to changing 
environmental conditions, social outlooks and 
community visions. 

The Planning Process
Approaches used in planning processes vary greatly. 
Some processes follow a rigid schedule of meetings, 
while others adopt a more flexible workshop approach. 
The approach selected is determined, in part, by the 
characteristics of the planning area, the specific issues 
being addressed, the needs and interests of the 
community, and the individuals involved. Planning for 
complex environmental, social or economic problems 
typically requires a process design that integrates 
most, if not all, of the following steps: 3, 4

5


