Water Allocation Plans can help avoid or reduce potential 
conflicts related to future water licence applications. 

in the Southern Interior. To view a list or to access the plans, visit  
www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/water_rights/wap/index.html. 

Water Allocation Plans are considered regional policy, 
and the MFLNRO uses these plans while exercising its 
authority (e.g. issuing water licences) under the Water Act. 
The plans are operational tools developed and used by the 
Ministry to help determine the quantity of water required in 
a watershed to protect ecosystem health, and the quantity 
of water available to be allocated for human use. 

Where developed, these plans have improved the 
efficiency of making water allocation decisions while 
protecting environmental flows. The plans have also 
assisted government agencies and water licence 
applicants as they ensure that their applications and 
actions align with environmental laws. 

The Shawnigan-Goldstream Water Allocation Plan 
describes these plans as “a means of anticipating and 
planning for water uses, identifying water demands and 
ensuring that water use is compatible with the goals of a 
sustainable environment. 

Advantages of Water Allocation Plans include:

 ▪  The provincial government’s position on water allocation 
decisions is available to applicants and the public;
 ▪  Response time for a water license application  
is reduced;
 ▪  The need for individual studies and reports on  
each water licence application is eliminated;
 ▪  Decisions are made more consistently, and  
allocation directions are defined; and,
 ▪  There is no need for referrals on individual water  
license applications.”  

As of March 2011, 23 WAPs have been completed and 
three water management plans have been developed 
for watersheds on Vancouver and the Gulf Islands. 
One water availability study (to inform water allocation 
decisions) has also been completed for a water source 

To date, all Water Allocation Plans have been prepared for surface 
water resources. As with water use plans, WAPs are unlikely to be 
applicable to groundwater resources because of the complexity of 
groundwater resources and because the Water Act does not presently 
require a licence to withdraw and use subsurface water. Therefore, 
Water Allocation Plans may be an inappropriate or impractical 
approach to planning for groundwater resources. However, some of 
the characteristics and benefits of Water Allocation Plans, such as 
area-based planning and consideration of future water demand, can 
be adapted to plan for and manage the allocation of groundwater 
resources. In addition, groundwater regulation is within the scope of  
the Water Act Modernization initiative.

Key Elements and Steps
The following are some of the key elements and steps in preparing a 
Water Allocation Plan:

 ▪  Planning is initiated by the regional water manager (or equivalent) of 
the ministry of forests, lands and natural resource operations;
 ▪  The planning process is led by ministry staff when a business case 
has been established that demonstrates efficiencies in making water 
licence and allocation decisions;
 ▪  Assessments are conducted on a watershed basis to identify the 
available surface water resources, instream flow requirements for 
fish, existing and potential licensable water demands, and to provide 
direction regarding future water licence allocations;
 ▪  Significant resources may be invested in gathering required water flow 
information, undertaking assessments, and working with agencies and 
stakeholders to develop the plan; 
 ▪ The WAP is submitted to the regional water manager for approval;
 ▪  The WAP becomes regional policy upon signature by the regional 
water manager; and
 ▪  The WAP is reviewed when the regional water manager feels that it is 
appropriate to update or amend the plan.

5.5 RefeRenCes

1  Brandes, O.M., 2005. "At a Watershed: Ecological Governance and  
Sustainable Water Management in Canada." Journal of Environmental Law  
and Practice 16(1): 79-97.

2   Wong, Jennifer, Susanne Porter-Bopp, Oliver M. Brandes, and Liam 
Edwards (2009). Water Conservation Planning Guide for British Columbia’s 
Communities. The POLIS Project on Ecological Governance. University of 
Victoria. Victoria, BC.

3   Province of BC. www.livingwatersmart.ca/drought/about.html  
[Accessed February 2011].

4   Water Sustainability Committee of the BC Water and Waste Association 
(2004). Water Sustainability Action Plan for British Columbia:  
Framework for Building Partnerships.

5   Econnics (2010). British Columbia Drought Response Plan. Prepared for the 
Ministry of Environment on behalf of the Inter-Agency Drought Working Group. 
www.env.gov.bc.ca/.../drought.../bc_drought_response_plan_faq_june-2010.pdf.

6   BC Hydro Website for Water Use Planning: www.bchydro.com/planning_
regulatory/water_use_planning.html?WT.mc_id=rd_wup.

7   Okanagan Water Stewardship Council (2008). Okanagan Sustainable Water Strategy, Action 
Plan 1.0, Burnaby, BC.

8   Rosenau, Dr. Marvin L. and Angelo, Mark (2000). Water Use Planning: a Tool to Restore 
Salmon and Steelhead Habitat in British Columbia. Prepared for the Pacific Fisheries Resource 
Conservation Council. Vancouver, BC.

9   See BC Hydro’s website for further details on individual processes in provincial regions,  
by hydroelectric facility: www.bchydro.com/planning_regulatory/water_use_planning.html? 
WT.mc_id=rd_wup.

10   BC Hydro Website for Water Use Planning: www.bchydro.com/planning_regulatory/water_

use_planning.html?WT.mc_id=rd_wup [Accessed February 2011].

11   BC Ministry of Environment (2010). British Columbia’s Water Act Modernization: Discussion 

Paper. Victoria, BC. www.livingwatersmart.bc.ca [Accessed February 2010].

12   BC Ministry of Environment. 2006. Shawnigan-Goldstream Water Allocation Plan.  

www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/water_rights/wap/vi/shawnigan_goldstream/shawnigan-goldstream.
pdf [Accessed February 2011].

25


