considerations about how climate impacts can 
be managed through adaptation and water and 
watershed planning.

The need for a watershed approach is made 
even more evident when compounded by current 
and expected impacts of climate change. For 
example, the Okanagan, Thompson and Cariboo-
Chilcotin regions can expect hotter, drier summers; 
extended growing seasons with the potential for 
new crop production; and increased demand for 
irrigation and livestock watering. Because this will 
occur when stream flows are at their lowest and 
when fish are particularly vulnerable, this may lead 
to increased levels of conflict among water users. 

Because all three planning processes profiled 
in this section (water management, watershed 
management and stormwater management) may 
consider existing and future watershed processes 
and functions, they provide opportunities to 
consider climate change and its impacts, as well 
as other pressures, on watershed health. It should 
be noted that although this guide focuses on 
planning and climate change adaptation for water 
and watersheds, climate change impacts will 
undoubtedly have a variety of other impacts on 
terrestrial ecosystems such as forests, grasslands 
and alpine ecosystems. These impacts on the 
landscape will, in turn, influence the health of 
watersheds. However, these land-based climate 
impacts are beyond the scope of this guide.

7.1 WAteR mAnAGement PlAns 
(WAteR ACt – P ARt 4)
Water Management Plans, which were 
introduced under Part 4 of the Water Act in 
2004, involve a comprehensive and integrated 
approach to water and watershed planning. 
This planning process is enabled only if the 
Minister of Environment determines that such 
a plan will help resolve conflicts between water 
users, conflicts between users and instream flow 
needs, or risks to water quality. 

Although the Township of Langley has completed 
the draft of a WMP, to date there are no approved 
WMPs in effect in British Columbia. Therefore, 
the operational compatibility of this planning tool 
with other Acts and regulations cannot be fully 
determined, nor can its effectiveness in improving 
water quality. However, it has been suggested 
that Water Management Plans hold potential 
as a mechanism for protecting groundwater, as 
well as for establishing authority for source water 
protection. Unlike other water planning tools, when 
Water Management Plans are implemented, they 
can place restrictions on the drilling or alteration 
of groundwater wells and the installation of well 
pumps. The plans may also affect other statutory 
decisions. However, there may be exceptions 
where the application of a WMP could be limited 
such as the Forest Act, Range Act, Forest 
Practices Code of BC Act, and the Forest and 
Range Practices Act. 1, 2   

Water Management Plans may provide a good 
structure for developing valley-wide response plans 

for severe water shortages because they provide more authority to bring water licence holders 
to the table and hold them to the agreements that have been developed. The plans may also 
be useful for providing water managers with tools to reduce activities and development in 
watersheds, thereby addressing the common challenge of managing water resources on private 
as well as Crown lands. In 2009, the Township of Langley submitted a Water Management 
Plan: Final Report to the Minister of Environment for review. As of 2011, TOL is the only local 
government that has been designated by the Minister of Environment to do so. 2

Characteristics, Benefits and Applications
Water Management Plans are applicable to both water quantity and quality issues. In this 
regard, they are relevant for source water protection and for managing demand in relation to 
water supply. They may also be relevant to both surface water and groundwater sources. 

Water Management Plans are also relevant for area-based planning. They apply to a 
designated water management plan area where the water interests are dispersed across 
a wide landscape and where many water licensees, groundwater users and land-based 
activities may be included in the plan. A Water Management Plan could apply to a watershed, 
aquifer, or another regional scale that is relevant to managing the water resources of a 
particular community.

Water Management Plans should be considered where regulatory tools are required and will 
provide an opportunity to achieve the planning objectives. Upon completion and approval by 
the provincial Cabinet, Water Management Plans are legally enforceable. However, significant 
resources may be required to develop and implement this type of plan. Therefore, this 
approach to planning may not be feasible for some communities.

Water Management Plans are similar in scope to Drinking Water Protection Plans, which are 
established under Part 5 of the Drinking Water Protection Act (see Section 6 in this guide). 
Because there is potential for the two types of plans to overlap, the Drinking Water Protection 
Act and Water Act state that if both types are to be initiated within one particular area, they 
can be developed jointly.

Key Elements and Steps
The following are some of the key elements and steps in preparing a Water Management Plan:

 ▪  The plans are requested by letter to the regional water manager or to the  
comptroller of water rights;
 ▪  The plans require an assessment of preparedness among stakeholders, first nations  
and the province;
 ▪  The plans are initiated & have their terms of reference established by an order of the minister;
 ▪  The plans are required to consider existing provincial or local government strategic, 
operational, and land use or water use planning processes;
 ▪ Preparation of the plans must include an extensive public consultation process;
 ▪  Consideration must be given to the results or progress of provincial or local government 
strategic, operational and land use or water use planning processes within the 
designated area;
 ▪ The plans require approval by an order from the provincial cabinet to acquire official status;
 ▪  The plans are brought into effect by the creation of a regulation that is designed to implement 
the plan, approved by the provincial government by the lieutenant governor with advice from 
cabinet; and,
 ▪  The plans are implemented through regulation (the plan implementation regulation)  
issued by the lieutenant governor in council.

7.2 WAteRshed mAnAGement PlAns
A watershed planning approach is a flexible framework for managing water resource quality 
and quantity within a specific drainage area, or watershed. The approach includes stakeholder 
involvement and management actions that are supported by sound science and technology. 
The watershed planning process works within this framework by drawing on a series of 
collaborative, iterative steps to characterize existing conditions, identify and prioritize problems, 
define management objectives, develop protection or remediation strategies, and implement 
and adapt selected actions when necessary. The outcome of this process is a watershed plan, 
which is a strategy that assesses the state of a watershed and presents detailed management 
information in terms of analyses, actions, participants and resources required for developing 
and implementing the plan. Using a watershed approach is considered beneficial because it 
addresses problems within a watershed in a holistic manner and actively involves stakeholders in 
identifying management strategies.

34


