for 

the 

floodproofing”  because 

Temporary Floodproofing Measures 
 
Temporary  floodproofing  measures  are  put  into  place 
immediately  before  a  flood  and  are  intended  to  keep 
water  out  of  a  building 
flood’s  duration. 
Contingency  measures  are  sometimes  referred  to  as 
“active 
they  require  human 
intervention  in  advance  of  a  flood.  They  are  therefore 
only useful if sufficient warning time is available to allow 
floodproofing measures to be deployed and the building 
owner  or  another  knowledgeable  person  is  available  to 
put the measures in place. Where possible, floodproofing 
measures that are permanently in place are preferred.  
 
Flood Shields 
 
Flood shields are removable watertight barriers designed 
to  prevent  the  passage  of  water  through  windows  and 
doors. They consist of panels constructed of a durable, 
impervious  material  (usually  metal)  that  can  be  readily 
installed  and  sealed  using  rubber  gaskets  or  special 
sealants around the edges. 
 
To ensure quick and easy installation during a period of 
immanent flood risk, flood shields should be stored close 
to the openings to be sealed, color-coded or numbered 
as  to  location  and  installation  priority  and  held  in  place 
by  simple,  quick  connecting  fasteners  and  latching 
devices.  
 
To  ensure  that  flood  shields  will  be  effective  when 
installed, periodic inspection and testing is advised. 
 
Watertight Doors and Temporary Bulkheads 
 
Watertight  doors  are  permanently  installed,  but  are 
designed  to  be  closed  and  sealed  only  during  floods. 
They  are  heavy  and  expensive  and  are  generally more 
suited 
than 
houses.  In  locations  where  anticipated  flood  elevations 
will not greatly exceed ground level, bolt-on, partial flood 
panels or barriers can be installed to protect the bottom 
portion of a doorway.    
 
It is important to realize that in order to be effective, 
flood  shields  and  watertight  doors  must  be  well-
maintained  and  incorporate  smooth,  close-fitting 
surfaces,  waterproof  gaskets  and  locking  bolts.    In 

to  commercial  and 

industrial  buildings 

 

12 


