Surrounding a building with a flood barrier will be of limited benefit if sewer, water or other drainage pipes 
continue to allow floodwater a path of entry. If such pipes extend beyond the limits of the barrier, they will 
have to be equipped with backflow preventers or manually operated shut-off valves. See also Sewage 
Connections and Lot Drainage (Page 5) and Floodproofing Utilities (Page 16). Remember that once 
a valve on a sewer pipe is closed, sewage from the building will be blocked and may overflow if sinks, 
toilets etc. are used.  
 
Consideration should also be given to drainage of the area within the berm. This means that snow melt 
and precipitation must be allowed to drain away from the building and through the barrier via pipes or 
channels that can be closed off during flooding. Finally, driveways or other gaps in the barrier must be 
blocked  when  a  flood  occurs.  Sandbags  or  other  equivalent  materials  can  be  kept  on  hand  for  this 
purpose (see Temporary Dikes on page 14).  
 
As  is  the  case  with  construction  on  fill,  the  use  of  floodwalls  or  berms  is  not  recommended  in 
locations where flood waters flow fast and deep since the wall or berm will have to be high and 
may be subject to scour and erosion. In addition the wall or berm may block or deflect flood flow, 
leading to higher flood elevations on adjacent, unprotected properties. Sudden failure of a flood 
wall or berm may have greater safety or damage consequences than if the wall or berm had not 
been constructed. Those intending to construct a flood wall or berm should confirm that these 
features are permitted by the planning authority (municipality, regional municipality, rural community, 
Regional  Service  Commission  or  the  province  as  the  case  may  be).  A  Watercourse  and  Wetland 
Alteration  Permit  is  required  prior  to  fill  placement  or  other  activities  such  as  construction, 
demolition,  clearing  land,  landscaping,  etc.,  within  30  metres  of  a  wetland  or  watercourse.  Fill 
placement  within  a  wetland  will  generally  not  be  permitted.  Those  considering  construction  in 
coastal areas should also consult New Brunswick’s Coastal Areas Protection Policy. 
 
Relocation 
 
Relocation  means  moving  an  existing  building  that  is  vulnerable  to  flooding  to  a  site  that  is  above  the 
flood  elevation.  If  flood  risk  is  severe  and  alternative  locations  are  available,  this  may  be  the  most 
effective  floodproofing  option.  This  option  involves  retaining  a  specialist  contractor  to  lift  an  existing 
building from its foundation and transport it to a new foundation at the new site.   
 
When deciding whether or not relocation is a feasible option, factors to consider include the:  

 

 
 

 

type of building (the easiest structures to relocate are single story wood frame buildings with a 
regular, rectangular shape); 
condition of the structure (is it structurally sound so that it can be moved?);  
route between the existing site and the new one (are there low power lines, narrow roads, weight 
restrictions, tight corners, etc. that will have to be addressed?);  
characteristics of the new site (elevation above flooding, safe access during flooding, ability to 
provide services such as well and septic system, etc.);  

  permits that may be required including building permits and permits for over-size/overmass loads 

from the Department of Transportation and Infrastructure; and 
relative costs of relocation versus demolition and reconstruction.  

 

 

 

11 


