trap  any  floating  contaminants.    Alternative  materials  include  marine  grade  plywood,  cement  board, 
concrete, glazed clay tile, plastic lumber (with no wood filling), non-absorbent natural or artificial stone or 
stone veneer with waterproof grouting, steel wall panels, ceramic or concrete tile (with mortar rather than 
an adhesive), metal doors, closed cell or plastic foam insulation, etc.  
 
When wet floodproofing is employed, the dwelling owner or occupant should also prepare a plan listing 
vulnerable furnishings and possessions along with a predetermined strategy for removing them quickly to 
a location above the flood elevation.  In addition provision should be made for dewatering (pumping out 
and  dehumidifying)  the  basement  once  the  flood  is  over.  Other  measures  associated  with  wet 
floodproofing, including special considerations for electrical services are described under Floodproofing 
for Utilities on page 16.  
 
If a building may be subject to damage from waves, floating ice, or debris during a flood then wet 
floodproofing  is  not  a  good  option.    Another  caution  regarding  wet  floodproofing  is  that  during  cold 
weather, water that enters a building can freeze and expand, causing additional damage. Therefore, wet 
floodproofing may not be the best option if other alternatives are available.    
 
Below Grade Living Space  
 
Basements  are  the  lowest  part  of  a  building  and  are  therefore  most  susceptible  to  flooding.    In  early 
homes, basements were usually not considered as living space and were more often used as storage 
areas.  In modern homes, basements are often finished with wall coverings and flooring and are used as 
recreation rooms, bedrooms or as fully-equipped apartments. 
 
Finished basements and their contents are highly vulnerable to flood damage. To avoid risks to life and 
property,  wet  floodproofing  should  not  be  used  to  accommodate  below  grade  living  space  in 
buildings  that  may  be  affected  by  sudden  or  rapid  flooding.    While  dry  floodproofing  (employing 
measures to seal off a basement to keep flood water out) might seem to be the best solution, this may not 
be  a  feasible  option.  As  previously  noted,  even  if  the  water  is  not  flowing  quickly,  the  weight  of  water 
pressing in on a watertight building wall or foundation could result in significant structural damage.       
 
Raising the Building 
 
Raising a building above the flood level may reduce potential damage to a building and its contents in the 
event  of  a  flood.    For  locations  where  flood  hazard  maps  or  sea  level  predictions  are  available,  the 
appropriate elevation can be obtained by referring to the past or predicted flood elevations. (See Finding 
Flood Information in New Brunswick on page 22). Even if the flood water is higher than expected and 
enters the building, the flood damage will be reduced, since the depth of the water and the length of time 
the building's contents are exposed will be less. Including some extra height above the anticipated flood 
level offers an additional margin of safety. 
 
Elevation on Fill 
 
This option means constructing a mound and relocating the building on top of it. Care should be taken in 
the  selection  of  the  fill  material  Silts  and  very  uniform  sands  are  undesirable  as  they  are  difficult  to 
compact. Instead the fill material should include well-graded sands and gravels since they are the most 
suitable for supporting the weight of buildings. Ensuring proper fill compaction is also important. This is 
usually addressed by placing the fill in a series of layers or “lifts” and compacting each layer before the 
next is added.  

 

7 


