general,  permanent  closures  or  sealants,  or 
relocating  doors  and  windows  above  the  flood 
level are more effective measures. 
 
To  prevent  flood  waters  from  entering  through  doors 
and  windows  a  temporary  wall  or  “bulkhead”  can  be 
constructed.  For  example 
“tongue  and  groove” 
wooden planks can be stacked on top of each other. 
The temporary wall can be covered by a plastic sheet 
and supported by a grooved concrete or steel channel 
attached to the sides of the door or window. A double 
layer  of  sandbags  placed  at  the  base  may  help  to 
reduce seepage and provide additional stability. 
 
As  is  the  case  for  closures  and  sealants,  expert 
advice  should  be  obtained  to  determine  if  flood 
shields,  watertight  doors  and  bulkheads  are 
feasible  options,  based  on  the  anticipated  depth  of 
flooding. 
 
Temporary Dikes 
 
Stacking  sandbags  to  form  a  barrier  against  rising 
floodwaters  is  a  common  emergency  floodproofing 
technique.  They  can  be  put  in  place  to  surround  a 
vulnerable  building  or  can  be  installed  as  needed  to 
protect  low  openings  such  as  basement  windows, 
patio doors, etc. The bags must be strong enough to 
hold  the  sand  in  place  and  withstand  prolonged 
contact  with  water.  Burlap  and  plastic  bags  can  be 
purchased that are specially made to be filled with sand. 
 
Flood  water  will  exert  pressure  against  the  dike  so  if 
possible, a trench should be dug to anchor the dike to 
the ground and prevent it from moving. 
 
Leaving  some  vacant  space  within  the  bags  will  allow 
the bags to overlap and mold together under their own 
weight, locking them in place. In addition, the orientation 
of the bags should alternate, so that each layer of bags 
is placed at right angles to the layers above and below. 
This adds stability to the structure. For added protection, 
a durable plastic sheet can be placed on the outer side 
of the dike to prevent the seepage of water through the 
barrier. 
 
A  number  of  alternatives  to  sandbags  have  been 
devised, 
including  re-usable,  anchored,  rubber  or 

 

13 


