A home isolated by flooding on the St. John River

property  is  available  during  a  flood.  It  is  therefore 
important  to  consider  how  a  flood  will  affect 
(e.g. 
movement  by  people  and  vehicles 
for 
evacuation,  or  access  by  police, 
fire  and 
ambulance services). This requires consideration of 
the  anticipated  flood  depth,  the  speed  that  the 
water  will  be  moving  and  the  distance  to  the 
nearest  “dry  land”.  A  good  rule  of  thumb  is  to 
assume that for ponded (non-flowing) water, the 
maximum depth of flooding for safe access by most 
cars  is  about  0.3  metres  (1  foot);  the  maximum 
depth for pedestrian access is about 1.4 metres (5 
feet) for adults and 1 metre (3 feet) for children)a . 
These  safe  depths  decrease  as  water  velocity 
increases.  Even  shallow  water  can  sweep  a 
pedestrian  or  a  vehicle  away  when  flowing  at 
high  velocity.  Also  remember  that  it  may  be 
difficult  to  judge  the  depth  and  speed  of  flood 
waters. Water may appear to be relatively calm even when moving at a high velocity and it may be 
impossible to see the bottom to determine flood depth. Prolonged exposure to cold water could 
lead to hypothermia. 
 
In  addition  to  property  access,  building  accessibility  is  also  an  important  consideration.  Some  of  the 
floodproofing measures described in this booklet restrict the use of doors and windows and may require 
the use of alternate entrances and exits. 
 
Municipal by-laws and permits - As is the case with any construction including modifications to existing 
buildings,  floodproofing  must  be  carried  out  in  accordance  with  all  applicable  building  code,  fire  code, 
local by-law and building permit requirements. For example, the local planning authority (i.e., municipality, 
regional municipality, rural community, Regional Service Commission or the province as the case may be) 
may prohibit construction within a flood hazard area or impose specific conditions. For more information 
contact your local planning authority. 
 
Provincial policies and permits - A Watercourse and Wetland Alteration Permit  is required prior to fill 
placement or other activities such as construction, demolition, clearing land, landscaping, etc., within 30 
metres of a wetland or watercourse. Additional information is available at: 
 
http://www2.gnb.ca/content/gnb/en/departments/elg/environment/content/wetlands.html 
 
Those  considering  construction  in  coastal  areas  should  also  consult  New  Brunswick’s  Coastal  Areas 
Protection Policy:  
 
http://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/gnb/Departments/env/pdf/Water-Eau/CoastalAreasProtectionPolicy.pdf 
 
 
 
a.  Ontario  Ministry  of  Natural  Resources.  Technical  Guide  -  River  and  Stream  Systems:  Flood  Hazard  Limit.  Appendix  6  - 
Floodproofing. (2002) 
 

 

3 


