Permanent Floodproofing Measures 
 
Permanent floodproofing measures are incorporated into the design of a building or building lot. They are 
permanently in place and require no additional action by property owners or occupants at the time of a 
flood. Examples are contained in the following sections.  
 
Sewage Connections and Lot Drainage 
 
The  following  measures  will  benefit  any  dwelling,  regardless  of  location  with  respect  to  flooding.  They 
focus on addressing issues associated with roof drainage, plumbing, municipal utilities, and lot grading. 
They include: 
 

Improved lot grading and channels to direct water away from buildings 
Foundation drains to direct groundwater away from the foundation 
Eaves trough downspouts that are not connected to foundation drains and are extended 
away from the building wall 
A basement sump pump (with appropriate capacity and stand-by electrical power ) connected 
to a storm sewer or a free-flowing surface outlet. Avoid connecting the sump pump to the 
sanitary sewer 
Basement window wells (where warranted by site grading), to ensure that window sills are 
above the adjacent ground surface  
Valves  that  prevent  backflow  (from  a  municipal  sewer  or  septic  system)  from  entering  the 
building. Sewer backups can cause major damage and inconvenience and occur when sewer 
outlets become flooded and water is forced back through the sewer line into a building. It is 
important to remember that buildings can be affected even if situated in areas where there is 
no flooding.  

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
The above measures are described in detail in guidance prepared by the City of Moncton, called The 
Homeowner’s Guide to Flood Protection available at:  
http://www.moncton.ca/Assets/Government+English/Publications+English/Flood+protection+manual.pdf 
 
Additional information is also provided in Floodproofing for Utilities on page 16. 
 
Dry Floodproofing 
 
Dry  floodproofing  means  closing  off  or  relocating  all  openings  in  a  building  wall  or  foundation  that 
otherwise might allow flood water to enter a building. For example, windows, doors and other openings 
located below the anticipated flood depth can be permanently closed in and sealed. Any water-resistant 
material of sufficient strength can be used (e.g. bricks, concrete blocks, glass bricks, etc.). Once closed 
in, the openings can no longer be used, so this measure should only be used if the windows and doors 
are not needed by the building occupants and are not required in order to meet the requirements of the 
National Building Code and National Fire Code.  
 
Waterproof  coatings  or  sealants  can  be  applied  to  basement  floors  and  foundation  walls  to  reduce  or 
eliminate seepage.  Cracks or gaps can be filled in with sealants and a continuous waterproof membrane 
can  be  used  to  line  the  outside  of  the  foundation.  Membranes  may  be  susceptible  to  damage  when 
backfill is placed, so proper installation is important.  Special attention is also required for any openings 

 

5 


