the 

foundation  and  supervise 

 Elevation on a Raised Foundation, Piers or Columns 
 
This option means designing and reconstructing a building foundation that is high enough to ensure that 
the living area of a building is raised above the anticipated flood level. This requires that the building be 
separated from its existing foundation, raised on hydraulic jacks, and held by temporary supports while a 
new or vertically extended foundation is constructed below. This retrofit is typically most feasible for wood 
frame homes originally built on basement, crawlspace, or open foundations. Masonry homes can be more 
difficult to lift, primarily because of their design, construction, and weight, but raising these homes may 
still be possible.  
 
The new foundation can consist either of continuous 
concrete  walls  designed 
to  address  hydrostatic 
pressure,  or  an  open  foundation  comprised  of  a 
series  of  piers,  posts,  columns,  or  piles.  Regardless 
of the foundation type, the foundation design should 
consider issues such as debris loading during a flood 
event,  the  position  and  orientation  of  the  supports, 
soil  conditions,  and  anchoring,  bracing  and 
connection details. Expert advice should be retained 
to  design 
its 
construction.  
 
Elevating a building on piers and columns instead of 
a foundation wall may be useful for coastal locations 
and inland locations exposed to high velocity flow or 
ice  jams,  because  flowing  water,  waves,  ice  and 
debris may be able to pass under the building without 
causing impact-related damage. The supporting piers 
and columns and their footings should be designed to 
support the building weight and withstand the force of 
moving water as well as the impact of ice and debris. 
Mechanically  driven  piles  may  be  the  best  solution 
where  erosion  is  expected  to  be  severe,  such  as 
exposed coastal locations. The open area under the 
building  can  be  used  for  other  purposes  such  as 
storage space for low value items. 
 
When  planning  an  elevated  foundation,  it’s  important  to  determine  how  high  the  foundation should be. 
(See  Finding  Flood  Information  in  New  Brunswick  on  page  22).  When  selecting  the  appropriate 
elevation  it  may  be  wise  to  add  some  extra  elevation  to  account  for  uncertainties  in  the  water  level 
estimate. 
 
Remember that use of this option is subject to the approval of the planning authority (municipality, 
regional  municipality,  rural  community,  Regional  Service  Commission  of  the province  as  the  case  may 
be). This option does not provide for safe access to a property during a flood. A Watercourse and 
Wetland  Alteration  Permit  is  required  prior  to  fill  placement  or  other  activities  such  as 
construction,  demolition,  clearing  land,  landscaping,  etc.,  within  30  metres  of  a  wetland  or 
watercourse.    Those  considering  elevating  a  building  on  a  raised  foundation  in  coastal  areas 
should also consult New Brunswick’s Coastal Areas Protection Policy.  

 

9 


