used  for  utilities  such  as  electricity,  telephone,  propane,  natural  gas,  sewer  and  water,  to  prevent 
infiltration and leakage into the building.  
 
The above measures can be used in combination with temporary flood shields and watertight doors as 
described under Contingency (Temporary) Floodproofing Measures on page 13. 
 
It’s important to know that although it may be technically feasible to seal the openings in external walls 
and  foundations  to  create  a  watertight  barrier,  it’s  not  always  a  good  idea  because  other  parts  of  the 
building wall or foundation may still fail during a flood. The structural integrity of even well-built, modern 
homes may be threatened if saturated ground extends above the basement floor elevation or if the flood 
level is higher than the top of the foundation. Therefore, in order to reduce the potential for severe 
structural  damage,  expert  advice  should  be  obtained  before  installing  closures,  sealants  and 
other flood barriers that are integrated into the building walls and foundation. A qualified expert 
can  determine  if  the  walls,  foundation  and  basement  floor  are  strong  enough  to  withstand  the 
weight of water pressing on the building from the outside (called hydrostatic pressure).  
 
No matter what type of foundation is used, the building should be anchored to prevent flotation or lateral 
movement in the event of a flood. 
 
Wet Floodproofing 
 
In  any  location  where  floodwater  is  expected  to reach  the outside  of  a  building  or  foundation  wall,  the 
resultant water pressure can be so severe that foundations can collapse and buildings can be heaved out 
of the ground, or off their foundations. Where pervious (sandy) soils allow water to move easily through 
the ground, this damage could happen even if no water is visible at the surface. In these circumstances, 
wet floodproofing (purposely allowing the water to enter the building so that the pressures on the interior 
and exterior of the building are balanced) may help prevent serious structural damage.  While the building 
interior (in particular the basement) will receive some flooding, measures can still be taken to reduce the 
potential for damage due to wetting of the building structure or contents. 
 
Wet  floodproofing  requires  that  openings  be  provided  to  all 
enclosed  spaces  below  the  anticipated  flood  elevation.  The 
idea  is  to  reduce  water  pressure  by  letting  it  enter  the 
enclosed  spaces  at  the  same  rate  that  the  floodwaters  rise 
outside.  The  building  should  also  be  anchored  to  prevent 
lateral movement.  
 
When  using  wet  floodproofing  it  is  also  important  to  ensure 
that  any  structural  materials  (beams,  subfloors,  insulation, 
framing  etc.) and  finishing  materials  (wall  coverings,  flooring, 
etc.)  that  may  be  exposed  to  flood  waters  are  resistant  to 
damage  from  wetting  and drying (e.g. swelling  and cracking) 
and  can  be  cleaned  once  the  flooding  has  subsided.  Even 
materials  that  will  not  come  into  direct  contact  with  flood 
waters  should  be  capable  of  resisting  moisture  and  humidity.  In  general,  materials  such  as  untreated 
wood, particle board, carpeting, corkboard, plaster, regular plywood, gypsum drywall, laminate flooring, 
linoleum, vinyl wall coverings, non-ceramic floor tiles, etc., should be avoided. Batt and blanket types of 
insulation such as mineral wool or fibreglass should also be avoided because they will retain water and 

Case Study: The “Spray and Wash” 
Basement 
 
Last  June,  a  homeowner’s  basement 
took  in  five  feet  of  water.    The  fully 
finished basement had to be gutted. If 
it  happens  again,  cleanup  should  be 
much  easier.  The  rebuilt  basement 
now  includes  metal  stairs,  polished 
concrete floors, and walls clad in foam 
insulation  covered  with  mortar  and 
steel  mesh  and  coated  in  concrete 
and sealant. 
 
CBC Calgary, March 20, 2014

 

6 


