INTERMEDIATE INFORMATION
Project Title: The impacts of climate change on the synchronicity between pests and their  
natural enemies: implications for the biological fight of the agriculture sector  
 
 
in Quebec.

Region: Southern Quebec

Summary  and  Application:  Researchers  involved  in 
this  project  sought  to  explore  the  potential  risks  of 
certain crop pests through an evaluation of analogue 
regions56.  More  specifically,  the  aim  was  to  identify 
spatial  analogues  further  south  in  the  United  States 
that corresponded to different administrative regions in 
Quebec in order to examine which pests were already 
present in the analogue regions and what adaptation 
measures  had  been  taken  to  combat  associated 
problems.  The  analogues  were  based  on  growing 
season length, growing degree-days, and precipitation 
during the growing season. 

Two  main  enemies  of  crops  were  investigated.  The 
first was the Fusarium head blight (F. graminearum), 
a disease of wheat, which renders the grain unsuitable 
for human and animal consumption. This disease has 
been on the rise in southern Canada and has caused 
important economic losses in many regions57. For this 
disease,  it  was  found  that  Pennsylvania  was  a  good 
climate  analogue  for  the  Bas-Saint-Laurent  region  in 
2050.  Based  on  this  information,  researchers  have 

begun  to  explore  adaptation  measures  adopted  by 
the state of Pennsylvania, such as relying on different 
strains that mature at different times throughout the 
summer, to combat this potential problem in the Bas-
Saint-Laurent. The second problem was the corn borer 
(O. nubilalis), an insect that causes important damage 
to crops of sweet corn, which is destined for human 
consumption. Regarding this insect, it was found that 
the  climate  in  the  Montérégie  may  become  more 
similar to the recent climate of Illinois. In this state, the 
insect has a more rapid growth rate than in Quebec 
and represents one of the most important sweet corn 
diseases56.

The  results  of  this  project  initiated  a  revision  of  the 
surveillance  strategies  and  norms  in  Quebec.  The 
project was the subject of an article in a local Montreal 
newspaper  (La  Presse,  Allard,  June  10,  2013),  which 
serves to illustrate how attractive this analogue format 
is for communicating the challenges of climate change. 

Website:A French copy of the report can be found at:  
http://www.ouranos.ca/fr/publications 

79  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


