Climate models are divided into two main groups based on the size of their calculation grid, an area referred 
to as the model domain: 

Global  Climate  Models  (GCMs):  as  the  name 
suggests, GCM calculation grids (domains) cover 
the entire planet. Current GCMs typically have a 
horizontal  resolution  around  200  km.  GCMs  are 
divided into three main categories. The very first 
GCM generation of models to be developed were 
referred  to  as  atmospheric  general  circulation 
models (AGCM), and only included the atmosphere 
portion of the climate system and its interaction 
with  the  continental  land  surface.  The  second 
generation of models, termed atmosphere-ocean 
general circulation models (AOGCM), coupled the 
atmosphere and land with physical ocean models. 
The latest generation of models, known as Earth 
system models (ESM), now include the addition of 
biogeochemical interactions and cycles, as well as 
changes in land cover (such as vegetation types).  
Thus far, the carbon cycle has been implemented 
in most ESMs and research is ongoing to include 
other cycles. 

Regional  Climate  Models  (RCMs):  RCMs  have 
smaller domains that cover only a portion of the 
planet. By focusing on a limited area of the globe, 
it is possible to solve the climate model equations 
over a finer horizontal resolution (45 km or less) 
within a reasonable amount of time. In order to run 
regional climate models, data from global climate 
models  must  be  integrated  at  their  boundaries 
(this can also be done using reanalyses; essentially 
a  technique  that  uses  computer  models  to 
combine  historical  data  from  various  sources  to 
recreate the past climate). This procedure is called 
driving a regional climate model.  

Model Resolution 

There is a tendency to believe that the finer the resolution over which the information is given, the more 
adequate, usable or richer it is. As a result, there may be a desire to use regional climate models or 
statistically downscaled data instead of the outputs from global climate models directly. Ultimately, the 
choice of one type of data versus another resides in the evaluation of numerous factors, but it is important 
to understand that increased model resolution does not guarantee a superior model performance for all 
variables. Moreover, increased resolution (through the use of downscaling techniques for example) will 
not necessarily yield more useful information to the decision-maker. However, higher resolution allows 
for a finer representation of topographic features, which may be very important for some variables, 
particularly those representing extreme events. 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  10


