What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
The  figure  presents  spatial  analogues  for  the 
greater  Toronto  area  (GTA)  for  the  2080  time 
horizon (2071-2100). On the top panel, the green 
illustrate  regions  where  the  reference 
areas 
climate  (1971-2000)resembles  what  the  climate 
of  the  GTA  is  projected  to  be  in  2080.  On  the 
bottom  panel,  the  green  areas  represent  areas 
where  the  reference  climate  of  Toronto  may  be 
found in 2080.

The top panel indicates that the area where recent 
past (1971-2000) temperatures and precipitation 
resemble the most what the greater Toronto area 
may look like in 2080 is fairly large and includes 
cities 
like  Detroit,  Cleveland,  Chicago,  and 
Pittsburgh. New York and Philadelphia also exhibit 
a high level of similarity in the simulations.

As  for  the  2080  location  of  Toronto’s  current 
temperature  and  precipitation  distributions 
(bottom  panel),  the  highest  similarities  are 
obtained  along  a  transect  that  cuts  through  an 
area  south  of  Lake  Superior  and  North  of  Lake 
Huron, encompassing the cities of Sault Ste-Marie 
and  Sudbury.  The  analogue  region  extends  past 
Timmins in the North.

One  of  the  interesting  uses  of  this  information 
is  to  identify  analogue  regions  in  terms  of  their 
current ability to adapt to the climate. This allows 
an  evaluation  of  whether  the  region  of  interest 
can  take  advantage  of  some  of  the  practices 
developed  in  the  analogue  region  to  adapt  to 
climate change.

techniques 

How is the figure constructed?
Analogue 
involve  a  comparison 
between  the  anticipated  future  climate  of  a 
region  of 
interest  with  historical  climate  of 
other regions47. The comparison is based on the 
similarity  between  the  distributions  of  climate 
variables  between  the  reference  and  future 
horizons (1971-2000 and 2071-2100 in this case). 
The  similarity  indices  can  be  calculated  using 
various metrics (e.g.48-51).

theory, 

In 
this  method  of  climate  data 
communication allows for any number of variables 
to be considered in the comparison. For example, 
one  could  simply  want  to  find  a  temperature 
analogue for a given city, while another user may 

instead be interested in finding an analogue for the 
same region that takes into account temperature, 
precipitation, and growing degree-days.

In  this  particular  case,  the  analogues  for  the 
future climate around Toronto in 2071-2100 are 
based on two climate indices, namely total annual 
precipitation and annual temperature. To simplify 
the interpretation, the median distance values for 
136  CMIP3  simulations  were  divided  into  three 
levels of similarity, plotted using a colour gradient. 
The «high» level of similarity represents the first 
10% of the median distance values, the «medium» 
level  represents  the  10  to  20%,  and  the  «low» 
level  represents  the  next  20  to  30%  of  values. 
Values  with  a  smaller  similarity  index  (greater 
than 30%) were not considered as analogues and 
are therefore not shown on the map.
 
What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
A noteworthy drawback of this technique is that 
it  can  be  difficult  to  find  analogues  that  share 
the  same  characteristics  for  a  large  number  of 
climate variables. In fact, analogues often capture 
only  a  few  key  aspects  of  the  climate  because 
they are based on a few climate indices, not the 
whole thing. For example, in this case, New York 
shows  a  high  level  of  similitude  with  Toronto. 
However, New York, being a much more coastal 
city compared to Toronto, will experience climate 
events that are vastly different from what Toronto 
will  ever  experience.  Consequently,  the  choice 
of the climate variables of interest will influence 
the  results.  In  addition,  analyses  that  includes 
analogues  often  rely  on  the  hypothesis  that 
regions with similarities in certain aspects could 
also  share  similarities  in  other  aspects  (such  as 
soil  type,  topography,  vegetation)52,  which  may 
not always be the case. Caution must therefore be 
exercised when comparing a given region with its 
analogues.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  54


