1.5 CLIMATE SIMULATIONS
Climate simulations are the end product of climate 
models. They represent the result of running a 
climate model and thus solving the equations that 
are represented in a model, for a certain period of 
time. As discussed earlier, each climate model has 
its own set of equations to represent the climate 
system.  To  obtain  a  climate  simulation,  many 
different inputs are required in a climate model, 
such as a detailed portrait of the Earth’s surface 
including  geophysical  data  (soil  types,  types  of 
vegetation,  continental  contours,  location  and 
bathymetry of large bodies of water, description 
of the topography, etc.). In addition, as addressed 
previously, emission scenarios are a main driver to 
climate models in climate change studies. Different 
climate simulations are obtained as each climate 
model  responds  differently  to  greenhouse  gas 
emissions  scenarios,  and  hence  will  produce  a 
different future climate (also see Box on Members). 
It is important to understand that none of these 
future climates should be considered a prediction: 
all the future climates projected by different climate 
models with different GHG forcing scenarios should 
be considered equally plausible. 

The time span of a simulation can range from a 
few years to thousands of years, both for the past 
and future periods (Figure 7). The length of time 
over  which  climate  models  are  run  to  produce 
simulations  differs  from  one  climate  center  to 
another  but  can  range  for  example  from  1850 
or  1900  to  2100  or  even  2300  (see  example  of 
Figure 7). Each simulation is computed iteratively 
at  different  time  intervals.  These  intervals,  also 
called time steps, indicate the time period within 
the  model  between  two  states  of  the  climate 
system  as  simulated  by  solving  the  equations. 
The length of the time step defines the temporal 
resolution, which is typically 5 to 20 minutes.  At 
each time step and at each point on the calculation 
grid (horizontal and vertical level), the numerical 
solution  of  the  equations  gives  the  values  of 
the  variables  included  in  the  basic  equations, 
along  with  several  others  derived  from  physical 
parameterizations.  Thus,  a  climate  simulation 
contains  more  than  one  hundred  descriptive 
climate variables (temperature, winds, barometric 
pressure, rainfall, snow, etc.), which should all be 
physically consistent with one another from one 
point on the grid to another and also in time.  

Model Bias

Climate models are a representation of the real climate system and the mathematical equations that are 
solved to represent this system are a simplification of the real world. A climate simulation is therefore an 
imperfect numerical representation of the meteorology that could have occurred over the globe, based 
on the assumption that the simulation of the natural variability is close to the real one. This means that 
even if we have observations of greenhouse gases emissions for the past and we run a climate model 
using those observations as input, the resulting simulation will give a response that is different from what 
is recorded at meteorological stations. 

Furthermore, due to the chaotic nature of the climate system and climate model sensitivity to things 
such as initial conditions at the start of a simulation, even a “perfect” climate model would not reproduce 
the succession or timing of observed historical meteorological events, and the best we can expect is 
that the model reproduces the statistical properties (mean, variance, inter-annual variability, etc.) of 
the observed records.  Given that each model represents the climate system differently and imperfectly, 
they each have their own particular bias. This will mean for example, that some models may always yield 
temperatures that are slightly colder on average than the other models, while some may always project 
more precipitation than others. . Furthermore, a model’s bias is not necessarily equal for all parts of the 
globe, and can vary for different regions. It is important to consider this bias when calculating climate 
change scenarios. Biases are present in both GCMs and RCMs, and in gridded observations.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  14


