1.11 CLIMATE CHANGE SCENARIOS
Climate  scenarios  are  plausible  and  simplified 
representations of the future climate, constructed 
from  climate  simulations.  They  represent  the 
difference between the current climate and a future 
climate. In essence, they represent a more tailored 
product than climate model outputs (where the 
time steps are minutes long). Climate scenarios give 
the portrait of the future by averaging the outputs 
of the simulations into a temporal resolution that 
is better suited for impact studies (over years or 
seasons for example). They are arguably the climate 
information product most often used to evaluate 
the potential impacts and consequences of our 
changing climate. 

Climate scenarios are generally grouped into the 
following classes3: 

 › Climate  model  scenarios  are  constructed  
using climate data output from climate models  
that simulate the future response of the climate  
to increasing greenhouse gas concentrations;

 › Analogue  scenarios  are  constructed  by  
identifying  recorded  climate  regimes  that  
resemble the future climate of a given region;

 › Synthetic  scenarios  are  produced  by  varying  
a particular climate variable by a realistic but  
arbitrary amount to obtain probable futures.

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

1.11.1 REFERENCE PERIOD AND FUTURE HORIZONS
Climate change scenarios compare the average 
climate between a past period, referred to as the 
reference period or horizon, and a future horizon. 
Given  that  inter-annual  variability  can  remain 
important in the future, the length of the reference 
and  future  periods  must  be  relatively  long  to 
detect clear projected climate change trends. Two 
main periods are used, one is a 30-year average, 
for which the reference horizon corresponds to 
the same timescale as the one used to calculate 
climate normals (WMO standards). Note however 
that an important distinction must be made here 
with climate normals, which are calculated from 
observations  and  the  data  over  the  reference 
period, which comes from climate simulations.  

The time periods used as reference and future 
horizons are used by climate research organisations 
and are revised every decade. For example, a few 
years ago, the reference period used by the WMO 
was 1971 to 2000, while it is now 1981-2010 (the 
AR5 from the IPCC uses 1986 to 2005). 

Averages may also be calculated over 20-year time 
periods, as is the case in most IPCC reports.  

The future horizons will follow the time period for 
the reference period, meaning that if the reference 
period used is 30-years then the future horizons 
will also be 30-years.

29  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


