What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
It  is  important  to  remember  that  this  particular 
case  represents  the  values  for  the  region  of 
interest (meaning the average of many grid points 
is  shown),  which  may  not  adequately  represent 
specific locations. In addition, a sinlge simulation 
is  used  and  therefore  the  figure  does  not 
showcase the range (uncertainty) of a simulation 
ensemble.  This  is  an  important  limitation  for 
decision-makers as there is no way of evaluating 
how this simulation compares with others. Thus, 
relying solely on this single simulation would not 
be advised.

the 

What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
This  figure  presents 
Intensity-Duration-
Frequency (IDF) curves for the reference period 
(1961-2000,  yellow  lines)  and  the  2050  time 
horizon  (2041-2070,  blue 
lines)  for  the  St-
Lawrence  valley  for  return  periods  of  2,  5,  10, 
and 25 years using a single simulation from the 
Canadian  Regional  Climate  Model  (CRCM  4.2.3 
driven by the global model CGCM3#4). 

The  figure  shows  rainfall  intensity  (mm/hr)  on 
the y-axis, rainfall duration (hr) on the x-axis, and 
rainfall  frequency  (how  often  rainfall  occurs),  as 
the coloured lines. In this case, rainfall durations 
(accumulation period on the x-axis) are calculated 
for five durations: 1, 2, 6, 12, and 24 hours. The 
simulation  projects  increases  in  the  amount  of 
rainfall accumulated for all four return intensities, 
particularly for the 6 and 12 hour rainfall events. 
For  the  10  and  25  year  return  intensities,  the 
accumulation  over  24  hours 
is  very  similar 
between the 1961-2000 and 2041-2070 horizons.

Intensity-Duration-Frequency  curve 

How is the figure constructed?
An 
is  a 
graphical  representation  of  the  probability  that 
a  given  average  rainfall  intensity  will  occur.  The 
simulated  precipitation  for  both  the  reference 
and  future  periods  are  in  this  case  calculated 
using  one  CRCM  simulation.  Such  curves  are  of 
considerable importance to engineers and others 
that must design municipal infrastructure to deal 
with precipitation events.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  68


