Adaptation: Initiatives and measures to reduce the vulnerability of natural and human systems against ac-
tual or expected climate change impacts.

Adaptive capacity: A system’s ability to implement adaptation measures to climate change (including climate 
variability and extremes).

Aerosols: A collection of airborne solid and liquid particles that reside in the atmosphere for at least several 
hours. They can be either natural or anthropogenic in origin and may influence the climate in several ways: 
directly through scattering and absorbing radiation, and indirectly through acting as cloud and ice condensa-
tion nuclei which impact the optical properties and lifetime of clouds.

Analogues: Climate analogues are a type of climate scenario constructed by identifying a recorded climate 
regime that resembles the future climate of a region of interest. The climate regimes can be obtained from 
the past (temporal analogues) or from another region in the present (spatial analogues).

Anomalies: Anomalies represent the difference between the value of a climate variable for a given year or 
season and the average value of the reference period.

Baseline: See reference period. A measurable quantity from which alternative outcomes can be estimated.

Boundary organization: Organizations that facilitate the exchange of knowledge between science and policy.

Change fields: See Deltas

Climate adaptation: The process that leads to a reduction in harm or risk of harm, or the realization of bene-
fits, associated with climate variability and climate change.

Climate change: Long-term continuous increase or decrease to climatic variables (such as 30 year averages 
of temperature and precipitation).

Climate information: This term is used in the guidebook to refer to climatic data that describe either past 
conditions, obtained from meteorological stations, or the future, obtained from the outputs of climate mo-
dels.

Climate model: A numerical representation of the climate system based on the physical, chemical, and biolo-
gical properties of its components, their interactions and feedback processes, and accounting for all or some 
of its known properties.

Climate normals: The average of weather conditions as obtained from observations for a historical 30-year 
time interval defines «typical» conditions for a given area. Note that climate normals are typically given for 
the time span that corresponds to the reference period.

Climate projection: Projections represent the future portion of climate model simulations. They are based 
on assumptions such as those concerning future socioeconomic and technological developments that may 
or may not be realized and thus are subject to uncertainty. 

Climate scenario: A coherent and internally-consistent description of the evolution in the climate for a given 
time period in the future, using a specific modelling technique and under specific assumptions about the 
evolution of greenhouse gas emissions and other factors that may influence the climate in the future. Cli-
mate projections serve as the raw material for constructing climate scenarios, but climate scenarios usually 
require additional information such as observed current climate.

Climate service providers: An organization that supplies climate information to users. The roles of these 
organizations may include providing historical climate data, running climate simulations, and tailoring their 
outputs to suit the needs of individual users.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  84


