THE NEED FOR THIS GUIDE

Climate change has become an important concern around the globe and in order to adapt to its impacts, the 
expected changes must first be understood. It can be argued that climate science has now reached a certain 
level of maturity that renders it more valuable and useful for decision-makers. At the same time, however, the 
potential impacts of climate change raise an increasing number of issues that decision-makers have to deal 
with. Consequently, making decisions based on climate information is far from straightforward. Identifying 
and obtaining the relevant information can be a challenge in and of itself but is one of many steps required 
to develop an adaptation framework (Figure 1). These steps largely stem from guidelines outlined by the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in the early 1990s for impacts and adaptation studies1–3. 
They have been described in a growing body of literature (e.g.4–8), however, most guides focused on impacts and 
adaptation generally give very limited guidance regarding the various types of climate information available. 
In this context, this guide aims to provide a tool that will help decision-makers better understand different 
types of climate information and help them better identify how this information can be used at different stages 
of the adaptation process. Knowledge exchange between climate service providers and users is increasingly 
recognized as an important step in the decision making process9.

DEFINING ADAPTATION AND DECISION-MAKER
The term adaptation is used in this guide to refer to all processes, actions and strategies that allow individuals, 
communities, and organizations to cope with, manage, and adjust to changing climatic conditions such that risks 
are minimized and opportunities are seized10. Adaptation is therefore used in a broad sense and encompasses 
a number of actions that are often separated into two categories11:  

 ›

 ›

 

 

In building adaptive capacity, which includes establishing systems for data collection and research, increasing  
awareness, evaluating vulnerabilities and risks, supporting social structures as well as governance.

In exploring adaptation outcomes, which includes initiating activities that reduce vulnerabilities or exploit  
opportunities.

In concordance with the term adaptation, the term decision-maker is used in this guide to include all individuals 
that partake in any one of the activities listed above. It therefore includes a wide range of users from those 
starting a reflection on climate change to those ready to implement adaptation measures. It is important 
to recognize that a given decision-maker may, over time, find himself at different stages of the adaptation 
framework. For instance, decision-makers may consider or implement different decisions as their knowledge of 
climate information increases or as conditions change. For example, a policy maker may first want to evaluate 
the potential vulnerability of a city to climate change (Step 4 in Figure 1) and based on that first evaluation, 
he/she may ultimately want to revise norms and policies to include specific adaptation measures (Steps 5 
and 6 in Figure 1). 
The diversity and availability of climate information have evolved over the years. However, climate information 
is generally not exploited to its fullest potential. There are a few reasons for this. First, potential users of 
climate information are numerous and will vary in their knowledge, objectives, capacities, authority and 
responsibilities12. Consequently, recognizing what and how to use climate information may not always be 
straightforward. In addition, their needs may require more specific information that must be customized to 
some degree to suit their expertise. Indeed, ‘generic’ decision support tools are not easily constructed given 
that climate related decisions are made at multiple levels and by a range of actors with varying capacities to 
handle the information13,14. Finally, climate information must be communicated and transferred efficiently 
and the optimal format used to convey the information may differ among users.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  2


