1.9.1 WHEN IS DOWNSCALING NECESSARY
The idea that finer resolution climate data is better 
can be attractive; however, downscaling will not 
necessarily  yield  more  useful  information  to 
the decision-maker. Moreover, increased model 
resolution  does  not  guarantee  superior  model 
performance for all variables and all time-scales. 
Arguably,  many  adaptation  strategies  will  be 
developed for a relatively small area (local scale), 
which  may  therefore  require  finer  resolution 
climate information. However, the mean change 
projected from a GCM over a 200 km grid cell may 
not be very different from what is projected once 
the  data  are  downscaled  to  a  smaller  grid  cell 
(from either dynamical or statistical downscaling), 
particularly  given  the  uncertainties  around  the 
model  ensemble  projections.  In  other  words, 
downscaling may improve the accuracy of some 
of the information given, but not for all variables 
over all time periods. 

Before  deciding  on  the  necessity  and  added-
value  of  downscaled  information,  the  climate 
variable of interest and the landscape features of 
the region of interest must be analyzed. Surface 
characteristics  like  topography,  coastlines  or  the 
vicinity of a body of water do not have the same 
effect  on  the  various  climate  variables  and  this 
influence  could  also  vary  from  one  season  to 
another.  For  instance,  air  surface  temperature 
is  generally  uniform  over  larger  regions  of  flat 
terrain,  but  changes  abruptly  by  the  seashore. 
On the other hand, precipitation generally tends 
to be more variable in space. Thus, in the latter 
case,  the  choice  of  reverting  to  a  dynamical 
downscaling  technique  may  be  preferable  but  it 
might not be necessary for someone interested in 
the temperature over a large region. In addition, 
the added time needed to resolve the information 
at  a  finer  scale  is  non-negligible  and  should 
be  accounted  for  (in  deciding  if  downscaling  is 
necessary). 

Downscaling and bias correction (post-processing)

There is often some confusion in separating downscaling and bias correction concepts. Bias correction 
techniques are part of what are often referred to as post-processing techniques (see next section) and 
are  not,  strictly  speaking,  related  to  downscaling  techniques.  However,  many  statistical  downscaling 
methods often involve a bias-correction step. In addition, while dynamical downscaling in and of itself 
does not involve any form of bias correction, the outputs from regional climate models are at times bias 
corrected. Hence, users often wrongly assume that bias correction and downscaling are one and the 
same. 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  24


