What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
Table 8 presents nine synthetic scenarios that were 
derived  to  simulate  increases  in  river  discharge 
along the North Shore of Montreal Island. Figure 
28 presents a map of the maximum area (in pink) 
that would be affected by a flood of the magnitude 
simulated  by  one  of  the  scenarios  presented  in 
Table 8, namely a discharge equivalent to Q100 + 
2000m3/s. 

How is the table/figure constructed?
Nine  synthetic  scenarios  of  future  discharge 
values were used to simulate a range of flooding 
events  (Table  8).  The  discharges  used  were 
based  on  hydrological  modelling  of  measured 
discharge values for the river. Plausible scenarios 
of  increases  in  discharge  were  based  on  both 
historical discharge values and expert opinions by 
hydrologists working on the project. Examples of 
simulated  values  were:  Q2  (maximum  discharge 
with a 2 year return period), Q100 (discharge with 
a 100 year return), and Q100 + 2000m3/s. Once 
the scenarios were developed, they were used to 
project water levels on a digital elevation map of 
the area of interest. The goal was to model different 
discharge overflow scenarios in order to identify 
areas most likely to be submerged (potential flood 
zones). These scenarios allowed the development 
of a map of the potential flood zones (e.g. Figure 
28) and ultimately permitted a first evaluation of 
the sensitivity of the populations to increases in 
future discharge.

 What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
Synthetic  scenarios  can  be  a  useful  approach  in 
evaluating  different  possible  futures  in  impacts 
and  adaptation  studies.  Some  of  the  main 
advantages of this type of scenarios are that they 
can help identify sensitivities in the system, they 
are  quickly  and  easily  constructed  (i.e.  do  not 
require major computational resources), and they 
are typically easy to use and understand. In this 
case, mapping flood zones needed to be modeled 
into the future and while the extent of flooding 
is  obviously  highly  dependent  on  the  discharge 
of  the  river,  this  river  is  regulated  and  so  water 
discharge is a complex variable to simulate. This 
complexity  is  heightened  by  climate  change. 
Indeed,  while  precipitation  will  explain  a  large 
portion of the variability in the discharge, other 
factors  which  are  more  difficult  to  model  may 
also  play  a  role,  such  as  water  uptake  from  the 
river upstream of the region of interest and other 
management decisions regarding flow regulations 
for example. The decision to use what-if scenarios 
therefore  allowed  a  first  evaluation  of  potential 
vulnerabilities of populations along this river. 

important  disadvantage 

However,  an 
is  that 
synthetic scenarios may not be physically plausible 
and  may  not  represent  the  physical  properties 
of the climate system. For example, some of the 
future  discharge  values  used  may  be  very  large 
compared  to  what  can  actually  occur.  Synthetic 
scenarios  must  therefore  be  constructed  with 
care with the help of experts and their underlying 
assumptions must clearly be outlined.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  72


