What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
Figure  26  shows  projected  changes  in  mean 
annual discharge values for the 2050 time horizon 
for a small watershed in Quebec (left panel) along 
with a mean annual hydrograph for one sub-basin 
(right panel). The left panel shows a south-north 
gradient  in  annual  discharge  changes  with  little 
change in  the  south  and  increases on  the  order 
of 7-9% in the northern portion of the region of 
interest.  On  the  right,  the  corresponding  mean 
annual  hydrograph  for  one  of  the  sub-basins 
shows changes in the periodicity of the flow for 
that location. The figure shows a projected shift 
in the peak discharge in the spring, with an earlier 
peak for the future 2041-2070 horizon compared 
to  the  1971-2000  reference  period.  In  addition, 
discharge values are lower in the summer and fall 
months in 2041-2070 while they are higher for the 
winter months.

How is the figure constructed?
In  this  example,  outputs  from  global  climate 
model simulations were imported into an impacts 
model, namely a hydrological model to evaluate 
how future discharges would be change. 

imported 

The  climate  model  output  data  provided  was 
relatively  simple  and  consisted  of  total  annual 
precipitation  values,  maximum  and  minimum 
daily  temperatures 
for  both  the  reference 
period (1971-2000) and for the 2050 future time 
horizon.  These  three  climate  variables  were 
subsequently 
into  one  hydrological 
model  that  calculated  daily  discharge  values  for 
both  periods  and  the  change  between  the  two 
periods.  This  analysis  used  a  total  number  of 
89  CMIP3  simulations  and  five  different  bias-
correction-post  processing  techniques  along 
with  the  hydrological  model  to  generate  445 
climate change scenarios. These scenario results 
are then  used  to  calculate the  amplitude  of  the 
mean  change  in  discharge  which  is  shown  on 
the left panel. The 445 climate scenarios are also 
used to produce the mean annual hydrograph on 
the right panel. The solid lines represent a daily 
30-year mean (either for the reference period in 
black  or  the  future  in  red),  while  the  envelopes 
represent the 10th and 90th percentiles for each 
time period.

What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
One of the biggest difficulties with using temporal 
series  is  that  it  demands  a  capacity  to  handle 
very  large  datasets.  In  addition,  it  is  important 
to  remember  that  the  information  provided  is 
often  very  case  specific  and  it  may  be  difficult 
to  extrapolate  the  results  to  other  regions. 
This  is  true  for  the  example  shown  here,  where 
both the climate data used as inputs and/or the 
parametrization of the impacts model is done for 
certain  conditions  only.  Given  the  specificity  of 
the information used for one region, one must be 
careful when extrapolating the projected changes 
to other regions.

More  specific  caveats  for  this  example  include 
that fact that the information given by the percent 
change  in  discharge  may  not  be  complete  or 
detailed  enough  to  make  decisions.  Indeed,  the 
analysis involved in producing this type of figure 
is  complex  and  results  in  a  very  large  number 
of  scenarios.  The  mean  change  shown  from  all 
scenarios  can  be  considered  as  an  advantage  in 
having a single scenario, and therefore a simple 
to  understand  value.  However,  the  uncertainty 
associated with the ensemble is also very large, 
with  scenarios  often  exhibiting  opposite  trends 
that are not shown in the figure. Given that our 
current knowledge does not allow us to reject any 
of  the  scenarios,  this  uncertainty  should  not  be 
ignored. The fact that the changes are expressed 
as percentages should also be viewed cautiously 
as some scenarios can exhibit very large changes 
in comparison to a very low reference discharge 
value  (large  relative  change  but  small  absolute 
change).

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  66


