What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
Table 6 shows projected changes (deltas) in mean 
temperature,  precipitation,  growing  degree-days 
and  frost-free  days  for  the  horizon  2050  (2041-
2070)  compared  to  the  reference  period  1961-
1990 for the province of British Columbia.

The projected changes presented in the table are 
straightforward increases for annual temperature, 
annual  growing  degree-days,  annual  frost-free 
days, as well as for annual and winter precipitation 
over  the  province  of  British  Columbia.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  median  projection  for  summer 
precipitation shows a slight decrease. The range 
in  the  values  highlights  that  there  can  be  large 
differences  among  all  the  simulations  used.  For 
example,  one  simulation  projects  increases  as 
low as +179 degree-days per year while another 
projects values of +429 degree-days per year. 

How is the table constructed?
Synthesis tables can summarize historical trends 
or projected changes (such as the example given 
here) for a given future time horizon and region 
of  interest,  and  can  be  expressed  for  different 
time periods (monthly, seasonal, or annual). The 
summary  can  be  done  for  any  area  of  interest, 
such as global, provincial, or regional scales. 

Projected  changes  are  calculated  as  the  change 
between  the  2050  horizon  (2041-2070)  and 
the  1961-1990  reference  period  using  15  global 
climate models with two SRES emission scenarios. 
An important point here is that, as shown in section 
1.11.2,  the  changes  represent  the  difference 
between  simulated  future  values  and  simulated 
reference values. In other words, the changes do 
not  represent  the  difference  between  a  model 
simulation  and  observed  climate  normals  (or 
reference) values but rather the difference within 
a simulation.

In  the  table  presented  here,  the  changes  in  the 
four  climatic  variables  are  expressed  as  the 
median change and the spread in the simulation 
ensemble.  The  ensemble  median 
is  a  mid-
point  value  of  all  simulations  used  to  calculate 
the  changes  (30  in  this  case),  while  the  range 
represents  the  10th  and  90th  percentiles  of  all 
values.  The  range  in  values  from  the  different 
models is generally referred to as the uncertainty 
in  the  models,  although  it  is  made  up  of  more 
than just differences between models. 

important 

What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
The  main  limitation  of  this  information  resides 
in the fact that the changes are often estimated 
over large areas, and may therefore not represent 
potentially 
local  differences.  For 
example,  in  this  particular  case,  the  values  are 
given for all of British Columbia, a province with 
large  topographic  relief  in  some  regions.  Given 
the  importance  of  topographic  features  of  this 
province, it is easy to imagine that the ‘average’ 
changes  given  in  the  table  may  not  adequately 
represent  all  environments  found 
in  British 
Columbia.

In addition, it is important to remember that while 
the changes are projected over the 2050 horizon, 
the actual change may be gradual and therefore 
not felt exactly during the year 2050. In addition, 
the absence of changes at the annual scale could 
mean  that  there  are  no  changes  at  all,  or  that 
changes  during  one  season  offset  changes  in 
another. More importantly, because of the natural 
variability in the climate, there may be individual 
years (or a series of consecutive years) where the 
annual  change  is  in  opposition  to  the  average 
change calculated over the 30-year period (2041-
2070).  In  other  words,  while  the  table  presents 
an 
in  average  annual  temperatures 
compared to the reference period, it quite likely 
that  some  years  will  show  annual  temperatures 
that  are  lower  than  what  has  been  experienced 
on average over the reference period.

increase 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  44


