Part of the challenge in incorporating climate information into an adaptation framework or into a decision-
making process is deciding what type of climate information is needed. Indeed, while the previous chapter 
explained many of the underlying climate science concepts, it is just as important for a decision-maker to 
understand the various climate information products that can be used to deliver that information.   
In order to familiarize decision-makers with climate information and its different uses, this chapter presents a 
simple categorization framework that divides climate information into three levels: basic, intermediate, and 
detailed information. The choice of the most appropriate climate information is often made in collaboration 
with  climate  service  providers.  The  goal  here  is  to  help  decision-makers  better  evaluate  their  climate 
information needs.
Two main concepts are addressed here: climate information categories, which reflect the climate data 
needed and climate information formats, which reflect the way the data is presented.

2.1 CLIMATE INFORMATION CATEGORIES
Climate information categories represent the climate data or climate information; namely the climate variable, 
the horizon, and the resolution of the model, which is provided to the user. The categories are based on a 
few key criteria that are specifically related to the type of climate information that is required. These criteria 
are shown in Figure 16. The categories are meant to separate climate information into three very broad 
complexity levels, from information that is fairly simple to prepare and understand to information that is 
more complex to produce and often more difficult to understand and where the uncertainties are more important.

Figure 16 |  Key criteria used to evaluate the climate information needs of decision-makers (adapted from Lu 200643).

Categories and user type

Climate information categories do not reflect a type of decision-maker but rather reflect the reason 
why the information is required, and the specifics of the climate data itself.  This implies that users that 
may be very familiar with climate information may, at times, only require basic information, while users 
unfamiliar with climate information may require detailed information. 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  34


