1.11.2 CONSTRUCTING CLIMATE SCENARIOS
One of the most important ‘best-practice’ messages 
to  remember  when  producing  or  using  climate 
scenarios is that they are constructed from climate 
simulations only and consequently, they compare 
values simulated for the past (reference period) with 
values simulated for the future (future horizon). 
These comparisons are made within each individual 
simulation. 

Climate projections should NEVER be compared 
directly  with  observations.  The  reason  climate 
model outputs or simulations cannot be compared 
directly  with  observations  is  that  climate  model 
results 
(i.e.  simulations)  are  always  slightly 
different  (as  seen  in  section  1.10),  or  biased 
compared  to  true  observations  (see  Figure  15) 
and never reproduce the observations perfectly. In 
addition, for precipitation, model projections are 
simulating the total amount of precipitation that 
would be moved around the atmosphere and fall 
over  the  entire  grid  cell  while  the  observation  is 
only measuring the finite amount that fall on the 
sensor at a particular station location. 

As  an  example,  Figure  15  presents  an  example 
of  a  climate  simulation  (red  line)  that  produces 
values that are higher than the true observations 
(black line) over the 1961-1990. In other words, 
this  simulation  is  warm-biased.  Consequently, 
if  a comparison  is  made between the simulated 
future  values  and  the  observations  (top  panel), 
the projected change is inflated (6˚C in this case). 
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  projected  change  is 
calculated  using  simulated  future  and  simulated 
past values (bottom panel), the resulting change 
is smaller (3˚C) as the warm bias in the simulation 
is  removed.  Given  that  each  simulation  yields 
slight different results, the only way to insure that 
the projected changes are not artifacts of biases, 
is  to  calculate  deltas  within  each  simulation 
and  not  with  the  observations  (and  not  among 
simulations).

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  30


