1.7 SOURCES OF UNCERTAINTY IN CLIMATE PROJECTIONS
Climate projection uncertainties stem from three 
main sources: natural variability in the climate, 
climate  model  structural  inaccuracies,  and  the 
future trajectories of greenhouse gas emissions30–32. 
As seen previously, the evolution of the climate 
is influenced by important unpredictable natural 
fluctuations that occur even without any change in 
greenhouse gases concentration. In addition, the 
models are simulating their own climate, which 
differs from reality (more or less, depending on the 
model, see Box on Model Bias) and each models 
can differ to a certain degree in its response to 
greenhouse gas emissions.  Finally, the evolution 
of greenhouse gas emissions is also uncertain and 
it is not possible at this time, to determine which, 
if any, of the four RCP trajectories will be realized. 

important since this variability can be in opposition, 
at least for a few decades, to the longer-term trends 
that are associated with anthropogenic climate 
change  (Figure  3).  It  may  take  several  decades 
before the climate ‘signal’ emerges from the ‘noise’ 
of year-to-year variability. Consequently, over short 
time scales, the choice of the emissions scenarios 
is relatively unimportant (red circle, Figure 8). This 
is perhaps surprising but it takes approximately 30 
years for any difference between current emissions 
scenarios to have an appreciable impact on the 
climate3,31. For example, on Figure 8, one can notice 
that the coloured line start to diverge around 2030 
and that a clearer distinction can be made among 
the different scenarios by 2050. 

The  relative  importance  of  each  source  of 
uncertainty depends on the timescale considered. 
Over a timescale of a few decades, the natural 
variability in the climate is the most important 
source of uncertainty and can even hide the climate 
change signal over the short term. This is extremely 

However, over longer time horizons, the choice 
of the emission scenario becomes very important 
(coloured envelopes on Figure 8), while the model 
uncertainty  remains  fairly  large  irrespective  of 
the  timescale  over  which  decisions  are  made. 
These patterns have been shown to be consistent 
for  both  global  and  regional  analysis  of  the 
uncertainties30,32–35.  

Figure 8 |  Title as Figure 7. The red circle highlights the time period prior to 2050 where models run with all four RCPs  
 
 

project similar changes in global surface temperatures. 
Source: IPCC 201319

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  18


