Collaboration between the user and climate service provider will be of utmost importance for these va-
riables  and  caution  must  be  exercised.  Indeed,  the  limitations  in  either  the  observations  (which  would 
influence the understanding of historical trends) or in the skill of the models (which would influence the 
reliability of future projections) have to be carefully examined and understood before the data is used by 
a decision-maker. The confidence will vary greatly depending on the variable of interest and on the study 
region. 

Two methods can be used to evaluate the impacts of future changes in these variables:
 

 › The  first  is  to  rely  on  climate  model  simulations,  such  as  what  is  presented  by  the  formats  given  in 
the guidebook, but with a clear understanding that the uncertainties for these variables are important. 
Nonetheless, the availability of observations for the climate variables identified in Table 7 is increasing 
along with the understanding of the processes generating them. Consequently, it is expected that our 
confidence in climate model projections for these lesser known variables will likely increase in the near 
future. 

 › The second is to rely on synthetic scenarios (also often called ‘what-if’ scenarios), where hypothetical 
futures are derived based on the best available information. Very simply, synthetic scenarios are created 
by adjusting climate elements incrementally by arbitrary amounts into the future, based on expert judg-
ment. The way in which they are adjusted should be consistent with either GCM outputs or historical 
climate data3. They can be constructed for climate variables for which we have a high degree of confi-
dence (such as temperature for example) but where resources to run climate models are limited. In such 
cases, the scenarios will allow a rapid first evaluation of the potential sensitivity of a system. They are 
particularly useful, however, for cases where the climate index of interest is not well understood at this 
time or is not well represented by climate models. In such cases, climate scientists develop hypothetical 
futures based on the best available information. 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  70


