DETAILED INFORMATION

Project Title: Study of storm patterns in Nunavik 

Region: Nunavik

Summary and Application: The objective of this study 
was  to  evaluate  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on 
coastal  maritime  infrastructures  for  seven  villages  in 
the Nunavik region60. More specifically, the goal was 
to study the impacts of storms and oceanic processes 
on premiums (water levels higher than the predicted 
tide) and on strong wave development. Both regional 
and global climate models were used to simulate storm 
characteristics,  such  as  the  number  of  events,  their 
speed,  and  their  trajectories.  Projected  changes  in 
these large systems, namely in the periodicity of storm 
events,  are  predicted  to  have  important  impacts  on 
coastal environments. 

Generally,  the  study  results 
lead  to  a  better 
understanding  of  the  processes  responsible  for  the 
creation and maintenance of large systems over Hudson 
Bay. This includes the links between their occurrences 
and  their  impact  on  the  development  of  waves  and 
premiums, which are responsible for damage to coastal 
infrastructures.  

This study also serves as an example of how results may 
be valuable to decision-makers despite some obvious 
limitations, such as the restricted number of climate 
simulations  and  associated  increased  uncertainty. 
The  overall  patterns  in  the  changes  for  example  are 
consistent for all simulations. This in itself is information 
that  decision-makers  can  retrieve  from  the  study. 
As for the uncertainties in the projections given, this 
information can be combined with other information, 
such as the vulnerability assessments of populations 
or 
infrastructures  (where  for  example  resilience 
thresholds can be identified) in order to better evaluate 
the urgency of putting adaptation measures in place. 

Website: A French copy of this report can obtained by 
contacting Ouranos. 

Project Title: Development of a warning system prototype for low flows and excessive  
 
Region: Southern Quebec

water withdrawals on the Yamaska River watershed

regional  climate  models  into  the  hydrological  model 
Hydrotel,  an  impact  model.  The  results  show  that 
longer and more severe low flows are expected for this 
watershed in the future (over the 2050 horizon, 2041-
2070).  

This  project  is  a  good  example  of  how  to  introduce 
climate  model  data  in  projects  at  the  municipal 
government level. While the issue of water management 
has been an important one for the watershed-based 
organization  of  this  river,  this  project  is  bringing  the 
issue  to  a  larger  audience.  More  specifically,  the 
warning system prototype is used to raise awareness 
and to make a better use of the resource. The climate 
change assessment results will be helpful in speeding 
up the adaptation process on the watershed. 

Website: A French copy of this report can obtained by 
contacting Ouranos. 

Summary and Application: The global objective of the 
project was to raise awareness of both the public and 
decision-makers to current low flow vulnerabilities and 
the misuse of water during summer periods. A second 
goal was to assess the impacts of climate change on low 
flows in order to start developing adaptation strategies. 
The  project  involved  the  construction  of  a  website 
where real-time river discharges and 7-day forecasts 
can  be  consulted  and  compared  to  low  flow  indices 
during the summer period. The project proposed to link 
each low flow index to a set of water use restriction 
measures. Selected cities along the Yamaska watershed 
remain  free  to  implement  the  restrictions  when  the 
flow falls below these indices. 

Real-time river flow data are measured by the Centre 
d’Expertise  Hydrique  du  Québec  while  the  forecast 
and  the  low  flows  indices  are  based  on  observed 
discharge data. The impacts of climate change on future 
discharges were assessed by importing the outputs of 

81  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


