Return period: The expected mean time between occurrences that equal or exceed a particular threshold. It 
is often used to express the frequency of occurrence of an event (freq = 1/return period).

Risk: The likelihood (probability of occurrence) of an event occurring and its impact or consequence where 
the outcome is uncertain.

Risk assessment: The process by which hazards and consequences are identified, characterized either qua-
litatively or quantitatively.

Scenario: See Climate scenario

Sensitivity: The change that results (in a variable or a system) from a specific perturbation in a parameter, 
input or assumption. Climate sensitivity is the degree by which a system would be affected, either benefi-
cially or adversely, by climate-related stimuli (e.g. radiative forcing). For example, the sensitivity of a climate 
model could be estimated by calculating its projected increases in temperature for a given increase in CO2 
concentration

Scale -Spatial and temporal: Climate may vary on a range of spatial and temporal scales. Spatial scale many 
range from local (such as a city), through regional (such as a province) to continental or global. Temporal 
scales may range from monthly, to seasonal to geological for example. 

SRES scenarios: The term stands for Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. They are emission scenarios 
developed by Nakičenovič and Swart (2000) and used, among others, as the basis for some of the climate 
projections used in the Fourth Assessment Report published by the IPCC.
Synthetic scenario: A way of constructing future climates without relying on climate models. The scenarios 
are built by adjusting meteorological parameters in a time series by incremental amounts, which are loosely 
based on either GCM outputs, past climate reconstructions, or expert opinion.

Uncertainty: An expression of the degree to which a value (e.g. the future state of the climate system) is 
unknown. Uncertainty can result from lack of information or from disagreement about what is known or 
even knowable. It can have many types of sources, from quantifiable errors in data to ambiguously defined 
concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour.

Variable: The term climate variable is used to refer to a variable that can be measured directly in the field (at 
meteorological stations for example) or that is calculated by climate models. (See Index)

Variability: See Climate variability

Vintage: The term vintage is used in the guide to refer to global climate model ensembles that are issued 
from one particular Coupled Model Intercomparison Project, such as CMIP3 and CMIP5.

Vulnerability: The degree to which is system is susceptible to, and unable to cope with, adverse effects of 
climate change. It is a function of the character, magnitude and rate of change to which a system is exposed 
and the sensitivity and adaptive capacity of that system.

87  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


