1.9.2 DYNAMICAL OR STATISTICAL DOWNSCALING
The choice of downscaling method to use is not a 
simple one. There are a number of factors (listed 
in  Table  3)  that  must  be  considered  by  climate 
service  providers  in  deciding  which  method  to 
use. First, with statistical downscaling techniques, 
each  climate  variable 
treated 
individually,  which  may  result  in  the  physical 
coherence between the variables being broken. In 
other words, the mathematical representation of 
the physics behind the climate that are present in 
a global climate model may no longer hold true. 
Some  climate  variables  may  be  more  sensitive 
than others to this issue. 

is  generally 

In  addition,  statistical  downscaling 
is  based 
on  statistical  relationships  between  the  local 
observations  of  a  variable  of  interest  and  other 
coarser  resolution  climate  variables  used  as 
predictors.  Adequate 
local  observations  from 
meteorological  stations  are  therefore  necessary. 
In  addition,  these  statistical  relationships  are 
assumed to be constant (or stationary) over time 
which may not be true in a changing climate. This 
assumption may not be too problematic for some 

variables  for  shorter  term  projections  but  the 
uncertainty is greater for projections for the end 
of the century.

far  outweighs 

Finally,  the  number  of  global  climate  model 
simulations 
the  number  of 
regional  climate  model  simulations  that  have 
currently  been  produced  over  North  America. 
Consequently,  a  much 
larger  number  of 
projections  can  be  provided  by  statistically 
downscaling  GCM  simulation  results.  If  a  large 
ensemble of projections is important to the study 
at hand, then statistical downscaling could be the 
preferred choice. If, on the other hand, a smaller – 
but carefully chosen –simulation sample suffices, 
then dynamical downscaling could be used. 

The factors listed above highlight the complexity 
in choosing, first whether to downscale at all, and 
second, which method to use. There is not a sole 
correct answer here and ultimately the selection 
will depend on the objectives and resources of the 
project. 

Table 3 |  Comparison of the advantages and limitations of both dynamical and statistical downscaling.

Dynamical 

Statistical 

 

 

 

 › Reproduces more detailed characteristics  

of the climate 

 › Consistency  in  time  and  space  among  

variables

 › More costly and longer to produce

 › Small  number  of 
simulations available

regional  climate  

 › More variables (wind, soil moisture, etc.)

 › Assumes  that  past  relationships  hold  

true in the future

 › Decline  in  spatiotemporal  consistency  

(one variable at a time)

 › Quicker and less expensive to produce 

 › Large  number  of  global  simulations  

available

 › Dependent  on  observations 

difficult for certain variables)

(more  

 

 

 

 

25  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


