Project Title: Planning for climate change adaptation: lessons learned from a community- 
 

based workshop.

Region: City of Prince George, British Columbia

Climate  information  used:  Climate  normals,  climate 
evolution  and  trends,  graphs  and  maps  of  projected 
future changes. 

Summary  and  Application:  The  overall  goal  of  this 
project  was  to  provide  an  analysis  of  historical  and 
projected  changes  in  the  hydro-climatology  for  the 
Prince George region. This information produced by the 
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) was meant as 
a tool to inform the public, municipal officers, planners, 
and researchers of the potential risks, vulnerabilities 
and opportunities of climate change in this region58.

The  city  was  given  information  on  both  historical 
normals and trends along with future projections for 
temperature and precipitation. This allowed an analysis 
of  the  strong  natural  climate  variability  observed  in 
that region, due in part to the effects of El Niño, the 
Southern Oscillation, and the Pacific Decadal Oscillation. 
The  magnitude  of  projected  changes  could  then  be 
compared  with  this  variability.  The  results  informed 
the  City  of  Prince  George  that  important  changes  in 
temperature and precipitation were projected, which 
were likely to have important impacts on many factors, 
such  as  flood  risks,  forest  fires,  water  supply,  and 
transportation infrastructure, to name a few. 

This  climate 
information  was  presented  at  two 
workshops  in  Prince  George,  which  allowed  the 
city  officials  a  valuable  opportunity  to  visualize  the 
information,  to  digest  it  and  importantly,  to  address 
questions  directly  to  the  climate  scientist  who  had 
produced the information59 Based on this information, 
they could then discuss specific impacts and explore 
adaptation options for the city.

The outcome of these exercises was the development 
of an adaptation strategy for the City of Prince George, 
where top adaptation priorities were identified along 
with potential actions to address them. Workshops and 
discussions between city officials and climate scientists 
also helped identify additional climate information and 
analysis needed to improve city planning, notably in 
terms of infrastructure and emergency planning. 

Website:  A  copy  of  the  report  can  be  found  at: 
http://www.pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/
publications/Werner.ClimateChangePrinceGeorge.
Aug2009.pdf

For  a  copy  of  a  journal  article  on  the  project:  DOI: 
10.1016/j.envsci.2011.12.011

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  80


