1.2 CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate change is a long-term continuous change, 
an increasing or decreasing trend, in relation to 
average baseline conditions. This change is strongly 
modulated by the natural variability in the climate. 
Figure 2 shows annual mean temperature data 
plotted over time. Clearly, the annual temperature 
is not constant but varies from year-to-year. This 
natural variability will persist, even if the long-term 
trend is for annual mean temperature to increase, 
as shown in Figure 3. 

A

B

This implies that, in order to pick up a clear climate 
change  signal  (Figure  3),  climate  data  must  be 
averaged  over  relatively  long  periods  of  time 
(see Box on Climate normals). Given the natural 
variability in the climate, it will still be possible with 
climate change, to experience short terms trends 
that are opposite to the overall projected trend 
due to climate change. It is therefore important 
to  beware  of  trends  that  are  calculated  over  a 
relatively small number of years (Figure 3a). 

Figure 3 |  Time-series of annual temperature over Quebec, as simulated by the Canadian Regional Climate Model,  
along with trend lines for a relatively A. short period and B. longer period that highlight the fact that short- 
 
term trends may not reflect long-term climate change trends.
 
Source: R. deElìa (Ouranos) 
 

Climate normals

Climate normals are averages of climate indices used to represent the recent past climate for a given 
area. The time period used for climate normals often corresponds to the time period used as a baseline 
or reference period in climate change calculations. Note that climate normals should not be confused 
with reference period. Climate normals are calculated using observed station data while reference 
period  values  are  calculated  using  outputs  from  simulations.  Climate  normals  are  calculated  using 
observations  of  temperature  and  precipitation  that  have  been  collected  globally  since  the  mid-19th 
century (some stations have longer time series), along with other climate variables on a more selective 
basis. To facilitate comparisons among studies, climate centers around the world tend to converge on 
a similar 30-year timeframe to represent climate normals, which are endorsed by the WMO. However, 
it is important to note that other sources of observations such as satellite data are available for much 
shorter and more recent time periods. The particularities of the study undertaken by the decision-maker 
can influence the baseline period chosen. What is important is that the reference or baseline period be 
long enough to adequately characterize the long-term climatic conditions and not be overly influenced 
by short-term variability. For example, a 10 year average could easily be influenced by a short-term 
warming or cooling trend, whereas a 30 year average would likely smooth out much of this effect (as 
seen in Figure 2).

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  8


