The goal of this section is to present how climate information can be tailored to the audience. In other words, 
the same climate information (e.g. past trends or projected future changes) can be presented using different 
formats. For example, projected changes in temperatures can be presented using a synthesis table (e.g. p.43), 
a map (e.g. p.48), or using a graph that plots the evolution of the change over time (e.g. p.59). 
The objective of this chapter is to present as many of the most commonly used formats as possible (Table 5). 
However, new formats are continually being developed by climate service providers and particular formats 
can always be created to meet the preferences of decision-makers or the particularities of a project.
In order to increase the capacity of decision-makers to critically evaluate the information that is provided to 
them, all figures, graphs and maps presented in this section are accompanied by explanations that describe: 
1) what climate information is presented and how should it be interpreted, 2) how the figure is constructed 
and 3) what are the limitations/caveats/possible ways to misinterpret the information.  In addition, the use 
of coloured font will remind the reader that additional information on key climate science concepts can be 
found in Chapter 1.

Table 5 |  Climate information formats associated with each of the three climate information categories. 

CATEGORY

BASIC

TYPE OF CLIMATE INFORMATION 

COMMONLY PROVIDED
Historical trends and future 
mean changes over large spatial 
and temporal scales and for 
simple climate variables

INTERMEDIATE

Future changes or future 
absolute values of more complex 
climate variables over finer 
spatial scales

DETAILED

Future changes in means, 
absolute values and extremes 
over finer spatial scales

EXAMPLES OF COMMON CLIMATE 

INFORMATION FORMATS

Synthesis tables 
Climate normals 
Historical trends (station data, 
homogenized climate records)
Delta changes: 
   Map of projected global changes
   Map of projected regional changes 
All formats from the basic category +
Spatial analogues 
Scatter plots 
Map of projected future values
Evolution of future values 
Cumulative distribution function

All formats from the basic and 
intermediate categories +
Temporal series 
Analysis of extremes –IDF curves
Analysis of low-confidence climate 
indices and events 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  40


