What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
Figures  of  this  type  give  decision-makers  an 
estimate of past general conditions for their area 
of interest. However, the values are averaged for 
a  relatively  long  period  of  time  that  masks  the 
season-to-season  or  year-to-year  variability  in 
the  climate.  This  information  is  more  adequate 
for ‘big picture’ decisions. For example, it is clear 
from such information that while you may be able 
to grow grain species in southern Canada, it is not 
possible to do so in Northern Canada. However, 
the  information  may  not  provide  enough  detail 
for  more  local  decisions;  for  example,  such  as 
deciding what specific crop species to plant. This 
decision  would  require  additional  information, 
such as the range in climate conditions that will 
be experienced by the crop species. In addition, 
the map shows average recent past conditions but 
gives  no  indication  about  how  those  conditions 
may  change  in  the  future.  Consequently,  using 
historical 
to 
maladaptation.

information  alone  could 

lead 

What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
The  figure  presents  a  map  of  observed  average 
annual temperatures across Canada for the period 
1971-2000 on a 10 km by 10 km grid. 

This figure shows that average or normal annual 
temperatures  vary  greatly  across  Canada.  For 
example, while average temperatures in Toronto 
are  around  5°C,  average  annual  temperatures 
in  Whitehorse  and  Yellowknife  are  closer  to 
-5  to  -10°C.  This 
implies  that  populations, 
infrastructures  and  ecosystems  are  already 
adapted to different climatic conditions.

How is the figure constructed?
Climate  normals  are  observed  climate  variable 
averages  calculated  using  time-series  of  climatic 
data  obtained 
from  meteorological  stations 
across Canada*. Such maps can represent simple 
climatic variables such as mean temperature and 
precipitation  but  the  same  format  can  be  used 
to  showcase  any  other  climatic  indices,  such 
as  growing  degree-days  or  number  of  freeze-
thaw  cycles.  Meteorological  station  data  can  be 
averaged over any given region of interest (a single 
province for example) and for any given time step, 
depending on data availability (such as annual or 
monthly for example).

In this case, the figure shows 30-year temperature 
normals  on  a  regular  grid  (where  each  polygon  
or  grid  point  is  10  km  by  10  km),  and  where 
each  polygon  value  corresponds  to  the  average 
temperature  for  the  1971-2000  period.  The 
daily  temperature  values  are  averaged  for  each 
year  from  1971  and  2000  and  the  average  of 
those  30  values  is  plotted  on  the  figure.  Note 
that climate normals  are generally given for the 
same timeframe that is used as a reference in the 
construction of climate scenarios, but that it is not 
necessarily  always  the case.

* This data comes from a Natural Resources Canada database44 in the form of a gridded data set that covers all of Canada with a grid 
size of 10 km by 10 km with a daily time step (Environment Canada meteorological station data is interpolated on this grid). The data 
covers the period 1950-2010. The same analysis could be done using station data itself or using other similar datasets with different 
grid sizes (e.g. CANGRID).

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  46


