Understanding climate information is a foundation step in making well-informed decisions in the face of climate change. 
However, climate information is only one of many aspects that must be considered in a decision-making 
process. Numerous other factors, such as demographic changes, technological advances and tolerance to 
risk, to name a few, also play critical roles9. While it is beyond the scope of this guide to detail the adaptation 
decision-making process, key messages relevant to the information presented in this guidebook include:

1.  Decision-makers routinely deal with many different sources of uncertainty concerning the future, aside 
from the fact that the climate or the weather is also changing. Variables such as demographic changes, 
economic growth and many others, impact the way decisions are made, but do not prevent long-term 
decisions such as investing in major infrastructure or protecting areas from development. Lessons learned 
from decision-making in the face of these other uncertainties can help inform the decision-making process 
under a changing climate.

2.  Climate information should never be the sole basis upon which decisions are made but instead must 
be used in combination with other  decision-support  tools  such as cost-benefit, multi-criteria analyses or 
hazard mapping tools. Including a range of factors will help ensure that decisions are robust and more readily 
implemented. Such analysis will help recognize adaptation measures that may be theoretically attractive but 
that could generate undesired impacts, may not be economically viable or do not have enough public support 
to be put in place.

3.  There is no such thing as the best climate scenario. The range of results obtained from a large number 
of climate simulations must be used to guide decisions. This spread in climate model results informs the 
decision-maker on the probable outcomes from worse to best given the current state of knowledge.
One way that the range in climate model results feeds into an effective decision-making framework is through 
the use of a sensitivity analysis that allows decision-makers to assess the consequences of each alternative 
future. The goal is to evaluate the impacts associated with the range of different climate scenarios and assess 
how adaptation measures perform in the face of this range of plausible futures. Different approaches can be 
used to conduct a sensitivity analysis, such as:

 › estimating the consequences of each alternative future;

 ›

 

identifying climate scenarios under which a given policy or adaptation measure would fail and what the  
consequences might be;

 › using the full range of available scenarios to determine which adaptation measures will perform well  
regardless of the magnitude or intensity of the expected climate change – these are often referred to as  
no-regret measures.

 
 
Scenario planning represents another way to consider the uncertainties. In this approach, initial common 
steps are identified for a number of different possible solutions that do not confine the results to only one 
end point, but rather leave many options open. Critical milestones can be used to reassess the adaptation 
measures in light of the best available science, and adjustments to plans made as required.

4.  Decision-making in a changing world implies that an iterative risk management approach should be 
prioritized. Decisions must be re-evaluated and adjusted as new knowledge about both climatic and non-
climatic variables becomes available. Monitoring and learning should be an important part of the process.

75  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


