BASIC INFORMATION

Consortium (PCIC) 

Project Title: Regional Climate Summaries Series produced by the Pacific Climate Impacts  
 
Region:  Eight  resource  regions  of  British  Columbia, 
namely  the  Cariboo,  Kootenay-Boundary,  Northeast, 
Omineca, Skeena, South Coast, Thompson-Okanagan, 
and West Coast.

degree-days, and frost-free days, are also given for the 
2050 horizon in a table format. These projections are 
reproduced from Plan2Adapt.ca, PCIC’s web platform 
for basic climate projections.  

Summary  and  Application:  The  summaries  were 
produced  with  the  support  of  the  BC  Ministry  of 
Forestry,  Lands  and  Natural  Resource  Operations, 
as  part  of  PCIC’s  ongoing  mission  to  help  regional 
stakeholders  in  British  Columbia  plan  for  projected 
changes to climate. 

The summaries describe climate change projections for 
each region in the context of historical observations and 
province-wide climate change. Each summary begins 
with  a  brief,  general  overview  of  climate  change  in 
BC and a short discussion of the topography, climate 
influences, ecosystems and economies of the region. 

The summaries present the historical temperature and 
precipitation trends of the regions using both summary 
tables  and  evolution  figures.  Projected  changes  of  a 
number  of  climatic  variables,  such  as  temperature, 
precipitation, snowfall, growing degree-days, heating 

In  addition  to  highlighting  historical  trends  and 
the  future  projections,  the  summaries  also  outline 
key  impacts  that  may  be  felt  by  various  sectors, 
infrastructure and ecosystems.

The  information  presented  in  the  summaries  has 
been used by the Government of British Columbia to 
present a portrait of the climate to decision-makers and 
planners of the province. By giving a general overview 
of the evolution of the climate over the past 100 years 
and of the projected changes over the next 50 years, 
the information can be used to start a dialogue about 
the  impacts  that  have  already  been  felt  by  different 
actors of the sector and to begin a reflection on possible 
future impacts. 

Website: 
publications

http://www.pacificclimate.org/resources/

Project Title: Rosemont – La Petite-Patrie’s zoning bylaw to reduce the urban heat island  
 

effect.

Region: Montreal’s borough of Rosemont – La Petite-
Patrie

Summary  and  Application:  This  borough  is  densely 
built  and  subject  to  significant  heat  island  effects. 
This phenomenon occurs in cities where ambient air 
temperatures  tend  to  be  hotter  than  in  surrounding 
areas due to the high percentage of dark surfaces (such 
as tar roofs and asphalt roads), the amount of heat-
retaining (namely concrete) buildings that cool more 
slowly than the surrounding air, and limited vegetated 
areas.  

In order to combat this problem, the borough council 
revised its zoning bylaw in April 2011 to include the 
following four regulatory measures: (1) when replacing 
an  existing  roof  or  constructing  a  new  building,  the 
owner  must  install  either  a  green  roof  or  a  highly 
reflective roof; (2) for all new parking lots of 10 or more 
spaces, at least 15 percent of the area must be open 

ground landscaped with plants, bushes and trees; (3) all 
new paving materials must meet a minimum specified 
surface reflectivity rating; and (4) when constructing a 
new building, at least 20 percent of the building site 
must  remain  open  ground  and  be  landscaped  with 
plants, bushes and trees. 

is  not  always  required 

This example highlights the fact that complex climate 
information 
in  order  to 
implement adaptation measures. Indeed, basic climate 
information, such as recent past trends and projected 
changes in temperatures are sufficient in this case to 
appreciate that the issue of urban heat islands is most 
likely  going  to  become  increasingly  important  in  the 
future.

Website:http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/
page?_pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_
schema=PORTAL See  also  :  Richardson  and  Otero 
(2012)55 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  78


