What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
The  figure  presents  projected  changes  in  winter 
(DJF) precipitation and winter (DJF) temperature 
for  the  2080  horizon  (2071-2100)  by  different 
global simulations with RCPs 4.5 and 8.5 for the 
provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia, in 
comparison with the 1971-2000 reference period.

The  main  panel  shows  a  clear  separation  in 
the  projected  changes  between  the  two  RCP 
emission  scenarios.  Climate  models  that  were 
run  with  RCP8.5  show  greater  precipitation  and 
temperature  changes.  When  all  simulations  are 
considered, the range in temperatures deltas for 
2080  varies  from  0째C  to  9째C,  while  changes  in 
precipitation range from -3% to 30%.

The  density  functions,  on  the  left  and  bottom 
of the figure, highlight a peak in the number of 
simulations that show increases in temperatures 
around  3째C  for  RCP4.5    and    of  6째C  for  RCP8.5. 
In  term  of  changes  in  precipitation,  the  density 
functions peak around 5% for RCP4.5 and around 
15% for RCP8.5. The curves show a good degree 
of  separation,  with  two  distinct  peaks,  between 
the two RCP families for temperature. In contrast, 
the precipitation curves overlap a great deal.

in  precipitation  and 

How is the figure constructed?
Scatter plots typically illustrate projected changes 
(deltas) 
temperature, 
although  any  two  climate  variables  of  interest 
could  be  used,  simulated  by  different  climate 
models under different emissions scenarios for a 
region and future horizon of interest. They allow 
a general view of the expected changes and more 
importantly, of the range projected by an ensemble 
of simulations. A rapid comparison between what 
is expected under different emissions scenarios is 
also possible.

This  particular  case  presents  the  changes  in 
winter  temperatures  and  precipitation  for  the 
2080  (2071-2100)  horizon  with  respect  to  the 
1971-2000  reference  period  as  projected  by  an 
ensemble of CMIP5 simulations (100 simulations 
with  RCP4.5  and  60  simulations  with  RCP8.5). 
The elliptical lines indicate the 50th, 75th, and 95th 
percent confidence intervals.

The  figure  presented  here  also  shows  density 
functions  on  the  left  and  on  the  bottom  of  the 
figure for all scenarios (black curve) and each RCP 
family (coloured curves) for both climatic variable. 
Note that these curves are not always presented 
with scatter plots.

What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
While this figure clearly highlights that there can 
be a large spread in the projected changes under 
different  simulations,  the  causes  (or  sources)  of 
the  spread  in  the  simulations  are  not  explained 
in  the  graphic.  However,  understanding  that 
different sources of uncertainties (stemming from 
natural variability, emissions scenarios or model 
differences) have a different relative importance 
over  different  timescales  can  be  valuable 
complementary information to decision-makers.

The  fact  that  the  changes  in  precipitation  are 
expressed as percentages should also be viewed 
cautiously  as  some  simulations  can  exhibit  very 
large changes in comparison to very low absolute 
reference values.

Scatter  plots  are  sometimes  used  to  manually 
select a sub-set of future scenarios; for example 
scenarios showing the largest changes in annual 
temperature  and  precipitation.  However,  the 
position  of  individual  scenarios  in  a  scatter  plot 
can be highly variable from season to season and 
from  region  to  region.  Consequently,  selecting 
scenarios  using  a  two-dimensional  scatter  plot 
based on annual changes may not be appropriate 
if the seasonal impacts are of interest.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  56


