EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Climate change is unequivocal. There is ample evidence from around the globe that changes have already 
occurred. This reality is forcing decision-makers to evaluate the potential impacts, risks, vulnerabilities and 
opportunities that climate change presents. The development of adaptation plans and actions to adjust to 
this new reality requires decision-makers to increase their understanding of climate information. However, 
given the complexity of climate science, climate change information often remains difficult to understand by 
many users. 

There is clear need for providers of climate information to find different ways to present information in 
order to engage stakeholders from different sectors. This transfer of knowledge between climate scientists 
and  users  must  not  only  include  the  climate  information  itself,  but  also  a  discussion  about  how  climate 
information  is  produced  and  about  the  uncertainties  that  are  associated  with  this  information.  These 
uncertainties are often viewed as barriers to climate change adaptation but a better understanding of them, 
and more importantly, a better comprehension of how they affect the interpretation of future impacts can 
alleviate some of the challenges associated with using climate information. 

This guidebook is meant to address some of the main challenges practitioners of adaptation to climate change 
often face in using climate information. The main goals are to increase their capacity to better understand 
climate information, to better evaluate their own climate information needs, and to become more critical of 
the information that is provided to them.

This  guide  is  arguably  most useful  to those with  limited climate information  experience as it provides a 
general introduction of many concepts related to climate science and climate scenarios production. Given 
the complexity of climate science, the document highlights the importance of working in collaboration with 
climate service providers and will help users engage more easily with them. 

For users more familiar with climate information, or those who regularly use climate data, the document will 
help identify ways to best showcase their results for different target audiences. Indeed, it is not uncommon 
for users who are very familiar with climate information to have to translate that information for users or 
stakeholders who are themselves not as comfortable with such information.

The guide is divided into five chapters. Chapter 1 provides fact sheets of key concepts in future climate 
modeling. This section helps users become more familiar with climate science jargon, which is often necessary 
to better understand climate information; Chapter 2 outlines a framework to categorize climate information 
in terms of its purpose and complexity into three categories: basic, intermediate, and detailed. This section 
uses a decision-tree approach to helps users better formulate their climate information needs; Chapter 3 
provides a catalogue of climate information formats that can be associated to one of the three categories 
identified in the previous chapter. This section describes different ways in which climate information may 
be provided to different users based on their level of expertise and preference; Chapter 4 discusses best 
practices in using future climate information given its inherent uncertainty; Chapter 5 highlights some case 
studies of how climate information can be used to guide decisions in climate change adaptation.

VI  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


