What is climate information?

The term climate information is used in this document to refer to climate data that are obtained from 
observations from meteorological stations or from climate models. The former provides information on 
historical events while the latter can simulate both past and future periods. The focus of the guide is 
largely on future climate information. 

TARGET AUDIENCE 

This guide is intended to be broad-reaching and written in a general fashion in order to help decision-
makers from all sectors of activity faced with the task of evaluating the impacts of climate change and/or 
of implementing adaptation measures. In other words, the guide targets an audience already invested in 
climate change adaptation that is for example going through an adaptation process described in Figure 1. The 
information presented will be particularly useful for users who have limited experience with climate information 
and climate services. A better understanding of the available climate information will increase their ability to 
evaluate their particular needs and to either prepare the information themselves or to communicate their 
requirements to climate service providers.

Climate service providers will also benefit from the guide since it will help them better categorize demands 
in terms of the use or purpose of the climate information and acquire a better sense of the different types 
of climate formats that can be tailored according to user expertise. The latter is also true for those who 
regularly use climate data and therefore understand climate science concepts well but must often find a way 
to present their results to stakeholders who may not generally be as familiar with climate information. 

OBJECTIVES 

The overall objectives of this guidebook are to increase the capacity of decision-makers to understand climate 
information and to incorporate this information in a decision-making framework.  The guide should, on one 
hand, serve as a reminder to users to become more critical of the information that is given to them, and on 
the other, it should also serve as a reminder to climate service providers to become more transparent about 
the way in which climate information is produced. 

HOW TO USE THIS GUIDE

This guidebook is meant to appeal to a wide range of users and therefore contains information with varying 
levels of complexity. Consequently, many will not need to read the entire document. Rather, users may want 
to focus their efforts on sections that are most relevant to them.
A few important points should guide the reader through this document:

 › Part of the challenge for decision-makers in using climate information is often to understand the terminology  
used by climate scientists. Many such concepts are addressed in Chapter 1 and are highlighted using bold  
coloured font throughout the guide. 

 › The level of complexity of the climate information increases fairly rapidly with the progression through the  
different figures and graphics presented in Chapter 3. It may therefore be helpful to evaluate one’s needs in  
Chapter 2 and then use that information to focus on the associated climate information category in  
Chapter 3. 

 
 

 
 
 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  4


