What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
The  top  figure  shows  projected  changes 
in 
annual  mean  temperature  across  the  globe  for 
the  horizon  2081-2100  in  comparison  to  the 
reference period 1986-2005, for RCPs 2.6 and 8.5, 
as published by the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) in their latest assessment 
report,  published  in  201319.  The  figure  suggests 
that the Arctic region will warm more rapidly than 
the  global  mean,  and  that  mean  warming  over 
land will be larger than over the ocean. 

The  bottom  figure  also  presents  projected 
changes  in  mean  annual  temperature  but  for  a 
smaller  domain,  namely  across  Canada,  for  the 
horizon  2080  (2071-2100)  in  comparison  with 
the reference period 1971-2000. Median changes 
in  annual  temperature  for  the  2080  horizon 
range from 2.5째C to 5째C, while the 10th and 90th 
percentiles suggest changes as low as 1째C and as 
high as 8째C (not in the same locations however). 
The  greatest  changes  are  expected  to  occur  in 
Northern regions.

How is the figure constructed?
The  information  presented  in  these  figures  is 
essentially the same as the information given in 
synthesis tables except that the expected changes 
are presented as maps, usually based on gridded 
data.  The  changes  are  calculated  for  a  specific 
future  horizon  by  comparing  it  to  the  reference 
period (this is often referred to as the change-field 
method).  The  difference  is  calculated  for  each 
polygon  (or  model  grid  cell)  and  for  all  climate 
simulations that have been chosen. The changes 
can be calculated for any given time frame, such 
as monthly, seasonal or annual changes (as is the 
case here). 

In both figures, a large number of models were 
used  to  compute  the  changes.  In  Figure  A,  32 
models  from  the  CMIP5  ensemble  were  used 
with RCP2.6 and 39 CMIP5 models with RCP8.5. 
For Figure B, the changes or deltas were obtained 
using  137  global  model  simulations  from  the 
CMIP3 using 3 SRES emissions scenarios (A2, A1b, 
B1). The changes are subsequently plotted over a 
common grid. Note that the size of the polygons 
is generally driven by the resolution of the climate 
models used. For example, global climate models 
typically have a resolution of approximately 200-
300 km whereas regional climate models have a 
resolution of approximately 45 km and less.

To synthesize the outputs from all the simulations 
used, a mean (as in the top Figure) or a median 
(as in the bottom Figure) of the ensemble is often 
shown. As with the synthesis table, the range in 
the  simulations,  which  gives  an  estimate  of  the 
uncertainty  in  the  projections,  should  also  be 
represented. In Figure A (globe), this is done by 
the  use  of  hatching  and  stippling  that  indicate 
whether  the  multi-model  mean  presented  on 
the  figure  is  small  or  large  in  comparison  with 
the natural variability. In Figure B (Canada), this 
is  done  by  giving  not  only  the  median  value  of 
the  simulation  ensemble  (left  panel)  but  also 
giving complementary maps that show the range 
in  the  simulations,  expressed  by  the  10th  and 
90th percentiles. The choice of the percentiles is 
arbitrary, and could potentially take on any value 
of  choice,  such  as  25th  and  75th  percentiles  for 
example.
 
What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
While  such  figures  point  to  the  fact  that 
temperatures  are  increasing  across  large  scales, 
they  also  highlight  the  fact  that  not  all  regions 
will experience the same increase. Consequently, 
this type of climate information may be useful to 
raise  the  awareness  of  stakeholders  to  climate 
change.  However,  it  does  not  detail  how  local 
changes may differ significantly from this global or 
national picture. Consequently, using such coarse 
projections  implies  that  the  local  relevance  of 
adaptation decisions is less certain.

In  addition,  the  values  shown  on  such  figures 
give  the  amount  of  change  that  is  estimated  by 
the models. However, in order to appreciate how 
important that change may be, it is often necessary 
to combine this information with climate normals, 
which give users a baseline value upon which to 
evaluate the projected changes. Similarly, climate 
trends can provide additional context to aid with 
the  interpretation  of  the  magnitude  of  future 
changes.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  50


