1.3 CLIMATE MODELS 
Climate  models  are  numerical  tools  based  on 
mathematical  equations  that  aim  to  represent 
processes of the climate system. These equations 
are  based  on  physical  laws  which  govern  fluid 
mechanics, such as the laws of conservation of 
mass,  energy,  and  momentum.  They  describe 

the  behaviour  and  interactions  between  the 
atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere 
and biosphere, under external forcings such as 
solar radiation, aerosols, as well as natural and 
anthropogenic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions 
(Figure 4).

Figure 4 |  Interactions described by climate models (left panel) and an example of the discrete grids used to compart 
 
 

mentalize the climate system (right panel). 
Source: Ouranos 

Numerous climate models have been developed 
by  different  climate  science  centers  around  the 
world. The models differ in a number of factors, 
such as the choice of the numerical scheme, the 
degree  of  simplification,  the  resolution  of  their 
grid and the way in which they represent physical 
phenomena that occur at scales finer than the one 
resolved directly by the basic equations (known as 
parameterization). Also, an important difference 
among  models  comes  from  the  geophysical 
fields used to represent the soil textures and the 
vegetation  types  and  cover.  These  fields  along 
with the topography and the GHG concentration / 
emission are needed as inputs in climate models. 
Such differences imply that each model is unique 
and will generate a slightly different outcome with 
the same forcing data. 

As the nature of the climatic system is non-linear 
(chaotic),  obtaining  an  exact  analytical  solution 
of  the  mathematical  equations  over  the  entire 
globe would require so many simplifications that 
the solution would be too different from the real 
system  to  be  very  useful.  The  way  to  minimize 
these  simplifications  is  to  solve  the  system  of 
equations numerically with a supercomputer and 
sophisticated  numerical  methods.  In  order  to 
obtain  the  most  accurate  representation  of  the 
climate, these equations would ideally be solved 
for  every  point  of  the  atmosphere,  oceans  and 
of the upper layer of the soil, but in practice this 
is impossible. Instead, these components of the 
climate  system  are  divided  into  discrete  boxes 
or grid cells covering the planet (Figure 4, right 
panel). The size of the grid cells, both horizontally 
and  vertically,  determines  the  resolution  of  the 
climate model. Thus, a climate model is a simulator 
consisting  of  computer  code  that  provides  a 
discrete  representation  (i.e.  on  a  grid)  in  space 
and time of the basic equations of fluid mechanics 
solved using a numerical scheme. 

9  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


