What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
The  figure  shows  the  climatic  normals  and 
the  projections  of  absolute  future  values  in 
annual  freezing  degree-days  for  the  province  of 
Newfoundland for the horizon 2050 (2046-2065) 
and 2090 (2081-2100) on a 10 km by 10 km grid. 
Freezing degree-days correspond to the absolute 
difference between the mean daily temperature 
and a threshold of 0°C. For example, if the daily 
mean temperature is equal to -5°C, the number 
of  freezing  degree-days  for  that  day  is  equal  to 
5.  If  the  temperature  is  above  0°C,  the  freezing 
degree-days are equal to zero. Annual values are 
obtained  by  adding  up  the  freezing  degree-day 
values of all days of the year.

The top panel first highlights the fact that climate 
normals  in  annual  number  of  freezing  degree-
days  are  spatially  variable  over  the  province 
of  Newfoundland,  with  values  ranging  from 
approximately 300 to 1300 for the period 1971-
2000. Note that these normals come from station 
data; they are not simulated by climate models. 
These  values  are  used  in  the  bias-correction 
process to obtain future values presented in the 
bottom panels.

The  future  maps  point  to  a  decrease  in  the 
number of freezing degree-days, due to warming 
temperatures. The median values (50th percentile 
maps) show that there are fewer freezing degree-
days in 2090 than in 2050. Notice that the biggest 
differences  in  values  are  shown  in  the  10th 
percentile maps.

How is the figure constructed?
The  top  panel  presents  climatic  normals  for  the 
period 1971- 2000, which are derived as shown in 
section 1.2.

Just  as  with  the  maps  presented  in  the  basic 
category,  the  future  values  are  calculated  over 
a  specific  future  horizon.  Values  are  calculated 
for  each  of  the  climate  simulations  over  every 
polygon  over  a  time  frame  of  interest.  In  this 
case,  projected  values  in  the  annual  number  of 
freezing  degree-days  are  given  for  two  future 
horizons, namely 2050 and 2090. The 10th, 50th 
and 90th percentile values represent the range in 
the simulations used, namely 79 simulations (75 
from the CMIP3 global ensemble and 4 from the 
regional CRCM 4.2.3 model).

The  largest  difference  between  this  data  and 
that  presented  in  the  previous  category  is  that 
these  results  do  not  present  deltas  or  mean 
changes  between  two  time  periods  but  rather 
present  future  projected  absolute  values  of 
freezing  degree-days  for  the  two  time  horizons. 
This information is often considered as an added 
value to the more basic delta maps shown in the 
previous sections and one that requires additional 
post-processing  of 
the  data.  The  climate 
scenarios obtained using a total of 79 simulations 
underwent  a  bias-correction  method  to  obtain 
absolute values over a 10 km grid.

is 

What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
The fact that the 10th percentile maps show the 
biggest changes as opposed to the 90th percentile 
maps 
important  and  may  be  somewhat 
confusing. Indeed, the largest change is typically 
represented  by  the  90th  percentile  simulations. 
Imagine  comparing  future  temperature  values 
with  average  annual  temperatures  for  example. 
One 
if  temperatures 
are  increasing,  there  will  be  a  gradient  in  the 
projected temperatures, such that 10th percentile 
temperature < 50th percentile temperature <90th 
percentile temperature. However, for the case of 
freezing degree-days, there is an overall decreasing 
trend and as a result, the lowest percentile map of 
future values shows the largest decrease. 

intuitively  knows  that 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  58


