Techniques to produce climate information at a finer resolution, referred to as downscaling techniques (Figure 
12) fall into two categories, namely dynamical and statistical downscaling (see39). 

Dynamical downscaling: This approach relies on the 
use of regional climate models (RCMs) which, like 
the GCMs, are based on a realistic representation 
of the physical laws that affect the climate system. 
Such  models  are  used  to  refine  the  horizontal 
resolution of the climate in a selected region of 
the globe. Their finer spatial resolution (typically 10 
to 50 km) means they can develop more detailed 
characteristics of climate because they benefit from 
a much more precise representation of land surface 
features (such as mountains, coastal contours, or 
the presence of lakes and rivers). To stay linked 
with the global climate, an RCM has to be supplied 
at its periphery with large-scale variables from a 
driving model, which is generally a GCM. Although 
costly in terms of computing time, this downscaling 
technique ensures consistency in time and space of 
climate variables. In addition, climate models like 
RCMs and GCMs have the capacity to simulate the 
interactions among greenhouse gases and aerosols 
with  other  components  of  the  climate  system, 
which will improve their capacity to reproduce the 
climate system.

Statistical downscaling: This approach is based on 
the premise that the characteristics of local observed 
climate can be derived from a series of large-scale 
global climate variables (predictors). It can involve 
various techniques (multiple regressions, stochastic 
generators, neural networks), which are used to 
establish statistical relationships between observed 
local conditions and predictors obtained using data 
from  the  recent  climate  (e.g.  1971-2000).  The 
statistical downscaling of a GCM simulation relies 
on the hypothesis that the statistical relationships 
established for the recent past will remain the same 
for the future. In the context of climate change, 
this hypothesis is problematic because climate is 
not stationary and the validity of the assumption 
is difficult to test. Moreover, downscaling several 
climate  variables  simultaneously  still  presents 
a  challenge.  Consequently,  climate  variables 
are  often  processed  separately,  resulting  in  a 
possible decline of spatiotemporal consistency. 
Nonetheless, statistical downscaling is a relatively 
inexpensive  and  quick  approach  compared  to 
dynamical downscaling. It is important to mention 
that statistical downscaling may also be applied to 
already higher resolution RCM data. 

Figure 12 |  Comparison between dynamical and statistical downscaling techniques. 
 

Source: Ouranos

23  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


