Climate simulation: Climate simulations represent the outcome of running a climate model for a certain 
period of time. The time span of a simulation can range from a few years to thousands of years and will ite-
ratively be computed at intervals of a few minutes. They are run for both the past and the future.

Climate statistic: Any statistics used to describe the state of the climate system or of one of its components. 
Examples include mean values, the occurrence or frequency of extremes and standard deviations.

Climate variability: The variations above or below a long-term mean state of the climate. This variability can 
be due to natural internal processes within the climate system (internal variability) or to variations in anthro-
pogenic external forcing (external variability).

Consensus: The term is used to refer to agreement between models. It represents the proportion of members 
of a simulation ensemble that ‘agree’ with the sign (whether positive or negative) of the projected change.

Delta: The relative change for a climate variable between the future and baseline or reference period, as 
simulated by a climate model.

Downscaling: A method that allows climate model output to be delivered over a finer resolution than the 
one  generally  obtained  from  global  climate  models.  Two  different  approaches  are  prioritized:  statistical 
downscaling and dynamical downscaling (see Section 4 for more detail on each method).

Emission scenario: A plausible representation of the future development of emission of substances that are 
potentially radiatively active in the atmosphere, such as greenhouse gases and aerosols). They are based on 
assumptions regarding driving forces like demographic and socioeconomic development, or technological 
change.

Ensemble: The term ensemble is used in this guidebook to refer to the complete set of climate simulations 
or scenarios that is used for a particular study. It is used synonymously with the term multimodel ensemble. 
Note, however, that other, more restrictive, definitions exist (for example, an ensemble could represent a set 
of simulations made with the same climate model, using the same emissions scenario, but initialized using 
different starting conditions).

Global Climate Model (GCM): Computer model that is a mathematical representation of the climate system, 
based on equations that drive the physical processes governing the climate, including the role of the atmos-
phere, hydrosphere, biosphere, etc. It represents a unique tool that helps reproduce a complex ensemble of 
processes relevant for climate evolution. Note the term Global Circulation Model is often used as a synonym. 

Greenhouse gases (GHG): Gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that 
absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths and that cause the greenhouse effect. Primary greenhouse 
gases include water vapour (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane (CH4) and ozone 
(O3).

Grid (grid points): Discrete model «cells» which represent computational units of a climate model. The simp-
lest model grids typically divide the globe (or model domain) into constant angular grid spacing (i.e. a lati-
tude / longitude grid). A climate model’s horizontal resolution is often expressed as the size of a single grid 
cell (e.g. 1° x 1° grid or 10 km by 10 km grid).

Horizon: A future time period of interest over which the outputs of climate simulations are examined or for 
which future scenarios are produced. The climate science community tends to converge on common time 
horizons that are recommended by the World Meteorological Organization (WMO). The horizons typically 
encompass a 30- or 20- year period. For example, horizon 2050 often corresponds to the years 2041-2070.

Index: The term (climate) index is used to refer to properties of the climate that are not measured in the field 
or calculated by climate models but rather that are calculated or derived from more basic climate variables 
such as temperature and precipitation. Examples include the number of growing degree-days, freeze-thaw 
cycles, and the drought code index. (see Variable).

85  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


