In many cases, stakeholders already make decisions 
in the face of some uncertainty since they have to 
manage  variability  in  local  weather  and  climate 
over  the  short-term,  as  well  as  uncertainties 
in  many  other  areas  of  their  workflows  and 
decision-making.  Consequently,  the  uncertainty 
in  climate  projections  need  not  be  a  deterrent 
from making decisions over a longer time scale. 

What is important is to understand what the main 
sources of uncertainty are and how their relative 
importance changes over time. Within a decision-
making framework, the timescale of the planning 
horizon must be considered in order to weigh the 
importance of the different sources of uncertainty 
(Table  2).  The  planning  horizon  will  also  greatly 
impact the type of climate information that would 
be most appropriate. 

Table 2 |  The relative importance of the three sources of uncertainties in climate projections over time.

Planning horizon

Short term  
(<30 years)
Medium term  
(30-50 years)
Long term  
(>50 years)

Relative importance of sources of uncertainties

Natural variability

Emissions scenario

Climate model

***

*

*

*

**

***

**

**

**

Key source to 
consider for 

decision-making

Natural variability

Emissions scenario 
and climate model

Emissions scenario

Over  a  near-term  planning  horizon,  decision-
makers may want to give greater importance to 
the natural variability in the observations over the 
region of interest, while keeping in mind that the 
underlying  climate  change  signal  is  still  relevant 
because  it  will  have  impact  over  the  long  term. 
In  other  words,  even  for  short-term  objectives, 
a  long-term  vision  is  necessary.  The  importance 
of  relying  on  an  iterative  process  of  revisiting 
climate projections and re-evaluating adaptation 
measures  put  into  place,  as  recommended  by 
an  adaptation  framework,  may  be  particularly 
beneficial here (Figure 1). 

On the other hand, for longer planning horizons, 
the  uncertainties  related  to  the  emissions 
scenario should be given particular consideration. 
Over these horizons, the climate change signal is 
stronger than the variability in the climate but it 
is heavily influenced by which emission scenario 
is  chosen.  Given  the  high  level  of  uncertainty 
associated  with  the  evolution  of  anthropogenic 
greenhouse  gas  emissions,  decisions  should 
consider all plausible futures.

19  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


