1.8 SIMULATION ENSEMBLE
Users  of  climate  information  often  express  the 
desire  to  be  provided  with  the  «best»  future 
scenario or the one that is most likely to be the 
«true» scenario. However, it is not possible for 
climate service providers to pick such a climate 
change scenario. The reasons why this cannot be 
done reside in the intrinsic properties of climate 
models,  climate  simulation,  and  the  emissions 
scenarios  outlined  above.  All  together,  they 
provide a plausible representation of what the 
real world is and of what the climate may become 
given the current state of knowledge. State-of-
the-art climate models provide a sophisticated but 
imperfect representation of the real world climatic 
system. It is very difficult to test which model is 
the best as they all possess different strengths and 
weaknesses. As stated previously, models have 
biases  and  therefore  produce  slightly  different 
results. There is no climate model that is always 
able to give the best results for all variables for all 
seasons over all regions.  Furthermore, it is not 
possible to determine at this time which scenario 
of future greenhouse gas emissions will be closest 
to reality. 

Therefore, when providing climate information, the 
most prudent advice is to consider a simulation 
ensemble, or a large number of simulations in the 
decision-making process. In other words, it is best 
to take into account an ensemble that includes both 
the best and worst case scenarios.  

However,  deciding  on 
the  exact  number 
of  simulations  that  should  be  used  is  not 
straightforward. Indeed, general guidelines suggest 
that users should obtain climate projections based 

on as many simulations that represent as many 
models and emission scenarios as possible36 but the 
term «large ensemble» remains vague. Ultimately, 
the choice of the number of simulations to be 
considered for a given project will be influenced 
by the time and resources available. The expertise 
of a climate service provider may prove valuable in 
helping the decision-maker choose an appropriate 
number.

Different statistical techniques can serve to select a 
limited number of simulations that best represent 
the properties of the entire available simulation 
ensemble. The goal is to ensure that the chosen 
simulations adequately represent the full range 
of  possible  future  conditions  of  the  indices  of 
interest37. 

One such technique is a cluster analysis38. Briefly, 
this method consists of first selecting the climate 
variables  that  are  of  interest  for  a  particular 
project. Next, for each simulation, the variables 
are computed for the reference period and for the 
future horizon and the difference between the 
two values is calculated (i.e. the climatic change). 
The  differences  are  then  standardized  and  an 
algorithm can be used to calculate the distances 
between all the simulations in a multi-dimensional 
space (the dimensions correspond to the climate 
variables chosen). Figure 9 illustrates an example, 
and  highlights  the  outcome  of  maximizing  the 
range in the response (i.e. the uncertainty) while 
minimizing the number of simulations chosen. The 
figure shows the number of simulations needed 
to adequately cover the range of the simulation 
ensemble  for  three  climatic  variables,  namely 

Figure 9 |  Maximizing the coverage of precipitation, temperature and snow distributions with the lowest number of  
 
 

simulations within a large ensemble. 
Source: T. Logan (Ouranos) 

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  20


