1.4 EMISSIONS SCENARIOS
As  discussed  above,  an  important  component 
(forcing) of the climate is the emission of greenhouse 
gases  GHG),  and  consequently  GHG  forcing  is 
also an important component of the numerical 
simulation of the climate. There are two sources 
of data for these emissions. First, for the past, 
emissions inputs come from observations made 
at different stations around the globe. Second, for 
the future, the evolution of greenhouse gases is 
obtained from what are called emissions scenarios. 
 
Emissions  scenarios  describe  plausible  future 
releases of greenhouse gases, aerosols and other 
anthropogenic gases into the atmosphere. They 
are based on a coherent and internally consistent 
set  of  assumptions  about  driving  forces,    such 
as  technological  change,  demographic  and 
socioeconomic  development,  and  their  key 
interactions (IPCC 200718). Many factors influence 
future global emissions, the most important are 
mitigation policies that can play an important role in 
regulating anthropogenic emissions. Consequently, 
levels of future emissions are uncertain and thus 
these scenarios provide alternative visions of how 
the future may unfold. The choice of the emission 
scenario is responsible for a large proportion of 
the uncertainty in climate projections, particularly 
in  the  latter  part  of  the  21st  century  (see 
uncertainties). The range in the different emissions 
scenarios reflects our current understanding and 
knowledge  about  future  socioeconomic  and 
technological developments that may or may not 
be realized. As new knowledge becomes available 
about these underlying assumptions, emissions 
scenarios are revised and made available to the 
scientific community.

Emission scenario development is a process that 
occurs in parallel with the development of climate 
models.  Teams  of  researchers  are  dedicated  to 
evaluating how emissions will evolve in the future 
and these scenarios are then used to run climate 
models in order to produce simulations of future 
climate, each dependent upon a given emissions 
scenario.

Concentrations of greenhouse gases are currently 
being described using Representative Concentration 
Pathways (RCPs). These emission scenarios were 
the basis of the latest, Fifth Assessment Report 
(AR5) published in 2013 by the IPCC19. RCPs contain 
emission, concentration and land-use trajectories 
and are meant to be representative of the current 
literature  on  emissions  and  concentration  of 
greenhouse gases. The premise is that any single 
RCP trajectory can result from a diverse range of 
socioeconomic  and  technological  development 
scenarios. Future climate projections presented 
in the third and fourth IPCC Assessment reports 
were based on SRES scenarios (Table 1, Figure 5).  

Four  RCP  families  were  developed  and  named 
according  to  their  total  radiative  forcing  (in  W/
m2) around 2100 (Table 1, Figure 5). They range 
from RCP2.6, which assumes an eventual decline 
in  CO2  concentrations  in  the  atmosphere  during 
the 21st century and projects the smallest changes 
in global surface temperatures, to RCP8.5, which 
is based on steadily increasing CO2 concentrations, 
leading  to  the  highest  projected  changes  in 
surface temperatures by 2100 and beyond (Table 
1, Figure 5).

Emissions scenarios over time 

Emissions scenarios over time: RCPs replaced an earlier set of emission scenarios, published in a Special 
Report on Emissions Scenarios (IPCC 200020), hence known as the SRES scenarios. The SRES scenarios 
were used as inputs to climate models for the IPCC Third and Fourth Assessment reports, published 
in 2001 and 2007 respectively18,21. Table 1 and Figure 5 can be used to compare both sets of emissions 
scenarios.

11  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


