1.6.1 COUPLED MODEL INTERCOMPARAISON PROJECT (CMIP)
As  discussed  above, 
there  are  numerous 
climate  modeling  centers  around  the  world, 
each  developing  their  own  climate  model  and 
there  are  currently  four  plausible  emissions 
scenarios  to  consider  when  producing  climate 
simulations.  Obtaining  such  a  simulation,  i.e. 
running one model with one RCP for example, is 
computationally intensive and even with today’s 
high  performance  super  computers,  it  can  take 
up to several months to run a global model over 
the  entire  globe  for  a  meaningful  simulation 
period, say 1850 to 2100. Consequently, it would 
be impractical, if not impossible, for each climate 
modeling center to run all available models with 
all available RCPs. Therefore, to obtain a common 
frame  of  simulations  and  the  largest  possible 
ensemble,  the  modeling  centers  have  agreed  to 
run their own models with the different RCPs and 
to make the resulting simulations available to the 
rest of the climate community. This collaboration 
is  done  through  an  initiative  called  the  Coupled 
Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP). Through a 
web interface, it is possible to download different 
simulations from different modeling centers that 
are part of this project in order to obtain a large 
ensemble  of  simulations.  The  CMIP  ensemble 
forms  the  backbone  of  the  results  presented  in 
the IPCC reports.

As models and emissions scenarios are updated, 
so  is  the  collection  of  simulations,  also  known 
as the ensemble, made available through CMIP. 
Currently, the scientific community is using the fifth 
ensemble, called CMIP5. This newest generation of 
participating models are run using the RCPs whereas 
simulations  made  available  from  the  previous 
CMIP3 used the SRES scenarios. CMIP5 simulations 

CMIP5 vs CMIP3

are generally executed at a higher spatial resolution 
and the models typically have a more complete 
representation  of  physical  parameterizations 
(particularly of biophysical processes such as the 
carbon-cycle) than their predecessors. It is generally 
expected that the new generation of models will 
provide a better representation of the climate; 
however, not all models have evolved equally24. It 
is worth mentioning that this development process 
is always on-going. Climate centers are currently 
developing a CMIP6 ensemble, which will be the 
basis of the next IPCC report.

Comparisons of projected future outputs between 
the  two  generations  of  simulations  are  not 
straightforward because the two ensembles used 
two different sets of GHG scenarios. Nonetheless, 
recent studies have shown that comparisons of 
model means of temperature and precipitation 
change  are  similar  in  CMIP3  and  CMIP5  for 
climate projections with similar forcing25. Yet, the 
CMIP5 ensemble compares more favourably with 
observations for past climate simulations (23,26–28). 
These  conclusions  should  reassure  users  that 
climate information provided using CMIP3 models 
remains valid and robust even if there is now a 
gradual shift towards use of CMIP5 model results. 
The conclusions also support the argument that an 
ensemble of models should be used when making 
decisions, as it has been shown that any single 
model chosen from the ensemble scores lower than 
the entire ensemble when multiple variables are 
validated against observations29. In other words, 
the mean of the simulation ensemble for the past 
climate is generally closer to the observed values 
than any given individual simulation. 

It is generally believed that recent climate model simulations are likely to be more reliable than those 
of an earlier generation of models (vintage). They are, after all, based on more recent knowledge and 
incorporate more processes and feedbacks. However, the differences between the two vintages are 
not always very distinct. Consequently, information provided with an older vintage remains valid when 
a  new  vintage  is  produced.  Indeed,  impacts  studies  conducted  with  an  older  ensemble  should  not 
be automatically disregarded when new simulations are made available. As such, the information in 
this guide is often based on the newest generation of models (from the CMIP5 ensemble), but older 
simulations (from the CMIP3 ensemble) are also presented in some cases. The focus of the guide is on 
the interpretation of the climate information, and hence depends very little on the particular generation 
of models or scenarios that were used. 

17  |  GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS


