What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
It  is  very  important  to  remember  that,  in  this 
type  of  analysis,  the  chosen  period  over  which 
the  trends  are  calculated  will  greatly  influence 
whether a trend is found or not. In other words, 
different  trends  can  be  observed  depending  on 
the  start  and  end  dates  chosen,  which  can  lead 
to  a  misinterpretation  of  the  overall  long-term 
trends. For example, a closer examination of the 
figure  can  quickly  reveal  certain  periods  over 
which  decreasing  trends  are  observed  (from 
1951-1961  for  example)  or  where  an  increasing 
trend prevails (e.g. from 1919-1928). 

Consequently,  it  cannot  be  assumed  that  the 
past trend will be an indication of the future and 
therefore  informing  decisions  based  on  a  given 
past trend should be done with extreme caution. 
Rather,  the  most  appropriate  use  of  historical 
trends is to give context to the magnitude of future 
projections. This is the reason why climate models 
play  such  a  central  role  in  our  understanding  of 
the climate to come.

shows  observed 

What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
The  figure 
total  annual 
precipitation  values  (mm)  over  the  years  1901-
2005  at  a  southern  Alberta  station  along  with 
linear trends for two periods, namely 1901-2005 
and 1971-2005.

The figure demonstrates the extent of the natural 
variability (black line) in total annual precipitation 
for the period 1901-2005. This natural range shows 
years with as little as 50mm of total precipitation 
and years with close to 350 mm of precipitation. 
The  figure  also  illustrates  that  while  the  1901-
2005  trend  is  insignificant,  total  precipitation 
amounts start to increase slightly in the seventies.

How is the figure constructed?
Trends  over  the  historical  period  are  calculated 
using  climatic  time-series  obtained  from  an 
Environment  Canada  database  for  the  location 
indicated on the map (Adjusted and Homogenized 
Canadian  Climate  Data,  AHCCD46).  This  dataset 
provides  adjusted  and  homogenized  climate 
data  for  many  meteorological  stations  across 
Canada.  Homogenized  means  that  the  data  at 
those  stations  has  been  corrected  for  changes 
in  instrumentation,  measurement  technique,  or 
changes in the location of the stations, which may 
have occurred over time. This type of data is better 
suited for evaluating climate trends, compared to 
non-homogenized data.

The figure can represent simple climatic variables 
such  as  mean  temperature  and  precipitation  or 
other climatic variables or indices. The data from 
meteorological  stations  can  be  averaged  over 
different regions of interest and for different time 
steps  such  as  ‘seasonal’,  ‘monthly’  or  ‘annual’, 
depending on the availability of the data.

The  black  line  and  dots  represent  the  yearly 
observed  values  for  the  chosen  location,  while 
the blue and red lines represent the trends for the 
periods  1901-2005  and  1971-2005,  respectively. 
The  trends  are  calculated  using  a  linear  non-
parametric  regression  technique (Sen  slope).

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  48


