What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways 
to misinterpret the information?
Users  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  proportion 
values presented in this figure do not represent 
a  probability  of  occurrence.  The  uncertainty 
in  the  simulations,  represented  here  by  the 
coloured  lines,  remains  important.  More  weight 
or  importance  cannot  be  assigned  to  one  curve 
over another. In other words, one scenario (line) 
is not more likely than another.

In  addition,  it  may  be  fairly  difficult  to  visualize 
what  the  information  presented  in  this  type 
of  figure  actually  represents  for  a  given  area. 
This type of graphic is in fact rarely given on its 
own  but  tends  to  be  complementary  to  a  map 
(where differences over the study area are better 
represented)  or  to  an  evolution  figure  (where 
average changes over the study area more easily 
discerned).

What climate information is presented and how 
should it be interpreted?
The  figure  presents  cumulative  distribution 
functions  (CDF)  of  the  projected  number  of 
growing degree-days for the reference period and 
the 2050 (top) and 2090 (bottom) future horizons 
for the Yellowknife region.

This  format  of  presentation  allows  for  an  easy 
comparison  between  the  different  percentile 
distribution  of  observed  and  projected  changes, 
as  well  as  an  evaluation  of  exceeding  given 
thresholds.  For  example,  a  year  with  a  growing 
degree-day  mean  of  around  800,  which  is  a 
fairly  common  occurrence  in  the  observations 
(black line), is projected to occur less than 5% of 
the  time  by  the  median  scenario  over  the  2050 
horizon.  Over  the  2090  horizon,  the  proportion 
of projected values that will be inferior or equal 
to 800 is only about 0.18 for the 10th percentile 
scenario  (green  line).  On  the  other  hand,  the 
90th  percentile  scenario  (red  line)  points  to 
an  increasing  proportion  of  years  with  higher 
numbers of growing degree-days.

How is the figure constructed?
The  figure  presents  the  same 
information 
shown on the distribution curves of the previous 
evolution  figure  (right  panel)  but  displayed  in  a 
different  manner.  The  cumulative  curves  show 
the  proportion  of  years  (vertical  axis)  that  have 
values inferior or equal to a given value of growing 
degree-days (horizontal axis).

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  62


