What  climate  information  is  presented  and  how 
should it be interpreted?
The figure presents the evolution of the number of 
annual  growing  degree-days  from  1971  to  2100  for 
a region surrounding Yellowknife in the North West 
Territories.  Growing-degree  days  correspond  to 
the  absolute  difference  in  mean  daily  temperature 
above  a  threshold  of  5°C.  For  example,  if  the  daily 
mean  temperature  is  equal  to  10°C,  the  number  of 
growing degree-days for that day is equal to 5. If the 
temperature  is  below  5°C,  the  growing  degree-days 
are equal to zero. 

The  left  panel  shows  a  projected  increase  in  the 
number  of  growing  degree-days  from  1971  to 
2100.  The  simulation  ensemble  (grey  envelope) 
covers approximately the same range as the natural 
variability  (black  dots).    The  right  panel  shows  an 
upward shift in the distributions of the simulations for 
2050 and 2090, particularly for the median and 90th 
percentile distributions indicating a change in mean 
climate conditions. The shapes of the coloured future 
distributions do not change drastically (compared to 
the  black  observed  distribution)  indicating  that  the 
inter-annual  variability  is  relatively  similar  between 
the observed and future horizons.

How is the figure constructed?
This  type  of  figure  presents  the  evolution  of 
projected values of a specific climatic variable for a 
particular  region  of  interest.  Hence,  it  shows  how 
the values evolve over time. Here, three horizons are 
represented,  a  1971-2000  reference  period,  a  2050 
horizon (2045-2065) and a 2090 horizon (2081-2100) 
with  a  total  of  79  simulations  (75  from  the  CMIP3 
global ensemble and 4 from the regional CRCM 4.2.3 
model). 

left  panel 

The 
is  constructed  by  averaging  the 
growing degree-days for all grid points for the region 
of  interest  shown  in  the  hatched  area.  The  black 
line  shows  observed  values  (notice  the  observed 
natural  variability  of  the  climate  over  that  time 
period), the blue  line  represents the median  of the 
CMIP3 ensemble simulations and the grey envelope 
represents  the  confidence 
interval  around  the 
median. A bias correction post-processing method is 
used to obtain future values. 

The  right  panel  shows  the  distribution  of  the  30 
observed  annual  growing  degree-day  values  for 
the  reference  period  (black  line),  as  well  as  the 
distributions  of  the  30  projected  years  for  three 
individual climate scenarios for both the 2050 (2046-
2065)  and  2090  (2081-2100)  horizons.  The  three 
plotted scenarios are selected from the 79 available 
simulations  by  first  calculating  the  average  delta 
values for all scenarios for the two time horizons. The 

three individual scenarios for each horizon are then 
chosen as those having (1) the median (blue curve), 
(2) the 10th (green curve) and (3) the 90th (red curve) 
percentile  values  of  the  average  projected  change 
out of the 79 simulations for the horizon in question. 
Note that the three scenarios are not necessarily the 
same  for  each  horizon  of  interest  (i.e.  the  scenario 
showing  the  median  change  in  2050  is  probably 
not the median scenario in 2090). This panel uses a 
scaling post-processing method which allows a direct 
comparison  of  future  scenarios  with  the  observed 
distribution.

  average  conditions 

What are the limitations/caveats/possible ways to 
misinterpret the information?
The left panel reveals that while there is definitely a 
projected  increase  in  growing  degree-days,  there  is 
also  a  widening  of  the  grey  envelope  (uncertainty) 
into the future. An important point is that the grey 
envelope contains all sources of uncertainty, not just 
the inter-annual variability. For example, the widening 
of  the  envelope  could  lead  a  user  to  mistakenly 
conclude  that in  the future, the simulations  project 
both  warmer 
(centered 
approximately  in  the  middle  of  the  envelope)  and 
an  increased  variability  between  individual  years 
(inter-annual variability). However, this is not how the 
figure should  be interpreted. The width of the grey 
envelope for the future horizons is in fact the result of 
multiple sources of uncertainty, not only inter-annual 
natural variability, but also uncertainty between the 
different  SRES  families  (i.e.  more  or  less  GHGs  in 
the atmosphere), as well as uncertainties in climate 
model sensitivity (i.e. how sensitive different climate 
models are to a given increase in GHG concentrations). 
It  is  therefore  false  to  assume  that  the  wider  grey 
envelope for future horizons solely represents greater 
inter-annual  variability,  as  represented  by  the  grey 
envelope for the reference period.

In order to better understand whether there is indeed 
an increase in the inter-annual variability (increased 
fluctuations  between  years)  we  need  to  investigate 
the panel on the right. Comparing the coloured future 
distributions with the observed distribution highlights 
the fact that the distribution shape does not change 
much in the future (similar widths, tails, etc.). What is 
projected is a simple upward shift of the distribution 
in the future, with an increased separation between 
the  green,  blue  and  red  curves  between  2050  to 
2090. Going back to the left panel we can now much 
more  easily  conclude  that,  in  this  case,  the  change 
in the grey envelope width is due to this increasing 
separation between the individual climate scenarios 
(due  to  differences  in  emissions  and  climate  model 
sensitivity) and not because of an increase in inter-
annual variability.

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  60


