Mitigation: Technological change or substitution that reduces greenhouse gas sources and emissions and 
that enhance sinks of GHG.

Natural variability: Component of the overall uncertainty that stems from the inherent unpredictability and 
apparent randomness of the climate. It is characterized by monitoring observations and can be studied by 
the initial conditions of an ensemble.

No regret (adaptation) option: Adaptation measure that would be the most justified under all plausible 
future scenarios.

Normals: See Climate normals

Polygon: See Grid

Radiative forcing: The change in the net, downward minus upward, irradiance (expressed in Watts per square 
metre) at the tropopause due to a change in an external driver of climate change; for example, a change in 
the concentration of carbon dioxide or the output from the Sun.

Range: The term range is used to represent the spectrum of output data from an ensemble of simulations 
or scenarios.

Representative Concentration Pathway (RCP): Scenarios that include time series of emissions and concen-
trations of the full suite of greenhouse gases and aerosols as well as chemically active gases, and land use. 
The word representative signifies that each RCP provides only one of many possible scenarios that would 
lead to the specific radiative forcing characteristics. Four RCPs were selected as the basis for the climate pro-
jections used in the Fifth Assessment Report published by the IPCC. 

Reanalysis: Reanalyses are estimates of historical atmospheric and oceanic temperatures, wind, current, and 
other meteorological and oceanographic quantities, created by processing past meteorological and oceano-
graphic data using fixed state-of-the-art weather forecasting models and data assimilation techniques. They 
allow the analysis of numerous climatic variables and are also used to validate RCMs and GCMs in the current 
climate and to drive RCM simulations.

Reference period: In practice, it often refers to a period of time from the recent past used in the produc-
tion of climate scenarios. Future period values produced by climate models are compared with those from 
this  period  to  evaluate  changes.  The  WMO  recommends  30-year  intervals  as  reference  periods,  such  as 
1971-2000; however there are exceptions. For example, the current reference period used by the IPCC is 
1985-2005. A synonymous term is baseline period. Accordingly, the terms ‘reference scenario’ or ‘baseline 
scenario’ are used to refer to climate scenarios for a reference period.

Regional Climate Model (RCM): Just like a GCM, the regional climate model is a mathematical representa-
tion of the climate system, based on equations describing the physical processes governing the climate. This 
includes processes and characteristics of the atmosphere, lithosphere, hydrosphere, cryosphere, and bios-
phere. RCMs have a finer resolution than (GCMs). RCMs are typically ‘limited domain’ models meaning that 
they cover only a portion of the globe.

Resilience: The ability of a social or ecological system to absorb disturbances while retaining the same basic 
structure and functions, and the capacity to recover from an impact that may have caused harm.

Resolution: In climate models, this term refers to the physical distance (metres or degrees) between each 
point on the grid used to compute the equations. Temporal resolution refers to the time step or time elapsed 
between each model computation of the equations. See Grid

GUIDEBOOK ON CLIMATE SCENARIOS  |  86


