4

1.1 INFECTIOUS DISEASE
There is consensus that climate change is affecting human health. The linkages between public 
health and climate change are complex and interact with other factors. Arthropod-borne 
diseases are infections spread by insect (e.g. mosquitoes and sandflies) or arachnid (e.g. ticks) 
vectors. Major shifts in the epidemiology of several vector-borne diseases and appearances on  
new continents have been predicted as a result of climate change (3,4). Climate change  
is likely to have both direct and indirect impacts on the burden of West Nile fever, dengue, 
Chickungunya fever, malaria, leishmaniasis, tick-borne encephalitis, Lyme borreliosis, Crimean-
Congo haemorrhagic fever, spotted fever rickettsioses, Yellow fever, Zika and Rift Valley fever 
(5,6). Population mobility is a main factor in globalization of public health threats and risks due to 
infectious diseases. Traditional health policy approaches have focused on diseases of global 
public health significance such as tuberculosis, Yellow fever, and cholera; however, new diseases 
and resistant organisms challenge existing approaches. Clinical implications and health policy 
challenges associated with movement of persons across barriers permeable to products, 
pathogens, and toxins (e.g. geopolitical borders, patient care environments) are complex. 
Outcomes are complicated by high numbers of persons who move across disparate and diverse 
settings of disease threat and risk. Existing policies and processes merit an approach to global 
public health risk management that integrates population factors with effective and timely 
application of policies and processes (7,8).

The incidence, outbreak frequency, and distribution of many infectious diseases are generally 
expected to change as a consequence of different factors related to climate change. Temperature 
and precipitation patterns influence food- and water-borne diseases. Changes in seasonal 
precipitation and temperature influence vector-borne diseases through i. effects on vector survival, 
reproduction rates, habitat suitability, distribution, and abundance; ii. the intensity and temporal 
pattern of vector activity (biting rates); and iii. rates of pathogen development, survival, and 
reproduction within vectors. The projected climate changes may shift the distributional ranges 
of vector-borne diseases (5,6). As an example, the number of tick-borne diseases of humans has 
increased in incidence and geographic range over the past few decades, and there is concern that 
they will pose an even greater threat to public health in the future. Global warming is often cited 
as the underlying mechanism favouring the spread of tick-borne diseases, as climate will influence 
which tick species are found in a given geographic region, their population density, the likelihood 
that they will be infected with microbes pathogenic for humans, and the frequency of tick-human 
contact. Changes in climate will influence spread and survival of other insect vectors including 
mosquitoes, fleas, sandflies, tsetse flies, and houseflies, known to carry highly pathogenic 
microorganisms infecting man. Given the pace of international travel the global consequences 
to these changes are currently unknown. Another concern with increasing temperatures is that 
ancient bacteria and viruses could re-emerge and revive as global warming melts ice at the poles 
exposing long dormant organisms. An example is the August 2016 Anthrax outbreak in the 
Russian Federation which was triggered by ice melt in temperatures of 35°C in the Arctic Circle4. 
This brought anthrax spores to the surface. Animal contact with those spores and then subsequent 
human infection resulted in the hospitalisation of 97 people and a child’s death. These situations 
highlight similar potential risks to vulnerable populations living in areas with diminishing ice cover 
and thawing permafrost. 

4  Anthrax outbreak triggered by climate change kills boy in Arctic Circle. 1Aug2016 The Guardian  

www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/anthrax-outbreak-climate-change-arctic-circle-russia. Accessed 5Oct2016

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
