6

1.3 WATERBORNE DISEASE
Waterborne diseases are also likely to be influenced by climate change. The importance 
of climate as a driver of disease risk is derived from observations that waterborne disease 
outbreaks are often preceded by heavy rainfall. This link is likely to be most obvious for 
inadequately treated water or small rural supplies. Several authors have pointed out links 
between cholera and climate variables especially with higher temperature and rainfall, 
flooding and major climatic cycles such as El Niño. Cyanobacteria are present in drinking 
and recreational waters and most reported human cases were associated with observable 
cyanobacterial blooms with known neurotoxicity. The impact of droughts on health through 
reduced agricultural productivity and access to water in affluent countries is not clear, but 
effects in resource poor countries are likely to be dramatic (16).

1.4 EXTREME WEATHER 
Extreme weather events pose particular challenges to populations. The frequency and 
intensity of extreme weather events is predicted to rise as a result of climate variability. 
Beyond physical damage, effects of disasters such as floods, extreme droughts, storms 
and hurricanes on human health seem to be mostly indirect (mediated through vector and 
waterborne diseases). Acute injuries, fatalities and mental health illnesses are also significant 
public health outcomes and their management and prevention require disaster preparedness 
and response planning (17,18). 

Disasters significantly impede progress towards sustainable development (19). This is of 
particular relevance internationally through the sustainable development goals and nationally 
through the revised Federal Sustainable Development Strategy5. Evidence indicates 
that exposure of persons and assets in all countries has increased faster than vulnerability 

5  Planning for a Sustainable Future: A Federal Sustainable Development Strategy for Canada.  

www.fsds-sfdd.ca/index.html#/en/detail/all/

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
