19

3.0 SOCIETY, CULTURE AND BEHAVIOUR 

Global climate change impacts on human and natural systems are predicted to be severe and far 
reaching. The most physically and economically vulnerable will be affected disproportionately. 
Adaptation and mitigation are two strategies that society can employ to respond to these threats. 
Importantly, these approaches must take diversity in society, and cultural norms, practices and 
preferences into account to ensure uptake and success. Industry, commerce, and government 
play indispensable roles in these actions but outcomes are ultimately dependent on individuals 
and receptivity to behavioural changes. Thus, the climate change discourse could be framed from 
a health perspective to motivate behaviour change (55). There is however, little evidence on how 
to change behaviours that contribute to climate change (56). In considering the broader scientific 
discourse on the determinants of behaviour and behavioural change, four themes stand out9. 

First, knowledge deficits are not the primary barrier to action; knowing about the causes 
and consequences of climate change does not, on its own, motivate people to change 
their lifestyles (57). Instead, it is emotions—the feelings that accompany thinking—that are 
central (58). Negative emotions, including fear, pessimism, and guilt, can produce passive 
and defensive responses, and do little to encourage individuals to change their behaviour and 
to press for wider social action. So-called ‘fear appeals’ only work if accompanied by equally 
strong messages about how to address the problem (59). 

Second, climate change is best represented in ways that anchor it in positive emotions (60), 
by framing action in ways that connect with people’s core values and identities. Examples 
include framing climate change as: an ethical and intergenerational issue; about safeguarding 
ancestral lands and the sanctity of the natural world; or an appreciation of the global injustice 
of anthropogenic climate change driven by rich countries but paid for by poorer ones (61). 
Aligning climate change to a range of ethical positions and a core set of identities can offer 
a way of appealing to diverse social groups, and thus securing a broad and inclusive platform 
of public support for action. Avoiding the rhetoric of climate catastrophe could facilitate this, 
and emphasise, instead, human capacity to steer a course to a sustainable future, including 
lifting the burdens that unmitigated climate change would otherwise impose on future 
generations (62).

Third, integral to such an ethical framing of climate change is the implied duty on national 
and international organisations to take action. A recurrent finding is that the public sees the 
main responsibility for action lying with governments and other powerful institutions, not 
least because the options open to individuals to take radical action to cut their own GHG 
emissions are often sorely limited by cost or availability (e.g. poor public transport provision). 
Public willingness to take action is also contingent on those considered responsible for 
climate change, taking action themselves (63). Th e majority of the public in cross-national 
surveys believe that their country has a responsibility to take action on climate change, 
and that their government is not doing enough. 

9  Excerpt from Lancet Commission on Health and Climate Change: Policy responses to protect public health (2015).

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
