17

Research on levels of public awareness and the effectiveness of health promotion campaigns 
related to air quality advisories, food safety and reducing risks from vector-borne diseases 
show similarly mixed results. Public awareness messaging on climate-related risks can be 
contradictory (e.g. exercising later in the day to avoid extreme heat versus not going outdoors 
at night to avoid contracting West Nile Virus). To maximize effectiveness, health promotion 
programs should develop consistent messaging across health issue areas.

2.2.4 HEALTH RELATED RESEARCH NEEDS
Over the last 15 years, calls for expanded research efforts on climate-related health risks have 
resulted in a growing body of research to help guide actions to protect the health of Canadians. 
Many gaps in health related research areas would still benefit from integration and collaboration 
with non-health sectors, as well as across government, academia and the private sector. 
Strides have been made in the areas of air quality, extreme heat, and the understanding of some 
climate-related infectious diseases. Although it is important to understand and recognize how 
far Canada has come, knowledge development has not been uniform among issue areas nor 
across regions of Canada. The following examples are recognised gaps where integrated 
research could maximise efficient delivery of diversely useful outcomes. 

•  Air Quality: Estimates of the contribution of black carbon emissions in Canada originating 
from sources such as: Open biomass burning and wood stove burning; Identification of the 
extent of proliferation, impact and allergenicity of aeroallergen-producing plants as warming 
continues; Identification and monitoring of potentially invasive fungal diseases that could 
establish with climate change; Understanding of the effects of various GHG mitigation and 
adaptation activities (e.g. energy efficiency trade-offs, green roofs) on ambient and indoor 
air quality and associated health impacts; Understanding of how heat and poor air quality 
interact to impact health and adaptive strategies to reduce health risks; and, Identification 
of how dampness and temperature affect degradation of materials in buildings and how 
indoor material product design may affect human exposure to chemicals.

•  Food and Water Quality: Understanding of the impact of water contaminants on human 

health and monitoring of illnesses; Monitoring of food-borne illness cases to reduce 
underreporting, including attention to emergence or re-emergence of specific diseases; 
Knowledge of the impacts of climate change on food and water security in northern and 
southern Canada; Understanding of the capacity and preparedness of water utilities to adapt 
to climate change; and, Defining the characteristics of resilient water and food 
management systems.

•  Zoonoses and Vector-borne Diseases: Surveillance for zoonoses, vectors and vector-borne 

diseases, including attention to emergence of novel diseases; Basic and applied research 
studies to inform the development of surveillance, prevention and control methods, vaccines 
and licensed products for vector control; and, Enhanced capacity to train highly qualified 
personnel for both research and public health activities.

•  Natural Hazards: Improved projections of extreme weather events due to climate change 
and modelling of possible health impacts; Surveillance of direct and indirect health impacts 
from extreme weather-related events; Interdisciplinary (psychology, social work, community 

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
