23

5.0 FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS

Identified as “the greatest health threat of the 21st century” (8), the global impact of climate 
change is a key cross cutting issue of our time that has the potential to cause instability on 
an unprecedented scale. Adaptation measures are already required as the effects of climate 
change are being experienced today. From a health-based perspective, a number of key 
elements should be considered to enhance our knowledge of the impacts of climate change 
and develop effective interventions. 

There is a need for greater understanding of the leadership role that health has to play 
in changing the behaviour of Canadians leading to both effective adaptation and mitigation 
efforts while recognizing the importance of implementing health adaptations within the 
health systems and increasing the advocacy role of health professionals with their patients. 
It is critical to recognize the powerful influence that health considerations have to play in 
mitigation. A recent report by researchers at the International Monetary Fund identifies the 
omission of health impacts from polluting fuels as the largest of the subsidies provided to 
global energy production and use, which will total US$5.3 trillion in 2015 (67). This is larger 
than total health spending by all the worlds’ governments. Therefore, the health implications 
could and should be more effectively harnessed in efforts to build support for a stronger 
response to climate change. 

There is a need for horizontal understanding and participation for effective interventions 
with multiple co-benefits. The built environment plays a vitally important role in promoting 
and maintaining health, so health considerations should be a key component of infrastructure 
discussions. A strong health-based vision would be city planning that encourages reduced 
air pollution and thus supports and promotes lifestyles that are healthy for the individual 
and for the planet. This is relevant to many interventions. For example air pollution, where 
encouraging a transition to cities that support and promote lifestyles that are healthy 
for the individual and for the planet would have far-reaching impacts on chronic disease 
conditions (68). 

There is a need to integrate health security considerations into upstream risk mitigation 
plans linked to health innovation, national security and climate change to as well as reinforce 
the mechanisms and systems to manage health emergency preparedness and response. 
Given recognised increases in the frequency and/or intensity of extreme weather events and 
emerging infectious disease outbreaks, this preparedness and foresight is critical.

There is a need to define cross-cutting adaptations that provide resiliency to both 
outbreaks of infectious disease, and the mounting burden of non-communicable disease. 
This can be achieved through the continued development of strong, flexible, and resilient 
health systems (69). Moving strategically “upstream” in our common understanding of the 
social determinants of health can enable and enhance the health of Canadian populations 
with considerations to health equity and patient-centered care. This provides a strategic 
approach to scaling up systematic strengthening of the health system through targeted public 
health and population health approaches.

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
