12

Vulnerability is commonly defined as the degree to which a system or person is susceptible 
to, or unable to cope with, the adverse effects of climate change (42). This definition considers 
demographics, geographical circumstances, effectiveness, and coverage of the health-care 
system, pre-existing conditions, and socioeconomic factors such as inequity (43). 

Resilience is commonly defined as the capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and 
reorganize while undergoing change, so as to still retain essentially the same function, structure, 
identity and feedbacks. Resilience has also been referred to as the ability of human communities 
to withstand external shocks to their social infrastructure (44). Resilience includes the capacity 
of a system to not only absorb a disturbance, but to innovate and transform (45).

Adaptive actions to address climate change in the health sector require action across the whole 
spectrum of public health core functions (promotion, protection, prevention, public health 
surveillance and emergency preparedness) (46). The scale up of adaptive actions to Federal/
Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) jurisdictions has been currently limited by the breadth and depth 
of the knowledge uptake as well as cross disciplinary application, commonly referred to as 
“mainstreaming”. Understanding of adaptation options that can be taken by public health and 
emergency management officials to build resilience has increased, although information 
about adaptation success is limited. Measures identified in recent literature address climate 
change risks to health, and build upon the list of public health adaptations presented by Séguin 
(2008) (1). Overall, new adaptation areas of focus by public health officials and researchers 
include:

•  Horizontal cross-cutting needs to understand vulnerability and strengthen resilience such as: 

Vulnerability assessments of high risk populations; Actions to address secondary health 
effects of climate hazards such as psychosocial impacts; Use of new technologies to facilitate 
adoption of individual adaptive behaviours (e.g. use of automated devices in cars to warn 
of water depth or landslide early detection systems); Advice to health care providers about 
actions they can take to reduce climate-related health risks; Emergency management 
planning measures tailored to increase the resiliency of health care facilities from climate 
change; and Identification of preventative measures to reduce harmful exposures before 
negative health outcomes occur (e.g. infrastructure development such as green roofs to 
reduce the urban heat island)

•  Extreme heat and air pollution such as: Health impacts from higher temperatures, 

increased frequency and severity of heat waves, increased air pollution; Air conditioning, 
during extreme events, with the caveat that seasonal use contributes to climate change 
and air pollution through greater use of fossil fuel; additionally seasonal use interrupts 
the human body’s ability to acclimate to regional weather which increases the individual’s 
vulnerability; Better quality housing stock, appropriate infrastructure with the ability 
to capture energy and recycle water; Infrastructure development such as green roofs, 
reflective road and building surfaces, urban green spaces, interior air sealing, use 
of elastomeric roof coating; Public awareness and education campaigns to promote 
personal protection from air pollution (e.g. Air Quality Health Index or AQHI8); 
Vulnerability assessments of high risk regions/populations; Physician attention 

8  Definitions as per Environment and Climate Change Canada. www.ec.gc.ca/cas-aqhi/default.asp?lang=En&n=CB0ADB16-1. 

Accessed 3Oct2016

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
