11

2.0 ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS 
TO HEALTH6

“Much of the potential health impact of climate change can however be avoided through 
a combination of strengthening key health system functions and improved management 
of the risks presented by a changing climate.” 7 As the climate continues to change and 
impacts on health are increasingly evident, adaptation is needed to reduce growing risks 
to vulnerable populations and communities. 

Successful adaptation requires intersectoral collaboration (e.g. health, environment, planning, 
transport, infrastructure) on monitoring and surveillance of climate change health outcomes, 
addressing root causes that limit preparedness (e.g. poverty), identification of vulnerable 
populations, reducing uncertainty through increased research on impacts, educating the 
public and decision makers about potential disasters and the benefits of preparedness, 
and the financing of needed measures. Adaptations are most effective when they maximize 
co-benefits (e.g. increase social capital, improve urban design) that address related health 
concerns, and when they are mainstreamed into existing programs and planning. For instance, 
federal departments are mandated by the Cabinet Directive on the Environmental Assessment 
of Policy, Plan, and Program Proposals (Cabinet Directive) to complete Strategic Environmental 
Assessments (SEAs) for all policy, plan, and program proposals (39). Completing a SEA (40) 
ensures that decision makers at all levels have taken economic, social, and environmental 
considerations into account to make informed decisions in support of sustainable development. 

2.1 ADAPTATION MEASURES AND STRATEGIES 
TO PROTECT HEALTH
There is now a large body of scientific work to frame the concept of adaption in a changing 
climate. Decision makers across health issue files and different levels of government have 
exchanged knowledge and promising practices in health promotion, public health intervention, 
and emergency management. Despite this, Canada does not have a comprehensive and 
systematic framework to address the interface between climate change and health. In moving 
towards this, it is important to have a shared understanding of key concepts that underpin 
this process.

Adaptation to climate change is commonly defined as ‘the process of adjustment to actual 
or expected climate and its effects, in human systems in order to moderate harm or exploit 
beneficial opportunities, and in natural systems human intervention may facilitate adjustment 
to expected climate’ (41). 

6  Section 2.0 is adapted from ‘Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation’ (2014).
7  Protecting Health from Climate Change. Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. 2013. WHO Report

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
