21

4.0 CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH 
AND AN INTEGRATED APPROACH 

An integrated approach to addressing climate change and health related issues will require 
innovative horizontal program development. Understanding and meeting the different needs 
and objectives of participating government departments, provincial partners and various 
stakeholders will be critical to effective and ongoing engagement. Grounding this approach 
in a climate change framework will require strategic engagement across files that are normally 
structured in a ‘silo’ or thematic way in order to enhance common understanding of the 
horizontal nature of the health impacts of climate change. Programs can be designed by aligning 
work across key activities, with strong integration of the science and policy. This will ensure 
best use of limited resources to address the complex and layered issues presented by the health 
effects of climate change. 

Weaknesses in systems and infrastructures in various sectors are necessarily interconnected, 
with a variety of anticipated and unanticipated knock on effects. Climate change is exacerbating 
already vulnerable situations, which puts demands not only on the impacted region itself, 
but also on external efforts to establish sustainable ways to reduce human health impacts. 
Stark evidence of this can be seen in resource poor regions. The recent Ebola health crisis in 
West Africa was an extreme example of a tipping point of multiple systems that already had little 
to no resilience. In Sierra Leone (the epicenter of the Ebola outbreak) climate change had already 
weakened that country’s vulnerable infrastructures and capacity (health, physical, agriculture, etc) 
with unusually intense “seasonal droughts, strong winds, thunderstorms, landslides, heat waves, 
floods, and changed rainfall patterns” (66). This made all aspects of emergency response to the 
emerging disease situation that much more difficult. Ultimately, the cost, both in human lives 
and financially, was very high. Globalization in all markets rapidly moves goods, people and 
infectious diseases to new areas of the world. This is further complicated by the fact that novel 
pathogens are emerging more rapidly, often from areas with high populations, poor sanitation 
and nutrition, and greater mobility than ever before. Overarching understanding and awareness 
of existing and future risk and trends in various sectors, and how they interact and support each 
other, will be critical to adaptive capacity globally. Proposed key areas for effective horizontal 
alignment in addressing climate change and health include:

•  Education and Awareness: Public communication and education initiatives to establish 

healthy behaviours and choices related to the impact of climate change on human health. 
•  Surveillance and Monitoring: Using research data and analysis gathered from public health 

surveillance systems to address health impacts related to climate change including identifying 
disease trends and identifying vulnerable individuals and communities. 

•  Building and Sustaining Healthy Environments: Playing a role in making infrastructure more 
resilient by informing and educating the public about health risks, advocating for changes 
that promote and improve health, and encouraging the adoption of health-promoting 
change in urban planning and community infrastructure. 

•  Capacity Building: Building community resilience by increasing the capacity of individuals 

and communities to cope and adapt to current and anticipated changes in climate. 

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
