16

2.2.2 PREPARING FOR THE IMPACTS
Protecting health from climate change impacts requires “mainstreaming” climate change 
considerations into existing risk assessment and management activities. Mainstreaming is based 
on “flexible” adaptation and institutional learning, which is responsive to changing risks to 
health, climate surprises, and individual- and community-level vulnerabilities. Mainstreaming 
aims to reduce duplication and contradictions between existing public health interventions 
and new adaptations developed in response to climate change. Evidence of mainstreaming 
in provincial and territorial policies, regulatory instruments and planning tools includes 
Strategic Direction 1 in the “Quebec In Action – Greener by 2020: Government Strategy for 
Climate Change Adaptation” (51) that integrates climate change adaptation into government 
administration by modifying, where needed, the content of laws, regulations, strategies, 
policies, and planning tools. In Nunavut, the climate change adaptation plan requires all 
departments and agencies to “[...] integrate climate change projections, impacts, and best 
practices in all levels of their decision-making in order to implement a comprehensive 
response to climate change” (52).

One study in Ontario found evidence of adaptation through the mainstreaming of climate 
change into existing public health programs (50). Outside of government, the Insurance 
Bureau of Canada is developing a municipal risk assessment tool (53) that can help community 
decision makers use climate change information to address infrastructure vulnerabilities to 
projected flood events. Other initiatives also contribute to reducing health risks from climate 
change. Many health authorities utilize HARS (heat alert response systems), air pollution 
monitoring activities, and programs to raise awareness of vector-borne diseases, which helps to 
manage a range of climate-related impacts.

For example, the provinces of Manitoba, Quebec, and Nova Scotia have provincial 
HARS (50) in place while Alberta is initiating one, and health authorities in Ontario are 
collaborating to maximize the effectiveness and integration of local systems. In addition, 
some activities that were not developed with the primary purpose of protecting health can 
indirectly help to improve health and wellbeing and thereby reduce the impacts of climate 
change (e.g. Drought Response Plan by the British Columbia Inter-Agency Drought Working 
Group) (54). New approaches and tools have been developed that could facilitate efforts to 
assist vulnerable groups in Canada and improve understanding of adaptation options at the 
individual and community levels. 

2.2.3 COMMUNICATING HEALTH RISKS TO THE PUBLIC
There are few formal evaluations of public education efforts to reduce health risks associated with 
climate change. Those that have been completed show mixed results. A study of the education 
campaign in Montreal, Quebec indicated that people who have been exposed to education 
materials were more likely to take protective measures against heat through, for example, the use 
of lightweight clothing, avoiding strenuous exercise, taking a shower or bath to cool down, 
and hydration. However, other studies suggest that while knowledge of heat warnings is very 
broad (>90%), protective actions taken by individuals are inadequate or that perceptions 
of health risks are generally low and the adoption of preventative actions is not widespread. 

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
