24

There is a need to develop a long-term vision of health with considerations to the 
fundamental need for clean air and clean water to support the health of Canadian 
communities. These include the strategic management of biodiversity to both protect 
the ecosystem services delivered in or natural environments, and in enhancing our One Health 
management of infectious diseases. Adoption of mechanisms to facilitate collaboration 
between Ministries of Health and other government departments will empower health 
professionals and better integrate health and climate considerations in government-wide 
strategies. This must acknowledge and seek to address the extent to which additional global 
environmental changes, such as deforestation, biodiversity loss, and ocean acidification, 
will impact on human health and decrease resilience to climate change. Ecosystem-based 
adaptation utilises ecosystem services, biodiversity, and sustainable resource management 
as an adaptation strategy to enhance natural resilience and reduce vulnerability (70). These 
interventions can be effective in reducing certain climate change vulnerability as they provide 
disaster risk reduction functions and enable improvements in livelihoods and food security, 
especially in poor and vulnerable settings. 

There is a need to enhance mechanisms to evaluate the effectiveness and ability 
of interventions in reducing the burden of high priority climate sensitive diseases and 
health conditions. Linkages between public health and climate change are complex 
and interact with other factors. It is important to be able to evaluate effectiveness through 
various outcome metrics including single interventions with multiple direct and indirect 
outcomes. While implementation of effective control interventions is the only way to reduce 
the disease burden of climate change, evaluation of the effectiveness of public health 
interventions is lacking. 

The health and well-being of populations is necessarily dependant on the resilience, 
adaptability and strength of interacting systems across all sectors. This complex web of 
dependencies has become more acutely emphasised as the effects of a changing climate 
become more and more prominent in various dimensions. Actions to mitigate the 
potential enormity of these impacts have been relatively slow. Perhaps this is, in part, due 
to being stymied by the inherent complexity of how to proceed. However, many authors 
argue that most mitigation and adaptation responses to climate change are “no-regret” 
options, which lead to direct reductions in the burden of ill-health, enhance community 
resilience, alleviate poverty, and address global inequity. 

Encouraging and supporting the integration of unique strengths and capacities from different 
sectors will address the challenges of complexity and move the agenda forward. Innovation 
and foresight in creating and leading these opportunities should define future considerations 
in governance and actions towards successful adaptations for mitigating health impacts of 
climate change in Canada and globally. 

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
