8

1.6 CHRONIC DISEASE
There is an emerging literature about the pathways by which climate change can have 
an impact on health and non-communicable diseases (18). For example air pollution, 
increased heat exposure and changes to agricultural systems (land use) have been linked 
to the built environment (23) with aspects such as walkability, travel, and vehicle emissions. 
Furthermore, scientific evidence has linked air pollution to cardiovascular diseases (24), 
asthma and lung cancer (25), neurological diseases (26), diabetes (26) and symptoms 
of depression (27). Air pollution is also associated with decreased physical activity among 
adults of normal weight (28). 

Extreme heat events have been linked to increases in hospital admissions for respiratory, 
kidney and heart-related conditions (28); the effects can be made worse due to the urban 
heat island effect and the types of built structures and the materials used (23). 
Urbanization, with its high levels of vehicle emissions, extreme temperatures and 
westernized lifestyle, is linked to the rising frequency of respiratory allergic diseases and 
cardiovascular disease observed over recent decades in most industrialized countries. 
Concentrations of air pollutants (mainly ozone and particulate matter) increase with 
greenhouse gas emissions and higher temperatures (24). The main driver of respiratory 
disease is air pollution itself rather than climate change and the main intervention for 
respiratory diseases is emission reduction. 

There is a risk of increased exposure to toxic chemicals, known or suspected to cause 
cancer, that are released into the environment following thawing permafrost, heavy rainfall 
or flooding and by increased volatilization of chemicals under conditions of increased 
temperature (25). Cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease are the 
leading causes of preventable death and disability in Canada (26). Reducing risk of these 
chronic diseases through innovations to the built environment, active living and personal 
behavioural change present a unique opportunity for strategic public health innovation (28). 
This presents a classic example of possible health adaptations to climate change that both 
reduce vulnerability and enhance community resilience. 

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
