5

1.2 FOOD SAFETY AND SECURITY
There are other diseases that are likely to be exacerbated in a warmer world including 
food-borne and respiratory diseases. It has been shown that reported cases of salmonellosis 
and campylobacteriosis peak in the hot summer months and that this association was 
observed at temperatures greater than 37.5°C (9). In Canada, some experts may consider 
the effect of climate change on food-borne diseases to be minimal providing appropriate 
food handling and storage procedures and improved food hygiene (10).

Indigenous Peoples are among the most vulnerable to climate change and experience 
distinctive challenges (11), particularly those living in remote locations. A range of factors 
that apply to each vulnerability assessment are layered with issues that are unique to 
Indigenous communities and culture to varying degrees. These may include reliance on the 
rapidly changing natural environment for cultural, social, mental and physical health and 
well-being, and livelihoods. Historical legacies have influenced development of Indigenous 
communities in Canada. Many have a number of socio-economic challenges, including 
disproportionate fiscal and population pressures; sub-standard infrastructure; and limited 
access to health services (12). Many of these factors are exacerbated by the more dramatic 
impacts of climate change in extreme environments. Food security and access to potable water 
are fundamental to health. Store-bought food and water are extremely expensive in remote 
areas. This combined with decreased access to traditional food sources and increasingly 
expensive and undependable conditions for safe and affordable transportation in remote 
regions are deepening existing food and water security concerns (13). Household food 
insecurity has been associated with a range of poor physical and mental health outcomes, 
including multiple chronic conditions and depression (14,15).

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
