15

2.2 HEALTH ADAPTATION IN CANADA
An international comparison of health adaptation activities among developed countries 
listed in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
reported that Canada is further ahead of many countries in efforts to protect health from 
climate change (47). Specifically, it is one of the leading countries with respect to the depth 
of research being led on vulnerability, to the impacts of climate change and adaptation 
options within the health sector. It is also one of the few countries to recognize and 
develop specific adaptation options around vulnerabilities of Indigenous Peoples. Health 
adaptation efforts ongoing at federal, provincial, territorial and local levels related 
to assessing vulnerabilities, preparing for the impacts and communicating health risks to 
Canadians were examined. Neither a comprehensive inventory of all local and regional 
adaptations (e.g. infectious disease surveillance, emergency management programs), nor 
a comprehensive assessment of the state of health adaptation in Canada are available 
at this time. However, communities can draw from information from various sources in order 
to set priorities, select appropriate strategies and implement them in a sustainable manner 
as a complement to existing programs, to protect and enhance health in their respective 
jurisdictions. 

2.2.1 ASSESSING IMPACTS AND VULNERABILITIES
Climate change and health vulnerability assessments help identify populations in a community 
or region who are vulnerable to the impacts, gauge the effectiveness of existing interventions 
and programs, identify additional measures necessary to respond to climate change, strengthen 
capacity to take action, and provide a baseline of information to monitor adaptation progress. 
The World Health Organization (WHO) recently released new guidelines for assessing 
health vulnerabilities to climate change and adaptation options and Health Canada released 
guidelines for assessing the vulnerability of communities and individuals to extreme heat. 
Such assessments rely on monitoring and surveillance data illustrating health impact trends 
associated with climate variability and change. Gaps in data exist for many climate change 
impacts of concern to Canadians. Cheng and Berry (2013) have identified a key basket of climate 
change and health indicators that can be used by health authorities to track impacts on health 
over time (25). At present, few health authorities at regional and local levels have conducted full 
climate change and health vulnerability assessments. Analysis of possible health impacts from 
climate change have been undertaken in British Columbia (48). Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy 
and Action Plan 2011–2014 (49) recognized extreme heat events as a key health concern and 
committed to the creation of a heat vulnerability assessment tool. At the local level, Peel Public 
Health (Ontario) used the new WHO guidelines to conduct a health vulnerability assessment 
that will contribute to implementation of the Region of Peel Climate Change Strategy (50). 
In addition, some public health authorities and their partners are currently undertaking or have 
undertaken research projects that contribute to knowledge of local vulnerability to specific 
health impacts. Expertise on climate change and health issues is growing and many universities 
and organizations across Canada are undertaking research in this area.

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
