20

Fourth, many climate-affecting behaviours are habitual and resistant to change. Everyday 
domestic energy use (e.g. cooking, heating the home), travel behaviour, and eating patterns 
are undertaken as part of a daily routine and without conscious thought. Such behaviours are 
resistant to change, even if alternative options are available, and interventions relying on 
increasing knowledge have limited effect (64).

While adaptation is largely dependent on the availability of information relevant to climate 
change, it appears that motivation for voluntary mitigation is mostly dependent on perceived 
susceptibility to threats and severity of climate change or climate variability impacts.

The technological, financial, and behavioural changes needed to meet ambitious long-term 
goals are in principle feasible. But they need to be accomplished in the face of highly 
diverse social, cultural, economic, and political contexts. Opposing national (and vested) 
interests, clashing views of what constitutes fair distribution of effort, and a model 
of economic growth that is currently tied to fossil fuel use, can make progress fraught. 
Hulme (2011) outlines several key climate change issues that when framed as a health issue, 
rather than purely as an environmental, economic, or technological challenge, makes the need 
for action that much clearer (65). Health puts a more personal and human face on what can 
sometimes seem to be a distant threat. By making the case for climate change as a health 
issue, it is hoped that the civilizational crisis we face will achieve greater public resonance. 
Public concerns about the health effects of climate change, such as under-nutrition and food 
insecurity, have the potential to accelerate political action in ways that attention to carbon 
dioxide emissions alone do not. 

The scientific literature relates a few avenues for public health engagement in the context 
of mitigation: the continued work towards establishing a framework for a strong, predictable, 
and international carbon pricing mechanisms; rapidly expanding access to renewable 
energy in low-income and middle-income countries; ensuring adequate local capacity and 
political support to develop low-carbon healthy energy choices; adopting mechanisms 
to facilitate collaboration between Ministries of Health and other government departments 
and empowering health professionals; agreeing and implementing an international agreement 
which supports countries in transitioning to a low-carbon economy; and investing in climate 
change and public health research. 

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
