7

has decreased, thus generating new risks and a steady rise in disaster related losses, with 
a significant economic, social, health, cultural and environmental impact in the short, medium 
and long term, especially at the local and community levels. Recurring small-scale disasters and 
slow-onset disasters particularly affect communities, households and small and medium-sized 
enterprises, constituting a high percentage of all losses. All countries are faced with increasing 
levels of possible hidden or unanticipated costs and challenges in order to meet financial and 
other obligations (19).

1.5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, HEALTH SECURITY 
AND GLOBAL STABILITY
Between 2008 and 2012 there were 144 million people displaced by disasters (20) with people 
in vulnerable situations affected disproportionately. This represents a population larger than the 
combined populations of Britain and France. For some disasters the effect of the displacement 
can be indirect such as with environmental refugees, or that new conflicts arise due to scarcity of 
basic resources (20). The problems of heat stress and heat stress-related mortality are considered 
an area of major direct impact because of the severity of the outcome (death) and increased 
pressure on governments to respond. An example is the intense 2003 European heat wave, which 
caused the death of more than 35,000 mainly elderly persons (21). 

Event coincidence analysis was used to investigate data from armed-conflict outbreaks and 
climate-related natural disasters for the period 1980–2010 (22). A coincidence rate of 9% 
regarding armed-conflict outbreak and disaster occurrence such as heat waves or droughts was 
observed. During this period, about 23% of conflict outbreaks in ethnically highly fractionalized 
countries robustly coincided with climatic calamities. Although climate-related disasters do not 
act as direct triggers of armed conflicts, the disruptive nature of these events seems to play out 
in ethnically fractionalized societies in a particularly tragic way. This observation has important 
implications for future security policies as several of the world’s most conflict-prone regions, 
including North and Central Africa as well as Central Asia. Both of these areas are exceptionally 
vulnerable to anthropogenic climate change and characterized by deep ethnic divides (22). 

Medical countermeasures (MCMs), such as anthrax vaccine, are therapeutic products (i.e., drugs, 
vaccines, and medical devices, as defined by the Food and Drugs Act) which aim to prevent, 
mitigate or treat the adverse health effects of a public health event or emergency. Globally, 
MCMs play a critical role in addressing all manner of health security threats. This is highly 
relevant with regards to climate change impacts on the evolving public health threat and risk 
landscape. Increased movement of people and goods leads to increased risk of disease 
transmission; emerging and re-emerging infectious disease outbreaks, including antimicrobial-
resistant pathogens; and increased risk of terrorism threat agents due to evolving geo-political 
landscapes. Ongoing awareness and foresight in ensuring that effective and relevant MCMs 
are developed and acquired for use to protect Canadians is a key area of responsibility for the 
federal government. 

The uncertainty and potentially extreme impacts of these types of events on health security 
in Canada and globally are important considerations in emergency preparedness and 
response systems’ evolution, innovation and responsiveness. 

SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS
