•	 as part of assessments of community 

vulnerabilities and risks. In formulating adaptation 
plans, communities often utilize climate projections 
when studying the nature and extent of local risk 
and vulnerabilities, including the capacity of key 
stakeholders and residents to cope with and respond 
effectively to increased stress. 

•	 as parameters for setting the design tolerance 

of systems and structures. For example, a 
municipality may, based on projected changes in the 
intensity of future rainfall events, change the design 
criteria for the diameter of storm-water pipes to 
accommodate greater flows.

Although projections are a useful decision-support tool, 
there are adaptation measures that communities can take 
without having to use or commission climate projections. 
Communities can, for example, base their adaptation 
planning decisions on an analysis of current vulnerabilities 
or on information gleaned from reliable regional, national 
or international assessments (which make use of climate 
projections). It is important that planners are cognizant of 
the inherent uncertainties embedded in projections and 
communicate them accurately to decision makers and 
the public. 

3.2 CLIMATE PROJECTIONS
A climate projection is a representation of the climate in  
an area at some specified time in the future.65,66 Projections 
indicate plausible changes in a set of climate variables. 
Examples include changes in average and extreme 
precipitation and temperature, the number of frost-free 
days, sea level, and the length of the growing season.  
This information may be presented in numerical, visual 
(graphs or maps) or narrative form. 

Climate projections are generated from the outputs of 
one or more climate models. These models are complex 
computer programs that simulate the behaviour of the 
atmosphere, the oceans, land surfaces, clouds and other 
key components of the climate system.67 The models depict 
future conditions at different scales – some encompass 
the entire globe while others focus on specific regions. 
Generally, uncertainty increases at the finer spatial 
scales. To examine future climates, models incorporate 
assumptions about greenhouse gas emissions in the 
future. For example, some assume fast-rising emissions 
while others assume more gradual growth and eventual 
reductions in emissions. Uncertainty is an inherent part of 
all climate projections, owing to challenges in modelling 
complex climate systems and in foreseeing future global 
actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Climate change projections may be applied to local 
planning processes in various ways, including the following:

•	 as tools for learning and public engagement. 

Planners may present climate projections to 
stakeholders and the public to raise awareness 
about the nature and magnitude of possible changes 
to the local climate, thus stimulating discussion 
amongst stakeholders about potential impacts, 
local vulnerabilities, adaptive capacity and preferred 
approaches to adaptation.

22  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


