2.2 LOCAL PLANS ON SPECIAL MATTERS 
In addition to official plans, local governments adopt 
many other kinds of plans. Those plans may focus on one 
function of local government (such as public transit or 
storm water management), on a sector or issue of special 
significance to the community (such as the development 
of the arts or the needs of senior citizens) or on a 
neighbourhood with special planning needs.11 As with 
official plans, these local plans are often developed through 
a formal planning process, including public consultation, 
and provide an assessment of conditions, a long-term vision 
and a set of goals and actions for the particular issue or 
area in question. 

A growing number of Canadian municipalities have 
adopted plans that specifically address the need to adapt to 
climate change. Some communities have chosen to develop 
stand-alone adaptation plans. Those documents typically 
outline the climate change impacts of concern to the 
community, the associated risks and opportunities, and the 
community’s vision and proposed actions for dealing with 
those changes. Many other communities have integrated 
consideration of climate change adaptation into local plans 
that address other issues. For example, a municipality may 
integrate adaptation into its capital improvement plan for 
storm water sewer systems.

Stratford’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan12
The Town of Stratford (population 8046), a rapidly growing community in Prince Edward Island, is located on a 
peninsula just south of the provincial capital, Charlottetown. The main climate change issues of concern to the 
community are coastal erosion, which already threatens several important heritage buildings and homes, sea level 
rise, storm surge and inland flooding. 
In 2010, the Town, in partnership with the Canadian Institute of Planners and the Atlantic Planners Institute, 
created a long-term strategic plan to prepare Stratford for climate change. The process comprised four stages: 
(1) forming a core working group to establish overarching objectives, engage key stakeholders and conduct 
background research into local climate change impacts; (2) organizing public meetings to assess current and future 
vulnerabilities (following a presentation of the potential climate change impacts, a survey was distributed to all 
participants at the public meeting to gauge climate change-related opportunities and threats for the community); 
(3) conducting a risk assessment, building on results of the vulnerability assessment, to rank the most important 
climate change impacts and identify priority areas for adaptation action; and (4) preparing a final adaptation plan 
that included recommended adaptation actions by theme (for example, heritage properties, parks and recreation, 
private properties, emergency services, storm water infrastructure). Stratford has since integrated adaptation 
considerations into all new or updated community action plans, including its draft Official Plan, Strategic Plan and 
Master Stormwater Management Plan.

D
N
U
A
M

 

N
O
T
S
N

I

W

 
F
O

 

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

 

O
T
O
H
P

6  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


