2.3 ZONING 

Zoning is a regulatory tool widely used by municipalities 
to control land use within their borders.7,16,17,18 It is a key 
tool for implementing the goals and objectives set out 
in a municipality’s official plan. Zoning bylaws divide 
the entire community into zones. For each zone, only 
certain land uses are permitted (for example, commercial, 
residential, industrial). In addition to restrictions on the 
use of the property, the zoning bylaws may impose 
requirements on buildings, including maximum height, 
lot coverage and density, as well as building type and 
setbacks. Those requirements are reflected in a zoning 
map for the jurisdiction. Zoning restrictions usually apply 
only prospectively.19

Zoning codes can be used by municipalities to limit new 
development in hazard-prone areas (for instance in areas 
subject to wildfires, landslides or coastal erosion) or to 
prescribe building standards that reduce vulnerability to 
environmental stress.20,21 For example, in areas of high 
flood risk, all development may be prohibited, while in 
areas where the risk is lower, the ground floor of new 
buildings and structures may be required to be built 
above a minimum height to avoid flood damage.22 Given 
that climate change often magnifies existing hazard risk, 
municipalities could respond by modifying existing zoning 
restrictions to factor in the greater intensity, frequency or 
duration of certain hazards as climate changes.

Beaubassin-est’s sea level rise protection zone23
Beaubassin-est (population 6200), a small coastal community in southeast New Brunswick, is vulnerable to 
the impacts of sea level rise and storm surge flooding. The Community is one of the first in New Brunswick 
to implement a minimum height standard for buildings to address climate change impacts. Council passed an 
updated zoning bylaw in March 2011 to better protect new construction in the community’s coastal zone. 
The bylaw identifies a sea level rise “protection zone” in which the minimum ground floor elevation of any new 
building must be at least 1.43 metres above the current 1-in-100-year flood mark. The regulation is an overlay 
zone – all previous zoning conditions apply. Rather than restrict development outright, the zoning bylaw imposes 
stricter building requirements on developers. This new regulation provides an opportunity to educate developers 
as well as the community at large about the impacts of climate change and sea level rise. This update to the bylaw 
was based on the best available scientific understanding of sea level rise for the area and a high resolution digital 
map that the community commissioned to help identify potential flood levels. 

N
O
R

I

O
D

 

N
E

I

T
S
A
B
É
S
 
F
O

 

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

 

O
T
O
H
P

8  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


