2.5 COVENANTS AND EASEMENTS
Covenants and easements (known as real servitudes in 
Quebec) are formal agreements that place restrictions on 
the use of land or grant a person (or the public) the right 
to use land owned by another.31,32 For example, a covenant 
may prohibit building a structure that casts a shadow on 
a neighbouring property. An easement may allow the 
public to pass through private land to reach a beach. Both 
covenants and easements are said to “run with the land,” 
which means they bind current as well as future owners. 
There are strict and complex legal requirements that apply 
when creating easements or covenants. 

Covenants may serve local planning goals in different ways: 

•	 as a development control tool – Municipalities 

may use covenants when entering development 
agreements, applying controls on subdivisions and 
other development projects or imposing conditions 
on issuing a development permit. In such cases, 
these instruments ensure that community interests 
are protected and that the developer’s promises 
about the operation and maintenance of the 
property are enforceable long after construction. 
Covenants may be used in “green developments” 
that use innovative energy, waste water treatment 
and other systems that require public access and the 
collaboration of future owners for proper operation 
and maintenance.33

•	 as a conservation tool – A special form of 

covenant, known as a conservation covenant or 
easement has been established by law in many 
provinces. It places restrictions on the use of land to 
protect its natural values. For example, a conservation 
covenant may prohibit the removal of native 
vegetation and prohibit any structures on a portion 
of the property that contains sensitive ecosystems. 
The owner who enters into a conservation covenant 
continues to own the land and may live on it, sell it, 
or pass it on to heirs but the covenant’s restrictions 
on development are followed in the future, regardless 
of who owns the land.34 In exchange, the land owner 
may be eligible for tax reductions or credits.

Covenants and easements can play an important role 
in climate change adaptation planning. For example, 
a municipality may acquire a conservation easement 
to prevent residential development on a coastal area 
threatened by sea level rise and storm surge flooding.  
A covenant may be negotiated with owners in an area to 
prevent construction of docks, sea walls or other coastal 
protection structures in order to allow marshes and dunes 
to migrate inland naturally.35 Covenants and easements may 
also support local efforts to monitor climate change by, for 
example, allowing access to a coastal property for purposes 
of measuring erosion rates. 

S
E
L
A
Z
N
O
G

 
.

E

 
F
O

 

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

 

O
T
O
H
P

Island Trust’s NAPTEP Covenant
The Islands Trust (population 25 000) is a federation of local governments 
in the Gulf Islands and Howe Sound islands of British Columbia. The Islands 
Trust Fund acts as the conservation arm of the federation, charged with 
protecting the ecosystems in the region through land acquisition, conservation 
covenants and education programs. Since 1990, it has protected more than 
1073 hectares (ha) of land on 84 properties.36 
Adaptation to climate change, especially the protection of biodiversity, is one 
key concern of the Trust Fund. The effects of changing climate are already 
evident in local ecosystems: vegetation is experiencing earlier green-up, 
wildlife migration patterns are changing, and insect outbreaks are more 
common.37 Up to 30 percent of assessed animal species are believed to be 
at high risk of extirpation (local extinction).38 By establishing, monitoring and 
managing conservation areas, the Trust Fund aims to maintain the ecological 
functions of high biodiversity areas in the face of a changing climate. Under 
the Trust Fund’s Natural Area Protection Tax Exemption Program (NAPTEP) 
Covenant, land owners receive a 65 percent reduction in property taxes on 
the protected portion of their land. The Trust Fund is developing a tool to 
estimate the biodiversity value of properties to prioritize future acquisitions.

12  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


