Aussi disponible en français sous le titre : Outils d’aménagement locaux pour l’adaptation aux changements climatiques

Information contained in this publication or product may be reproduced, in part or in whole, and by any means, for personal or public  
non-commercial purposes, without charge or further permission, unless otherwise specified.

You are asked to:

•	 exercise due diligence in ensuring the accuracy of the materials reproduced;

•	

•	

indicate the complete title of the materials reproduced, and the name of the author organization; and

indicate that the reproduction is a copy of an official work that is published by the Government of Canada and that the reproduction  
has not been produced in affiliation with, or with the endorsement of, the Government of Canada.

Commercial reproduction and distribution is prohibited except with written permission from the Government of Canada’s copyright  
administrator, Public Works and Government Services Canada (PWGSC). For more information, contact PWGSC at 613-996-6886 or  
at copyright.droitdauteur@pwgsc-tpsgc.gc.ca.

Cat. No. M4-106/2012E-PDF 
ISBN 978-1-100-21282-1

© Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2012

Her Majesty is not responsible for the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in the reproduced material. Her Majesty shall 
at all times be indemnified and held harmless against any and all claims whatsoever arising out of negligence or other fault in the use of the 
information contained in this publication or product.

Synopsis: This document describes planning tools being used across 
Canada to help communities prepare for climate change, increase 
adaptive capacity and build resilience. It is directed to individuals and 
groups interested in climate change adaptation at the local level, 
including planners and other local government staff, elected officials, 
community organizations, local residents and business leaders.

Recommended citation: 
Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. (2012). Land use planning tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.: Government 
of Canada, 38 p. 

Front cover photograph courtesy of Halifax Regional Municipality


