can be mapped. Maps can also be readily referenced or 
incorporated into land use planning tools, such as zoning 
bylaws, official plans and policy documents. 

Increasingly, municipalities employ computer animation 
software to create three-dimensional visualizations at the 
street and neighbourhood scales. The software combines 
images of the existing features of the community (for 
example, roads, buildings and trees near the shore) with 
climate-related impacts projected for the area (for example, 
higher sea level). The animations help people visualize 
the losses that may be incurred under such conditions 
and illustrate the consequences of a particular adaptation 
measure. For example, planners may want to create an 
image showing how raising a dike or levee would affect 
views of the ocean from various waterfront properties. The 
resulting images may be useful in engaging the affected 
land owners and the public when evaluating the merits of a 
proposed adaptation measure, such as raising a sea dike.

H
T
L
A
E
H

 

C

I
L
B
U
P

 

O
T
N
O
R
O
T

 
F
O

 

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

 

P
A
M

3.4 VISUALIZING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS
Maps and other landscape visualizations can illustrate, in 
a simple and effective manner,78 the nature and extent of 
the changes expected in the local climate, the severity of 
possible impacts, and what proposed adaptation responses 
might look like. Such visualizations support decision making 
by translating scientific concepts into maps or images 
that have clear and practical meaning to non-scientists 
and the public. They can facilitate dialogue during the 
planning process.

VISUALIZATIONS

MAPS

Maps are one of the most common adaptation decision-
support tools used by planners. They can range from 
simple hand-drawn maps to those developed by using 
sophisticated computer software. Maps have been used 
to identify geographic areas of the municipality at risk 
from climate-related impacts, the location of vulnerable 
infrastructure and populations, or to demarcate places 
where certain adaptation-related policies apply. For 
example, the potential extent of shoreline erosion or storm 
surge flooding under various climate change scenarios 

Toronto’s heat vulnerability mapping tool79
As the climate changes, Toronto is expected to 
experience more intense and prolonged heat 
waves. Extreme heat is a public health issue of 
particular concern to the city’s senior citizens, to 
persons suffering from respiratory illnesses and to 
other vulnerable populations. Toronto Public Health 
(TPH) has developed a mapping tool to visualize 
areas of elevated human vulnerability to extreme 
heat. The maps incorporate numerous indicators of 
vulnerability, including surface temperatures, green 
space coverage, housing and social characteristics 
of at-risk populations, access to air conditioning, 
and the location of cool places. The tool helps TPH 
and community partners identify and prioritize 
geographic hot spots for delivering resources during 
a heat alert. The City also plans to use the tool for 
long-term climate adaptation planning. 

26  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


