3.3 SCENARIO PLANNING
A scenario is a plausible, simplified description of 
how the future may develop. Scenario planning is a 
strategic medium- to long-term planning tool in which 
planners develop multiple scenarios describing potential 
social, economic and environmental conditions in a 
community and then formulate strategies and measures 
to achieve planning goals under one or more of those 
scenarios.73 Long used by government and the private 
sector for managing uncertainty, scenario planning is 
now being applied by some communities to prepare for 
climate change.

In planning for adaptation to climate change, planners 
devise scenarios that demonstrate how changes in climate 
may affect the community under different development 
trajectories (see the diagram in the following Whitehorse 
example). The development trajectories are based on a few 
key variables expected to drive change, such as population 
growth, technological shifts or energy demand. Different 
narratives about how climate change may unfold in the 

community are derived from scientific projections, expert 
assessments and other sources.74

Planning scenarios assist adaptation planning and policy-
making in several ways. The process of constructing the 
scenarios educates stakeholders about the nature and 
extent of future climate-related risks and opportunities. 
Scenarios may provide information that helps to identify 
emerging vulnerabilities (for example, potential conflict 
over access to water) and support efforts to prioritize 
climate change risks. They also assist in devising adaptation 
strategies and actions to address vulnerabilities. The 
most robust measures are those effective across different 
scenarios. For example, in communities at risk from 
wildfires, proper firebreak maintenance can be a useful 
adaptation measure regardless of the magnitude of climate 
change experienced and the rate of development. In 
other cases, planners may develop contingent adaptation 
strategies that would be implemented in the event a 
particular scenario begins to unfold.75

Whitehorse Community Climate Change Adaptation Project
Whitehorse (population 25 690) is the capital of Yukon and, like other northern communities, already faces many 
climate-related impacts, including forest fires, flooding and ecosystem changes. To help the community prepare for 
future climate changes, a scenario planning project was conducted in 2009, led by a local college in collaboration 
with the territorial government, local and First Nations governments, private sector firms and community groups.76,77 
In a series of meetings, members of the community identified local vulnerabilities under four possible “future 
histories” of Whitehorse. To create those histories, two climate change scenarios and two development scenarios 
were generated. For instance, Scenario 4, entitled City of Crossroads, envisions a high degree of climate change 
(median temperature rise of 4°C) as well as significant population growth (24 000 new residents). The other future 
histories have different assumptions regarding climate change and development. Participants brainstormed on the 
social, economic and environmental consequences associated with each scenario. Certain impacts or concerns 
that were common across the four histories were deemed to be consequences most likely to occur and therefore 
became priorities for developing adaptation actions. The priorities included increased risk of forest fire, shifts in the 
availability of water, infrastructure decline, energy and food security, and potential land use conflicts. The study 
also allowed planners to identify the range of impacts that any one adaptation measure could address and how 
these measures may fit with other planning initiatives. 

Climate changes (e.g. extent of temperature  
rise and increase in snow)

some climate change

lots of climate change

Development trajectory 
(e.g. population growth)

low

high

Scenario 1:  
City of Wilderness

Scenario 2:  
City of People

Scenario 3:  
City of Mettle

Scenario 4:  
City of Crossroads

L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S   |  25 


