2.4 LAND SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS
Communities across Canada employ many different tools 
to control the layout and design of proposed developments 
and to reduce adverse impacts on the community. The 
controls, which may apply to subdivisions of land, new 
construction or alterations to existing buildings, allow local 
officials to evaluate projects case by case.7 Among them are

As part of the evaluation of proposals under these types 
of regulations, local officials may seek changes to projects 
prior to approval. Further, the developer may be required to 
pay development charges, dedicate a portion of the site for 
public use or provide some other concession or amenity.

These project-based, discretionary development controls 
can be very useful for adapting to climate change at the 
neighbourhood scale. For example, as part of the review 
of a subdivision proposal, the developer may be asked to 
assess the increased risk of erosion due to climate change 
and to determine how it may affect the development. 
The municipality may require that appropriate adaptation 
measures be taken by the developer, such as shoreline 
restoration or increased development setbacks. The lots 
in a proposed subdivision may be clustered in the least 
hazardous part of the property. In other cases, a site plan 
control ordinance may be used to require that green design 
features that address the impacts of climate change be 
incorporated (for instance, providing shade and rooftop 
gardens to decrease the public health risk from urban 
heat islands). 

•	 subdivision controls – which apply when a developer 
wants to divide a parcel of land, often for residential 
development. Generally, subdivision plans must 
demonstrate good access and efficient utility service 
for all the proposed lots and also address concerns 
about financial, environmental and other impacts.

•	 site plan controls, development permits, 

development agreements and similar tools – 
which require developers to submit detailed designs 
to be assessed against specified criteria. For example, 
a proposal may be reviewed for the quality of the 
design of public areas, the fit with the historic 
character of the neighbourhood, or the extent of 
disturbance to ecologically sensitive land.

•	 comprehensive development zones, planned 
unit developments and similar instruments – 
that apply to large sites in which non-standard or 
innovative designs and techniques are to be used, 
and a customised approach to zoning and site design 
is appropriate.

Toronto’s Green Standard
Toronto, Ontario (population 2.6 million), is situated at the centre 
of a conurbation of more than 5 million people. Climate change 
impacts of concern for the city include increased health risks due 
to extreme heat, higher incidence of pests and diseases (such as 
West Nile virus) and more extreme rainfall with consequences for 
storm-water systems and other infrastructure.26
The Toronto Green Standard (TGS) is a set of performance 
measures for site and building design, covering energy and water 
efficiency, air and water quality, ecological services and solid waste 
management. The standards work with the regular development 
approval and inspection process, and apply to all new development subject to subdivision or site plan controls or 
for which a zoning amendment is required.27 Although adaptation is not explicitly mentioned, the TGS addresses 
several climate change impacts of concern to the city. For example, one provision, applicable to non-residential 
development of three stories or less, requires the use of light-coloured materials, open-grid pavement or shading 
on at least 50 percent of the site to reduce urban heat. Another provision requires that new developments retain at 
least the first 5 millimetres (mm) from each rainfall through rainwater reuse, plantings and other practices, thereby 
reducing storm water runoff. A more stringent set of voluntary standards has been adopted. Developments that 
meet those stricter standards are eligible for reductions in development fees.

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

O
T
O
H
P

O
T
N
O
R
O
T

 
F
O

 

Y
T

 
F
O

 

 

I

C

 

E
H
T

10  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


