D
N
A
L
U
O
M

 

Y
R
R
E
J
 
F
O

 

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

 

O
T
O
H
P

3.1  ASSESSMENTS OF COMMUNITY VULNERABILITY 

AND RISK

One of the first steps in the local adaptation planning 
process is an assessment of how climate change affects 
a community. Assessments can take several forms.i Some 
emphasize projections of climate change impacts in 
the community, while others focus on the factors that 
produce local vulnerability and constrain the ability of the 
community to take adaptive actions. The knowledge gained 
through vulnerability and risk assessments can help decision 
makers develop effective adaptation measures. 

Many guidelines and frameworks have been developed 
to help communities undertake local climate change 
assessments.57 Some are generic tools that may apply 
generally to all communities, while others are targeted 
to certain types of communities (for example, rural 
communities) or particular forms of climate change impacts 
(for example, heat-related health risks). Many forms of 
knowledge, including scientific and technical expertise and 
local and traditional knowledge, can contribute to local 
assessments of climate change impacts and adaptation. 

VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENTS 

A vulnerability assessment is a structured process for 
identifying the vulnerability of human and natural systems 
to climate change.58 The more exposed and sensitive an 
individual or community is to climate change, the higher 
its vulnerability. Vulnerability is also a function of adaptive 
capacity; the higher a community’s capacity to undertake 
adaptive actions, the less vulnerable it is. 

When conducting a vulnerability assessment, a broad 
range of socio-economic and physical factors should be 
considered, including climate conditions, the adequacy of 
housing and local infrastructure, the quality of emergency 
response systems and assistance networks, the availability 

of material and financial resources, and the general health 
and risk awareness of the population.59,60 Consultation with 
local stakeholders and residents is crucial in assessments, 
both to understand existing vulnerabilities and to develop 
effective strategies to reduce them. The information gained 
from vulnerability assessments allows local officials to 
develop appropriate interventions such as improved health 
services, better access to transportation networks, and 
healthier buildings and urban spaces. The assessments also 
help to prioritize measures to assist the most vulnerable 
individuals and groups in a timely and cost-effective manner. 

RISK MANAGEMENT

Risk management is a process widely used by businesses, 
governments and non-governmental organizations to 
identify and manage the adverse impacts of a change 
in conditions. The magnitude of a risk is calculated by 
examining the probability of the occurrence of an event and 
the severity of its impact. Risk management helps decision 
makers evaluate multiple threats and prioritize policy 
responses under conditions of uncertainty. 

Risk management processes can be used by a community 
to evaluate risks associated with climate change and 
suggest adaptation measures. Risk management 
methodologies can provide a way to explore public 
attitudes and perceptions of risk, and this information can 
feed back into the assessment. The evaluation process 
may be formal or informal and may be quantitative 
or qualitative, depending on what works best for the 
municipality. In addition to common risk management 
processes (for example, ISO31000, CSA Q850), which can 
be used to assess climate change risks, several climate 
change-specific risk assessment tools have been developed 
to assist Canadian communities (see Appendix A). 

i  The IPCC56 described several distinct conceptual frameworks for assessments of local climate change, including impact-based approaches that are climate scenario driven, adaptation-based 

approaches that focus on the capacity of communities and natural systems to respond effectively to stress, vulnerability-based approaches centered on the factors driving the susceptibility 
of individuals and groups to harm, integrated approaches that include modelling and other procedures for investigating climate change across sectors and scales and risk management 
approaches that focus directly on decision making.

L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S   |  19 


