2.7 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS 
An environmental assessment (EA) is a structured process 
development proposals. For example, developers may be 
used by governments to evaluate the environmental, social 
required to submit an EIS for plans of a subdivision or for 
and economic impacts of development. It can be applied 
a building project located in or near sensitive or protected 
to a specific project, such as the construction of a bridge 
areas. The scope and process for a particular EIS will 
or to a plan or policy intended to guide future projects. 
vary depending on the nature of the project, applicable 
Many kinds of developments are required to undergo 
environmental and planning laws, policies in the official 
an EA. For instance, federal and provincial law may 
community plan and municipal bylaws, and the resources 
require EAs for major industrial projects, projects that use 
available to local authorities. 
federal or provincial funds or for development on crown 
lands.46 Some municipal infrastructure projects such as 
extensions of sewers and the construction of water mains, 
roads and transit systems may be subject to provincial 
EA requirements. In 2003, the Canadian Environmental 
Assessment Agency issued guidelines for incorporating 
climate change considerations in EAs, one of the first 
federal agencies in the world to do so.47 

EAs, EISs and other forms of environmental review have 
proven to be ready platforms for consideration of climate 
change concerns. The applicable legislation and guidelines 
for EAs and EISs may require that local climate change be 
incorporated as one aspect of the natural environment to 
be considered and that measures to address climate change 
impacts be incorporated into the project’s design and 
management plan. In other cases, climate change impacts 
may not be a direct consideration in the EA process. 
Despite this, measures enacted in response to the EA may 
help build resilience to a changing climate. 

In addition, municipalities can require formal environmental 
reviews, sometimes called environmental impact studies 
(EISs), as part of the local process for the evaluation of 

Saint John waterfront redevelopment
Saint John (population 70 063), the largest municipality in New Brunswick, is located on the north shore of the 
Bay of Fundy at the mouth of the Saint John River. Climate change in this region is expected to cause a rise in 
coastal water levels, more intense precipitation and storm events, and more significant coastal and inland erosion 
and flooding.48
The Saint John Waterfront Development Corporation, on behalf of the City, plans to redevelop 2.43 ha of land 
on the waterfront. The street grid is to be extended, buildings renovated and new residences, shops and a hotel 
constructed. A portion of the development site was formerly a Canadian Coast Guard base and is owned by 
Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Accordingly, the transfer of the property to the Corporation requires a screening 
under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.49 The EA screening, completed in March of 2010, included 
consideration of the potential impacts of climate change and sea level rise on the project.50 The Corporation 
agreed to ensure that the climate and potential sea level rise are considered where relevant in the design of the 
infrastructure components of the project. The loadings and stresses associated with climate change, potential sea 
level rise and other environmental forces are to be addressed through engineering design as the planning for the 
project continues. 

 
F
O

 

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

 

O
T
O
H
P

N
O
O
R
A
M

 

C
A
M

16  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


