Planning tools and climate change 
risk reduction 
Generally speaking, planning tools can be used to 
reduce climate risks in four ways:
•	 limiting development in hazard-prone areas
•	 ensuring that the built environment can 

withstand a range of environmental stress
•	 helping to preserve natural environments 
that protect communities against hazards 
(for example, dunes that absorb coastal 
storm effects) 

•	 educating stakeholders and decision makers 
about risks and opportunities and fostering 
dialogue about adaptation

This document describes tools in the land use planning 
sector that communities can use in preparing to adapt to 
climate change. In addition, it provides information on 
decision-support tools, tools that provide information and 
resources to help planners and local decision makers take 
effective adaptation action. 

A brief example of each tool and its use by a Canadian 
community is given. Not every case discussed here was 
explicitly motivated by a desire to adapt to climate change. 
However, the significance of the tool to adaptation 
planning is clear in each case. An effort was made to select 
examples from communities of varying sizes and from all 
regions of Canada.  

Although the examples are of broad utility, the design and 
application of a particular planning tool can vary greatly 
from one jurisdiction to another, depending on provincial 
or territorial laws and other factors. We describe the 
provincial and territorial roles in local adaptation planning 
in Appendix A. Readers interested in knowing how a 
particular tool is applied in a specific community should 
consult provincial, territorial and local laws.

It is important to keep in mind that land use planning is 
used to pursue many local policy objectives, including 
providing affordable housing, stimulating job growth, 
preserving the character and heritage of a community, 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions, protecting biodiversity 
and enabling efficient transportation. A key challenge for 
planners and local decision makers is how to incorporate 
and balance the need to prepare for climate change 
through adaptation with other local development 
objectives. Another consideration is how to integrate 
(mainstream) consideration of changing climate into 
the wide array of decisions made by local governments, 
from operating municipal services to capital spending, 
enforcement and inspection activities, collection of taxes, 
and administration of disaster response programs.

2  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S
2  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


