While the legal framework for land use planning in the 
territories differs from that in the provinces, the roles 
that territorial governments play in adaptation to climate 
change roughly correspond to those described in the 
Provinces section of this appendix. For example, territorial 

governments also adopt climate change strategies and 
actions plans.94,95,96 Territorial land-use planning practices 
and territorial government involvement in local adaptation 
planning vary by territory, depending on the enabling 
federal legislation and other factors.

British Columbia’s Climate Action Plan97
British Columbia released its Climate Action Plan in June 2008. Chapter 5 describes the Province’s vision, strategies 
and activities as it prepares for climate change. In responding to the increased likelihood of severe weather events, 
the provincial government is taking action to (1) ensure that new development on flood plains will be flood-proofed 
to provincial standards, (2) consider the impacts of climate change when awarding provincial infrastructure grants, 
(3) develop a comprehensive plan for green community development and (4) ensure that community development 
strategies recognize the importance of streams and rivers. The Province is currently updating its planning policy 
statements and guidelines, including the Guidelines for Management of Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use. The 
Guidelines describe new land use tools that local governments may adopt, including sea level rise planning areas and 
risk-based zoning.98 

Prince Edward Island’s Climate Change Strategy99
Prince Edward Island’s Climate Change Strategy outlines measures to both reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to 
deal with the impacts of climate change. The strategy adopts a risk-based approach to adaptation as it “is the most 
practical way to ensure that adaptation responses are socially acceptable, cost-effective and consistent with the 
community’s wider social, environmental and economic goals.” The impacts of climate change on coasts – such as sea 
level rise, increased storm surge flooding and erosion – are highlighted as issues of concern. The strategy identifies 
five overarching adaptation objectives and actions, all of which have direct implications at the municipal level. For 
example, the Province committed to reviewing all provincial land use and development policies to encourage more 
sustainable options for future land development and to better adapt to changing climate conditions.

Manitoba’s Provincial Planning Regulation 
Manitoba’s Provincial Planning Regulation100 (the Regulation) identifies both climate change mitigation and adaptation 
as strategic priorities, along with other key concerns such as clean water and public safety. Community resilience is 
recognized as a key principle of sound land use planning. 
The Regulation identifies issues of provincial interest to be addressed in local development plans and goals to be 
pursued in various policy areas. For instance, with respect to general development policy, the provincial interest 
includes directing development toward areas where risk can be minimized and taking into account climate change 
vulnerabilities. With regard to water, provincial interest includes the development of strategies to prioritize allocation 
and implementation of conservation measures to build community resilience. The Regulation prohibits certain kinds of 
development in or near water bodies and prescribes minimum setbacks for new development. The policy on planning 
for agriculture recognizes the potential increased demand for food production in response to climate change and 
encourages local authorities to promote food security. At a strategic level, the Regulation requires that each local 
planning authority assess local vulnerabilities to climate change and consider existing climate change action plans 
when preparing, amending or replacing the local development plan. 

L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S   |  31 


