Appendix A 
Provincial and territorial role in local adaptation planning

PROVINCES

Under the Canadian constitution, provinces have jurisdiction 
over many matters of local concern including land use 
planning.87,88 Accordingly, Provinces play a role in land use 
planning for local adaptation to climate change through 

•	 enabling legislation – Provinces enact and revise 

laws that guide planning by local and regional 
authorities. Those laws establish the regulatory and 
policy tools that control land use at the local level 
and define how and when they may be used. For 
example, provincial planning acts prescribe the kinds 
of zoning bylaws a municipality may adopt. The 
provinces define the suite of tools available to local 
government to design and implement adaptation 
plans and measures.

•	 provincial planning policies – Provinces adopt 

regulations and policies, to which local and regional 
plans generally must conform, on planning issues 
of concern across the province. Those policies may 
address topics relevant to local adaptation efforts. For 
instance, a province may prescribe planning standards 
designed to protect agricultural land and contain 
urbanization at the fringes of a metropolitan area. 
Those standards may facilitate enhanced regional 
food security and the design of more resilient urban 
communities.

•	 provincial adaptation plans and programs – 
Many provinces have their own formal plans for 
adapting to climate change. Typically, such plans 
specify provincial goals and objectives; identify the 
impacts of climate change on government programs, 
operations and infrastructure; and suggest specific 
actions. For example, a plan may call for more high-
definition aerial mapping or enhanced monitoring of 
water quality. Provinces also disseminate guidelines 
and technical information and can act as facilitators 
and conveners to assist local governments, the private 
sector and civic organizations in adapting to climate 
change. Finally, provinces fund programs that can 
support local adaptation (for example, subsidies for 
an urban tree planting program to reduce the urban 
heat island effect). 

•	 direct involvement in development decisions – 

In most local planning matters, the provincial 
government plays an indirect, oversight role (for 
instance, as appellate bodies on a zoning dispute 
or as the final approving authority on local official 
plans). In some circumstances, provincial officials 
are directly involved in local development decisions. 
This may be the case for sites and issues that fall 
under direct provincial jurisdiction, such as highway 
construction, unincorporated communities, local 
projects on crown land, projects affecting heritage 
properties, and environmental assessments of large 
infrastructure projects. In such cases, provincial 
officials may contribute directly to decisions on the 
design and implementation of local adaptation 
measures.

•	 intergovernmental relations – Provinces negotiate 

agreements, collaborate on programs and projects, 
and manage their relations with other provinces 
and the federal government. In that capacity, a 
province can help set the conditions for participation 
by local governments in programs that support or 
complement adaptation. An example is the set of 
agreements between the Government of Canada and 
various provinces governing the allocation of federal 
gas-tax funds. 

The nature and extent of provincial involvement in local 
adaptation planning varies between provinces, depending 
on legal and institutional frameworks, the planning culture 
and practice of each location, and many other factors.

TERRITORIES

Like provincial governments, the governments of the 
territories of Nunavut, the Northwest Territories and 
Yukon have jurisdiction over land use planning and many 
other local matters. However, these legislative powers do 
not spring directly from the Constitution but instead are 
delegated to the territories by the Government of Canada 
under various laws.89,90,91 Territorial governments in turn 
enact legislation and adopt policies to guide planning by 
local and regional authorities within their borders.92,93

30  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


