2.6 DESIGN GUIDELINES

Design guidelines describe preferred practices in the design 
of certain aspects of a development project (for example, 
buildings, public areas, infrastructure, mechanical systems, 
landscaping). Municipalities may develop design guidelines 
for several reasons: to improve environmental performance, 
reduce infrastructure costs, enhance aesthetics, increase 
public safety or create more accessible public spaces. 
Examples include guidelines for the design of parking lots, 
streetscapes, building facades, storm water ponds, heritage 
districts and public squares. A combination of text and 
photographs, sketches and architectural drawings describe 
preferred designs. 

Municipalities often develop these publications as 
supplementary educational tools to help developers, design 
professionals (such as architects, landscape architects, 
engineers and planners) or the general public to improve 
upon existing design and construction practices. They 
also illustrate various ways in which developers may meet 
required municipal or provincial development standards. 

Some municipalities require that developers comply with 
such design guidelines and demonstrate compliance during 
the formal review of development proposals.

The design of a community’s physical components – such 
as parking lots, parks and roadways, drainage ditches or 
a neighbourhood as a whole – can reduce or magnify 
the impacts of climate change at the local scale.41,42 
Good design can contribute to building resilience to 
climate change at the local level.43 For example, selecting 
appropriate building materials and landscaping can reduce 
the risk of wildfires. Although many municipalities have 
developed design guidelines without climate change in 
mind, their use can improve resilience to the impacts 
of climate change. Conversely, design guidelines may 
recommend or impose development standards that may 
inadvertently decrease resilience to climate change. For 
example, a municipality may prescribe building wide roads 
to accommodate emergency vehicles. However, those wide 
roads may also increase storm water volumes and magnify 
the urban heat island effect.

Regina’s Xeriscape Workbook44
Regina, Saskatchewan (population 193 100), is situated in the middle of the southern prairies, the driest major 
region of Canada. The city has very little local access to water. For the Canadian prairies, increases in water scarcity 
and drought are one of the most serious risks presented by climate change. 
Xeriscape is an alternate form of landscaping that relies on drought-tolerant plants to reduce outdoor watering 
requirements during the summer. In 1993, the City of Regina produced the Xeriscape Workbook, which provides 
practical guidelines for low-water, low-maintenance landscaping. The Workbook is distributed at free workshops in 
the spring and fall and on the  
City’s Web site. In the late 1990s,  
the City partnered with a local school 
to create a xeriscape educational 
and demonstration site. The garden 
features 45 plant types, a false creek 
and an amphitheatre with a teacher’s 
rock for outdoor classes and lessons. 
Climate change was not a consideration 
when the City first developed the 
Workbook. However, the application 
of the landscaping practices within 
the Workbook helps reduce water 
consumption, an important climate 
change adaptation action. 

Y
S
E
T
R
U
O
C

D
L
E
F
U
E
N

 

T
E
H
C

 

O
T
O
H
P

 
F
O

 

14  |   L A N D   U S E   P L A N N I N G   T O O L S


