homes; (f) emergency response routes; and (g) areas that are 
critical to the local and regional economies (such as important 
agricultural areas or business parks) the committee will get a 
far better indication of where within the  municipality climate 
impacts and hazards may become significant issues which 
warrant action. 

3.  Will the issue cause more of a problem (or benefit) in 

certain areas of the municipality?
If issues are specific to certain areas, which parts of the 
municipality are most greatly affected?

4. 

5.  Do you think this pattern will change in the future: will 

these issues become more problematic with predicted 
changes in weather and climate?

6.  What resources and tools can your municipality use in order 
to map-out and determine which parts of your municipality 
are at higher risk?

It is recommended that municipalities look first to internal 
resources before deciding upon what additional tools are 
required to develop greater understanding of impacts and 
issues. The latest digital mapping and modeling may provide 
exceptional levels of detail, but in many cases, this level of 
detail may only be necessary under specific circumstances. 
For example, in the case of built areas that are located in 
close proximity to the coast, detailed modeling that helps 
the committee to understand risk and vulnerability may be 
warranted. This level of modeling may be both appropriate 
and necessary to make informed decisions, especially where 
people and property are concerned. However, it may not be 
necessary for parts of the municipality with a low potential 
for development, or places with minimal infrastructure and 
urbanization. 

7.  What additional information, skills, expertise or resources 

do you need to make proper decisions?

There are going to be instances where municipalities will require 
resources and/or expertise that cannot be provided internally. 
Capacity building projects related to understanding climate 
change, are generally eligible under the terms of the MFA, 
and can be paid for using Gas Tax funds. Questions regarding 
capacity building projects should be directed to Canada/Nova 
Scotia Infrastructure Secretariat branch of SNSMR to confirm 
project eligibility.

Step Four:   Facilities, infrastructure 
 

& Service delivery

Step Four: Objectives

a) 

b) 

Identify key facilities and infrastructure in your 
municipality.
Identify where they are located and determine if some 
facilities and infrastructure will be more affected by climate 
change than others.

c)  Evaluate the impact of climate change on the delivery of 

municipal services.

Water Supply & Treatment

Wastewater Collection & 

Treatment

roads, Bridges, Culverts & 

Trails

Power utilities/Supplies

Police & Fire

Hospitals & Nursing Homes

Schools

Community & Municipal 

Buildings

other

Affected: Facilities, 

infrastructure & Service 

delivery

determine where 

impacts and issues may 
occur, and which parts of 
the municipality may be 

at high risk.

Municipal infrastructure has enormous value, both directly as a 
capital asset and indirectly as an essential element contributing 
to a productive local and regional economy. The objective of 
Step Four is to look at the key facilities and infrastructure to 
ensure the services they support and the people they affect are 
taken into consideration when setting priorities for adaptive 
actions. 

Climate change hazards include (among others): damage or 
destruction resulting from extreme events (rain, wind and snow), 
flooding of facilities and equipment, inundation from sea level 
rise; changes in patterns of water availability; and the overall 
effects of climate change on operating costs. 

MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN13


