rising Sea level
Climate change models (reviewed by the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change), suggest that the projected increase 
in the global average surface temperature will likely result in 
a global sea level rise on of a meter or more by the end of this 
century. This change in sea level will occur due to the thermal 
expansion of seawater and the melting of glaciers and ice 
caps. On a regional level sea level increases will depend on a 
variety of factors such as the local coastline variations, changes 
to currents, vertical land movements, and differences in tidal 
patterns.

According to a report completed by the Geological Survey of 
Canada in 1998, approximately 80% of the Atlantic Region’s 
coastline is considered to be highly sensitive to global sea level 
rise. Areas already vulnerable to erosion and flooding will be at 
even greater risk as a result of sea-level rise. For example, along 
the Bay of Fundy, an extensive system of dykes was started in 
the 1630s and now protects 85% of the former marsh area from 
flooding and inundation. Since the 1630s, regional sea level 
has risen by 1.3 metres due to coastal subsidence and although 
the dykes have been maintained and upgraded to keep them at 
levels adequate enough to prevent flooding from regular high 
water events, many are currently 2 metres below the level of an 
extreme storm surge superimposed on a high tide, and by 2100 
they could be as much as 3 metres below. In Halifax sea level 
has risen about 30 cm over the last century. This means that with 
climate change, Halifax could potentially experience an increase 
in sea level of 80 cm by the year 2100.

Sea level rise

Coastal 

Storm 
Surge

inundation
& erosion
erosion of headlands & 

Coastal 
Flooding

Salt Water
intrusion

drinking Water Contamination

Shoreline Areas

damage to infrastructure

damage to Structures & Property

Storm Surges, Coastal erosion & Flooding
Increased erosion and flooding will likely mean significant 
impacts on coastal communities with damage to houses, 
buildings, roads, bridges, and other types of infrastructure, as 
well as the risk of contamination to fresh water supplies, damage 
to drainage systems and sewage treatment facilities. Important 
coastal resources and sensitive coastal habitats could also be at 
risk from the impacts of increased erosion and flooding. There 
are also a host of other areas that may experience impacts 
from increased erosion and flooding such as human activities, 
human health and safety, emergency preparedness, insurance, 
construction, maintenance and repair costs, property ownership, 
jurisdiction, liability and legal issues. 

While some coastal ecosystems may be able to naturally adapt 
or migrate landwards in response to rising sea levels, those 
areas backed or fringed by human development, where natural 
processes of coastal evolution have been disrupted, may be 
permanently inundated or squeezed out.  Coastal wetlands are 
extremely diverse and productive ecosystems and are critical 
in the life-cycles of many marine and terrestrial species, so the 
loss of these ecosystems could have significant implications for 
biodiversity and coastal resources.

Coastal communities and their infrastructure and industries, 
including fisheries and tourism, are vulnerable to these changes. 
Impacts on coastal infrastructure, such as bridges, roads and 
energy facilities have already affected trade and tourism 
in the region, and some coastal communities have started 
experiencing saltwater intrusion in their groundwater supply. 
Future disruptions to transportation, electricity transmission and 
communications will have widespread implications, including 
increasing the susceptibility of some communities to isolation.

Storm Surges

runoff 

& drainage 

issues

localized 
Flooding

Coastal 
erosion 

& Washouts 

Heavy 

Precipitation 
& Strong Winds

drinking Water Contamination

Public Safety Concerns

damage to Structures, Property & infrastructure

interruptions in Power Supply

economic implications

Wetter Winters and drier Summers 
Climate projections indicate that Atlantic Canada will 
experience drier summers, with an accompanying increase in 
summer-time droughts. Nova Scotia is projected to experience 
increases in mean annual temperature and precipitation. By 
2050, there trends indicate a 2 to 4 C° increase in summer 
temperature, depending on geographic location, and drier 
summer months will characterize inland regions of the province. 
Future warming of 1.5 to 6 C° during winter can also be 
anticipated (From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate, 2007). 

Wetter Winters

decrease in 
Snow Cover

localized 
Flooding

erosion 

& Washouts

landslides

damage to Property

damage to infrastructure

economic implications

MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 7


