Agriculture

Fishery

Forestry

Tourism

Food

Construction

Manufacturing & industry

Transportation

Services

other

economic Assessment

examine your 

municipality’s important 

economic sectors and 
understand how they 

may be affected.

Step Five (b) involves determining how climate change 
issues will affect the local and regional economy. Although 
climate change is seen to have mostly damaging effects on the 
management and operations of municipalities, there may also 
be a number of benefits which can help your municipality to 
prosper in the future. 

Because climate change is directly linked to the ‘business as 
usual’ fossil-fuel economy that has predominated for the past 
century, many municipal administrators view climate change 
adaptation as good opportunity to move towards creating 
a greener future for their municipality. Local government 
investments in renewable energy, and green technologies, 
particularly if coupled with adaptation and sustainability goals 
and actions, will help local governments to become more 
competitive in the twenty-first century. The integration of green 
practices with adaptation, presents a chance for municipalities 
to be both adaptive and competitive. Climate change adaptation 
may also benefit municipalities in other ways. For example, a 
warmer climate may help the agricultural sector and allow new 
types of crops, fruits and vegetables to be grown. 

Conversely, many climate change issues, for example the 
flooding of homes and businesses, or damage to critical 
municipal infrastructure, can have severe and far-reaching 
consequences for local and regional economies. It is important 
for your team to develop a good understanding regarding these 
issues, so that adequate measures can be undertaken to minimize 
negative impacts and advance positive ones.

The following questions will help your team to understand 
the social implications of climate change issues affecting 
your municipality:

1.  Have you reviewed your ICSP’s social pillar’s goals and 

actions in order to identify key priorities?

2.  Are there any goals or actions under the social pillar which 
warrant special attention when examined within the context 
of climate change?

Reviewing your ICSP will enable you to re-visit your 
municipality’s priorities around its social agenda. If for example, 
you have major initiatives involving the long-term wellbeing of 
seniors, you should consider taking another look at your goals 
and actions in light of climate change issues.

3.  Can you identify who in your municipality will be most 

affected by climate related emergency events?

In Step Three you determined what parts of your municipality 
are likely to be at greater risk from climate issues. Based on 
information collected in Step Three, you will be able to get a 
good sense of any groups of people who may be put at risk, 
because they reside in vulnerable parts of the municipality.

4.  What are the main barriers for at-risk people to receive 

adequate help during an emergency in your municipality?

5.  Does your municipality have an emergency plan?
6.  Does the plan address barriers for at-risk people?     
7.  Does the plan take into consideration the location and 

characteristics of the at-risk people and work their needs 
into the plan?
 Are there heritage or cultural elements of your municipality 
that could be affected?

8. 

9.  How will these issues affect the quality of life, health and 

safety in your community?

10.  Are their groups or organizations in your community that 

can help?  

Step Five (b):  economic Considerations

Step Five (b): Objectives

a) 

Identify the most important economic sectors in your 
municipality and determine how these issues impact 
these sectors and, in addition, identify the most important 
economic goals the municipality has identified in the ICSP.

b)  Understand how climate change will affect the financial 

resources of your municipality.

16 

CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT


