Municipalities with formal planning documents can begin the 
process, by developing an understanding of how adaptation can 
be integrated into:

Statements of Provincial Interest

• 
•  Zoning Bylaws (i.e., setbacks)
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 

Site Plan Control
Setbacks
Storm Water Management
Parkland Dedication
Plans of Subdivision

Municipalities without Formal Planning Documents
Municipalities without formal land-use planning documents, 
i.e., Municipal Planning Strategy and Land Use Bylaw, are 
required to explain and document how they plan to address new 
development within the context of climate change adaptation.

Concern 2

The following questions will help you prioritize issues:

Concern 3

1.  Of all of the issues discussed by your team so far, what are 

the most significant, and why?

Determining the significance, in terms of priority, of the various 
climate change hazards facing your municipality can be a 
difficult task, influenced by numerous factors. When discussing 
the ranking of priorities and potential courses of action with 
your team, you should keep in mind the following fundamental 
principles: 

•  The protection of  public safety 
•  The protection of structures, buildings, and infrastructure 
•  The protection of public drinking water supplies.

Concern 4

The committee may want to consider developing a series of 
tables to help you to summarize and organize information 
gathered during Steps One to Five. Tables can be particularly 
useful when capturing information that influences decisions 
on priorities and potential courses of adaptive action. A few 
examples of the types of tables that can be generated the 
committee are outlined below. The information and approaches 
provided in the examples are presented as illustrations. 

Example 1: Storm Surge - Impacts, Issues & Hazards

Storm Surge
Concern 1

residential cottages and properties located in 
Shellfish Bay are vulnerable to erosion, flooding, 
wind and water damage during severe storms 
and storm surges.
The unpaved road leading to the campground 
is prone to flooding and washouts and 
undermining in several places along its route, and 
may become impassable due to damage from 
storm surges.
Several economically important wharfs, and 
harbours are at risk during extreme wind, 
flooding and wave damage, and boats and fishing 
equipment are also at risk from severe storm 
damage
Along route 1 there is an increased risk of 
damage to power lines and poles due to their 
close proximity to the shore. This risk for damage 
is increased if snow and ice are a factor.

MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN19


