ICLR-SL Snow&Ice-D11 Jun18-12 E-FINAL_x  12-06-18  12:32 PM  Page B

About the Institute
for Catastrophic Loss Reduction

The Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction (ICLR), established in
1997, is a world-class centre for multidisciplinary disaster prevention
research and communication. ICLR is an independent, not-for-pro!t
research institute founded by the insurance industry and af!liated with
the University of Western Ontario.

The Institute’s mission is to reduce the loss of life and property caused
by severe weather and earthquakes through the identi!cation and
support of sustained actions that improve society’s capacity to adapt
to, anticipate, mitigate, withstand and recover from natural disasters.

ICLR’s mandate is to confront the alarming increase in disaster losses
caused by natural disasters and to work to reduce disaster deaths,
injuries and property damage. Disaster damage has been doubling
every !ve to seven years since the 1960s, an alarming trend. The
greatest tragedy is that many disaster losses are preventable. ICLR is
committed to the development and communication of disaster
prevention knowledge. For the individual homeowner, this translates
into the identi!cation of natural hazards that threaten them and their
home. The Institute further informs individual homeowners about
steps that can be taken to better protect your family and your home.

The purpose of this handbook is to outline actions that
homeowners can take to protect their homes from extreme winter
weather. Some of these measures are simple and free; others cost
money. All contribute to reducing the risk to homeowners from 
winter weather. 

Published by: The Institute For Catastrophic Loss Reduction

Cover photos: Superstock, Corbus Images.

Waiver: ICLR accepts no responsibility of liability for:
• any loss or damage that any person may sustain as a result of the information in, or anything

done or omitted in reliance on, this pamphlet; and

• any personal injury or bodily injury, including death, and any loss or damage caused by extreme 
winter weather to insured or uninsured structures and/or property as a result of actions outlined 
in this document.

ISBN: 978-0-9811792-2-3
Copyright®2012 The Institute For Catastrophic Loss Reduction


