•  Use food-resistant building materials. 
   
 

FLOOD PREPAREDNESS 

 
You may be able to take additional actions immediately before an 
 
expected food event that will prevent or reduce food damage to 
your home: 

 
•  Activate food protection devices (turn on sump pumps, close backfow 

   

valves, etc.). 

•  Shut off electricity at the breaker panel. 

   

 
•  Safeguard important paperwork and move furniture, rugs, electronics, 

   

 
and other valuable belongings to upper foors, or at least off the foor of 
the ground level. 

 
•  Elevate major appliances onto concrete blocks. 

   

 
•  Clean gutters, downspouts, and splash pads, along with any nearby 

   

 
drainage ditches or storm drains; clear snow and ice away from 
foundations. 

 
•  Deploy temporary food barriers, such as portable food gates or shields, 

   

sandbags, infatable foodwalls, and food skirts. 

 

 

 

 
 
— Replace wooden foorboards and carpets with ceramic tile, vinyl, 

 
rubber, or other food-resistant materials. Use moveable rugs instead 
 
of ftted carpets. 

— Replace internal walls and ceilings with food-resistant material such 
 
 

 
as lime plaster, cement board, concrete, or pressure-treated and 
 
decay-resistant wood. 

— Replace wooden doors and window frames with metal or other food-
 

 
resistant options. 
  

 

•  Raise electrical system components. Increase the height of electric 
   
 
service panels (fuse and circuit breaker boxes) and all outlets, switches, 
 
and wiring to at least 1 foot above the potential food elevation. These 
 
modifcations should be made by a licensed electrician. 

•  Protect utilities and service equipment. Move the main parts 

   

 

of your heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems to 
a higher foor or the attic. Consider raising other major appliances, 
such as washers, dryers, and hot water heaters, above the ground 
foor. If relocation or elevation is not possible, you can protect service 
equipment in place using low foodwalls and shields. Alternative 
options such as replacing traditional hot water heaters with tankless 
units should also be considered. 

•  Anchor indoor fuel tanks. Anchor fuel tanks by attaching them to 
 

   

 

a large concrete slab that weighs enough to resist the force 
of foodwaters. 

 

•  Install a food alert system. A variety of food sensors and other early 
 

   

warning devices can alert you to the risk of imminent fooding so that 
 
you can take preventative or protective actions before extensive damage 
 
occurs (see “Flood Preparedness”). 
 


