INSIDE THE HOME 

For interior areas below the potential food elevation, consider 
 
making the following alterations: 

•  Protect your valuable possessions. Move important documents and 
   
 

other valuable or sentimental items to a safer location, well above the 
 
potential food elevation and/or inside watertight containers. 

•  Seal your foundation and basement walls. Close any foundation 
   
 

cracks with mortar and masonry caulk or hydraulic cement, which 
 
expands and flls gaps completely. Seal walls in your basements with 
 
waterproofng compounds to avoid seepage. Make sure any foor drains 
 
are clear of obstructions. 

•  Install food vents. Flood vents are small permanent openings that 
 

   

allow foodwater to fow freely through an enclosure such as a crawlspace 
 
or garage. Properly positioned and installed food vents protect homes 
 
during foods by preventing water pressure buildup that can destroy walls 
 
and foundations. Flood openings may be required for lower enclosures of 
 
homes being built in high-risk food zones, but they can also be installed in 
 
existing homes. Once installed, make sure your food vents are kept free 
 
of debris and will allow the free-fow of foodwater. 

•  Install a sump pump. Sump pumps, which pump groundwater away 
 

   

from your home, can be an excellent defense against basement seepage 
 
and fooding. They draw in the groundwater from around the house 
 
and direct it away from the structure through drainage pipes. Be sure 
 
to choose a device with battery-operated backup, in case of electrical 
 
power failure. 
  

 

•  Prevent sewer backups. Install drain plugs for all basement foor 
   
 

drains to prevent sewer backups. Another recommended option, 
 
regardless of the potential food elevation, is to install sewer backfow 
 
valves for all pipes entering the building. These devices, which allow 
 
water to fow only one direction, prevent foodwater and wastewater from 
 
backing up into your home through toilets, sinks, and other drains. They 
 
are available in a variety of designs that range from simple to complex, 
 
but they should be installed by a qualifed, licensed plumber. 
 


