FLOODING IS THE MOST COMMON AND COSTLY DISASTER 
 
IN THE UNITED STATES AND CAN HAPPEN ANYWHERE. 
 

However, there are many ways to reduce your home’s risk of fooding, 
 
and not all of them are diffcult or expensive. This guide briefy describes 
 
some of the smaller, lower cost actions you can take yourself or with minor 
 
assistance from others. It also suggests places you can go to fnd more 
 
information about food mitigation techniques, including some of these. 

You have many food mitigation options as a homeowner. As you begin 
 
to think about which might be the best for you and your home, consider 
 
following these three key steps: 

 

1. Know Your Risk. Anywhere it can rain, it can food–so we all live in a 
 
 
food zone, and we all live with the risk of food damage to our property. Learn 
 
more details about your home’s level of food risk, including the type of food 
 
zone it is in and, if available, the potential food elevation (referred to as the 
 
“base food elevation” on a food map). A good place to start is FEMA’s online 
 
Flood Map Service Center at 
. You can also visit the 
 
offcials in your community who maintain the FEMA food maps and elevation 
 
certifcates; they may work in the local planning and zoning offce or in the 
 
building department. Talk to them, your neighbors, and others about any past 
food events and how high the water has risen in the past at or near your home. 

www.msc.fema.gov/portal/

 

2. Insure Your Property. As a homeowner, it’s important to insure your home 
 
 
and personal belongings. Even if your home is in a low- or moderate-risk food 
 
zone, purchasing a food insurance policy is highly recommended. It provides 
 
you with fnancial protection from a food event. Flood damage isn’t covered by 
 
standard homeowners insurance policies, and just a few inches of foodwater 
 
can end up costing thousands of dollars in repairs. More than 25 percent 
 
of food insurance claims come from properties that are not in an identifed 
 
high-risk zone, but most homeowners in these areas are eligible for coverage 
 
at a preferred rate. Preferred Risk Policy premiums are the lowest premiums 
available, offering building and contents coverage for one low price. 

 

3. Reduce Your Risk. Decide how to prepare your family and protect your 
 
 
home from fooding. Consider which of the methods included in this guide are 
  
most appropriate and practical, based on your home’s food risk, and create 
 
a plan to mitigate the risk to your property. Even after a mitigation project, 
  
some risk will remain, so learn about more actions to prepare and protect 
your family, home, and belongings at 

www.ready.gov/make-a-plan. 


