ICLR-SL SevereWind D10 Jun18-12-E-FINAL_x  12-06-18  12:35 PM  Page 2

First steps

Understand your home’s vulnerabilities
While tornadoes and severe winds can easily destroy homes, most
often the result is damage to the home’s roof, exterior walls and
windows. It is important to be aware and educated about your home’s
vulnerabilities to the threat of severe winds.

Talk to your local government

1
Local government’s often offer important advice for homeowners on
how to protect their home from severe winds. Municipal government
websites, public works, utilities and the building department are all
useful sources. Towns and cities located in severe wind regions can
offer a great deal of expertise on how to protect your home.

Some key questions worth asking
왘 What advice do they offer?
왘 Are there engineering studies on your subdivision?
왘 How do you report damage from extreme winds and storms?
왘 What does your local government suggest you do?
왘 Is there any disaster-relief assistance you can apply for?
왘 Do they recommend any contractors with expertise in severe

wind protection?

왘 What permits are required to strengthen your home’s defenses?

Talk to your insurance agent or broker

2
It is critical that homeowner’s talk to insurance agents and brokers 
to understand what types of damage are covered under their policy.
Sometimes speci!c types of damage can be excluded depending 

on your policy. Insurers can also identify common sources of
damage in your subdivision that you should watch out for. 

Have a building inspector evaluate your home

3
Because each home is different, building inspectors can offer
important insights into your home’s capacity to withstand
storm-force winds. Inspectors can provide important
information on the age of your home, and its capacity to resist
extreme winds. Contacting your municipality is the easiest way
to !nd a good home inspector with knowledge on your area.

Home inspectors can
help assess a home’s
capacity to withstand
storm-force winds

2


