Please be aware that food mitigation measures need to be 
 
tailored to the property in question. Depending on the project, 
 
you may need to consult local architects, engineers, contractors, 
 
landscapers, or other experts in design and construction. Also, 
 
changes to properties and buildings often require permits or other 
 
regulatory approvals. Your local planning and zoning offce or 
 
building department is a good place to start for advice on how to 
 
best proceed. Lastly, please remember to be kind to your neighbors! 
 
Consulting adjacent property owners is very important when 
 
any actions on your property, such as extending downspouts or 
 
regrading areas between homes, could affect their property. 

•  Install a rain barrel. A rain barrel is an alternative method for 

   

dealing with rainwater. Rain barrels are typically connected to gutter 
downspouts and collect the runoff from roofs. You can use this stored 
water for non-potable uses such as watering the lawn and gardens or 
washing your car. 

•  Elevate utilities and service equipment. Raise and anchor air 
 

   

conditioning condensers, heat pumps, water meters and other service 
 
equipment onto pedestals or platforms that are at least 1 foot above 
the potential food elevation. For identifed high-risk zones this means 
going to or above the regulatory food elevation for the property as 
adopted by the local community. This inexpensive action can help 
prevent signifcant damage and disruption following a food event. 

•  Anchor outdoor fuel tanks. Attach outdoor fuel tanks to a large 

   

concrete slab that weighs enough to resist the force of foodwaters, 
or install inexpensive ground anchors that are connected across 
the top of the tank with metal straps. Unanchored fuel tanks can be 
easily moved and ruptured by foodwaters and pose serious threats to 
people, property, and the environment. If located in an identifed high-
risk zone, fuel tanks should also be elevated to or above the regulatory 
food elevation as adopted by the local community. If not feasible then 
all flling and ventilation tubes should be elevated so that foodwaters 
cannot enter the tank. 

OUTSIDE THE HOME 

For the exterior areas of your property, consider taking the 
 
following actions: 

•  Maintain proper water runoff and drainage. Routinely clean and 
   
 

 

 
 

maintain gutters, downspouts, and splashpads so that rainwater from your 
 
roof fows easily away from your home. Also, make sure that any nearby 
drainage ditches or storm drains are clear of debris and functioning 
properly. 

•  Improve lot grading. Determine how water fows or accumulates 
 

   

around your home to identify potential trouble spots (often easy to see 
 
during an average rainstorm). Stormwater should always drain away from 
 
the building; if necessary, change your landscaping to improve runoff. 
 
This may include building up any sunken areas around the foundation, 
 
digging small depressions to properly channel water, and otherwise 
 
improving the yard so that it slopes away from your home. 

•  Reduce impervious surfaces around your home. Water runs off 
 

   

concrete and asphalt almost immediately and can exceed the capacity 
 
of storm sewers quickly during heavy rains. Retaining and creating 
 
natural green space around your home can help reduce sewer overfows 
 
by reducing stormwater runoff. Consider options such as rain gardens, 
 
vegetated swales, or pervious pavements, which allow more water to be 
 
absorbed by the ground. 
 


