ICLR-SL SevereWind D10 Jun18-12-E-FINAL_x  12-06-18  12:35 PM  Page 1

Tornado damage

Tornadoes appear in many shapes and sizes, but are typically in the form
of violent rotating columns of air extending from a thunderstorm with 
a narrow end touching the ground. Most tornadoes have wind speeds
of less than 170 km/h and a width of 75m across. They typically travel
several kilometers before dissipating. Extreme tornadoes can easily
uproot trees, "ip cars and demolish houses with wind speeds of more
than 480 km/h. They can stretch more than three kilometres across 
and travel more than 100 km. 

Canada experiences more tornadoes than any other country (80 on
average) with the exception of the United States. Tornadoes are
relatively common in certain regions in Canada, including: the British
Columbia interior, southern areas of Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba,
Ontario and Quebec, and western New Brunswick. They can occur 
at any time of the year but
are most prevalent from April
to September with peak
months in June and July. 

Hospitals and public
buildings are typically “fully
engineered” and perform
well in high winds because of
the attention given to
construction connections (joints, fasteners) and load paths (the path 
that seismic forces pass through to the foundation of the structure).
Historically, less engineering oversight has been applied to residential
construction, making it especially vulnerable to severe wind damage. 

With population and development increasing in at-risk areas, tornado
and severe wind activity has serious implications for homeowners across
Canada. While homeowners cannot predict violent wind activity, they
can take steps to protect themselves and minimize damage to their
homes. This handbook is designed to assist homeowners who are at risk
of tornadoes and severe winds. It identi!es several steps homeowners
can take to protect their homes from severe wind damage and provides
a scorecard that can help evaluate potential vulnerability.

1

k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
 
:

o
t
o
h
P


