Furthermore, the underlying emission forecasts and socioeconomic assumptions are often not stated when presenting climate
change projection information.

While these factors introduce some uncertainty into climate projections, the uncertainty can be managed through appropriate
data treatment and climate scenario development. These practices are typically outside of the experience of the engineer. It is
therefore important that engineers consult with climate experts to ensure that they understand the overall integrity and limitations
of the information they are planning to use and incorporate appropriate measures from their own professional discipline to
accommodate these factors within their professional work.

Engineers can also conduct sensitivity analyses to account for the potential consequences of different climate change scenarios. 

The OURANOS Consortium on Regional Climatology and Adaptation located in Montréal, Quebec, Canada has published a
guidebook on climate scenarios and the use of climate information to guide adaptation research and decisions
https://www.ouranos.ca/publication-scientifique/Guidebook-2016.pdf . Published in its second edition in 2016, the guide is a
resource for climate change adaptation decision-making and research. The following is an excerpt from the Executive Summary
(reproduced with permission):

“This guide is a tool for decision-makers to familiarize themselves with future climate information. It is aimed at all actors
involved in climate change adaptation, from those in the early stages of climate change awareness to those involved in
implementing adaptation measures.

The guide consists of three main sections. The first categorizes climate information based on its use and on its level of
complexity. The second section presents a catalogue of different ways in which climate information can be presented to
decision-makers, such as planners, engineers, resource managers, and government. Finally, a third section outlines
key climate modelling concepts that support a good understanding of climate information in general.

This document is not detailed enough to inform users on how to prepare different types of climate information, nor is it
intended as a critical analysis of how the information is produced. Rather, it highlights the importance of working in
collaboration with climate service providers to obtain climate information. The guide allows users to engage more easily
with climate service providers and to become more critical of the information that is provided to them. It should be
recognized that, at this point in time, the number of climate service providers is low relative to the demand for climate
information.

Using this guide will allow engineers to become more familiar with climate information products and hence better
evaluate what climate information best suits their needs.”

Key important messages emerging from the guide include:

»

Climate information at different levels of complexity can be valuable, depending on the type of decision being made;

»

More detailed information is not always necessary to inform better decisions;

»

Climate information can be tailored into formats that best match the level of expertise of the decision-makers;

»

Decisions should be based on a range of plausible futures, and a single best climate scenario does not exist.

It is important to understand the limitations of the climate information. Engineers are cautioned that whatever climate information
or methodologies used in their professional work should be considered scientifically defensible by the climate specialists they
consult. More broadly this extends to defensible sources of data, uses of data, and the decisions arrived at and designs
produced. 

3.5.2 Implementing actions

The following are some suggested actions to aid engineers in interpreting and assessing climate information. Not all may be
appropriate to the situation at hand nor is the list complete.

»

»

»

»

List climate information needs in terms of parameters that are listed in codes, standards, guidelines and “rules of
thumb” as well as other information that is not formally codified within codes, standards, etc. but are nonetheless
relevant to the professional work.

Develop the current climate profile based on analysis of historical weather data. Engineers should make sure that they
are using data from the most current treatment of the subject.

Estimate the changes in frequency and extreme values of relevant climate parameters based on scientifically
defensible methods of future climate projections over the service life of the engineered system.

Engage climate scientists and climate experts as appropriate to derive current and future extreme values and
frequencies of relevant climate parameters.

For this climate information, seek the advice from climate scientists and climate experts to define the:

»

Associated uncertainties with the information

15


