emergency events.  At the installation level, natural resource managers work to evaluate 
the threat of wildfires to key resources and promote sustainable management practices, 
such as the development and implementation of fire management plans for major 
facilities and aligned special areas. 

•  DLA is upgrading its data center layout and mechanical equipment to ensure provision of 

the cooling needed for processors and servers to operate efficiently in warmer 
temperatures.  All data centers will eventually migrate to a cloud server following the 
Data Center Optimization Initiative. 

•  Other DLA approaches to increase installation resilience involve relocation of assets 

from flood-prone areas to safer areas.  For example, at two flood-prone sites, DLA 
installed backup power generators and other mechanical equipment like chillers on a 
higher elevation or mounted on concrete pads in accordance with building codes.  Other 
mechanical rooms were located in building rooftops, which helps prevent flood water 
damage to equipment.  In addition, other measures control rainwater flow, such as the use 
of retention swales to divert storm water, green roofs to absorb rainfall, and cisterns to 
store rainfall during downpours. 

 

 

 
RESEARCH 

Current Efforts 

DoD’s Strategic Environmental Research and Develop Program (SERDP) and 

Environmental Security Technology Certification Program (ESTCP) invest in research focused 
on improving DoD understanding of environmental risks to installations and mission.  SERDP 
and ESTCP investments support the development of the science, technologies, and methods 
needed to manage and enhance the resilience of DoD installation infrastructure with the goal of 
maximizing mission readiness.  The following are a few examples of SERDP research efforts 
related to infrastructure and mission resiliency: 

• 

• 

In response to drought risk, SERDP initiated a study to understand and assess 
environmental vulnerabilities on installations in the desert southwest.  This research seeks 
to detect and assess drought response of sensitive riparian forests to drought stress over 
recent decades and will be carried out within three DoD bases in the Southwest, with 
widely applicable results. 

In response to wildfire risk, SERDP developed a Fire Science Strategy in 2014 focused 
on the following: improved characterization, monitoring, modeling, and mapping of fuels 
to support enhanced smoke management and fire planning at DoD installations; enhanced 
smoke management using advanced monitoring and modeling approaches; and research 
to quantify, model, and monitor post-fire effects. 

•  SERDP and ESTCP investments seek to understand changes to the arctic terrestrial 

environment relevant to DoD infrastructure.  Permafrost degradation can impact soil, 
vegetation, buildings, roads, and airfields.  SERDP and ESTCP investments are leading 
to tools for making arctic infrastructure more "aware" of permafrost changes before 

13 

 


