 

allies and partners and growth in the number and frequency of live training exercises in the 
region. 
 

In the Arctic, acquisition and supply chain requirements are considerably longer and are 
much costlier.  DoD will continue to partner with Federal departments and agencies, state, local, 
and tribal agencies, other nations, and the private sector on services as appropriate. 
 
Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief 
 

Geographic Combatant Commands regularly conduct humanitarian assistance and 

disaster relief initiatives to improve the resiliency of the partner nation to natural and manmade 
disasters. 
 

DoD conducts foreign disaster relief at the request of the U.S. Agency for International 

Development (USAID) and the State Department.  USAID’s Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster 
Assistance is the lead federal agency for coordinating the U.S. Government foreign disaster relief 
response.  DoD does not develop its force structure for foreign disaster relief missions, but 
supports USAID with available unique military capabilities and assets, such as transportation, 
logistics, engineering assessments, air traffic control, and water. 
 

DoD focuses its humanitarian assistance program on building capacity of partner nations 

for health-related activities and activities that promote sustainable public health capacity-
building, disaster preparedness, risk reduction, and relief response.  Examples include: 
emergency management training; construction/renovation of emergency operations centers and 
disaster relief warehouses; assistance with planning for disaster response and recovery; and 
country baseline assessments for vulnerabilities to disasters, including vulnerabilities from 
weather and climate impacts.  Global health engagement activities such as disease mitigation and 
prevention initiatives address the basic survival needs of the population, promote stability and 
capacity, and thus also climate resiliency. 
 
Defense Support of Civil Authorities 
 

Domestically, DoD provides disaster assistance at the request of the Federal Emergency 

Management Agency (FEMA) and other federal Departments and Agencies.  DoD always 
operates in support of civil authorities and is not the lead federal agency for domestic disaster 
relief missions, unless so designated by the President.  DoD will maintain command and control 
over Federal military forces and Governors of responding States will maintain command and 
control over State National Guard forces.  FEMA’s ten regions are responsible for writing All 
Hazard Plans (AHPs) that guide response efforts to disasters including floods and hurricanes. 
DoD works to support these AHPs as requested. 
 
Testing and Training 
 

The Department conducts training in realistic field environments to achieve and sustain 

proficiency in mission requirements.  Similarly, the Department conducts testing in realistic field 
environments in anticipation of the military’s use of weapons, equipment, munitions, systems, or 
their components.  As such, access to the land, air, and sea space that replicate the operational 

9 

 


