 

Joint Land Use Study.  This addendum will help solidify a path forward for the City of 
Hampton and JBLE-Langley to identify and implement resilience strategies that support 
continued feasibility of base operations. 

•  Eglin and MacDill Air Force Bases in Florida partnered with local groups to address 
persistent coastal erosion around their installations.  Oyster shells collected from local 
restaurants became the foundation for oyster reefs to create a living shoreline, bolstering 
natural protection of critical historic sites, stabilizing shoreline, protecting the riparian 
and intertidal environment, thereby creating habitat for aquatic/terrestrial species. 

•  Navy Region Southwest leadership have adopted decisive measures to evaluate climate 

impacts on shore infrastructure, and are pursuing a strategy to mitigate vulnerabilities 
through local agency collaboration, adaptive planning and implementation of innovative 
design techniques.  This initiative will improve upon the Navy’s scientific data, facilitate 
assessment of various sea level rise (SLR) scenario impacts, and help identify sustainable 
infrastructure strategies to offset stressors from flooding, beach erosion, and loss of 
wetlands and habitat. 

•  Navy Region Southwest facility planning efforts now incorporate adaptive planning 

measures from a variety of government agency sources, including NAVFAC’s Climate 
Change Installation Adaptation and Resilience Planning Handbook.  Regional planners 
are working with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration and the Scripps 
Institute of Oceanography to study potential vulnerabilities at the Naval Amphibious 
Base.  Sea level rise data for 2100 was used during the environmental planning and 
design phases of the Coastal Campus project.  The design configuration of five buildings 
was modified to resist a moderate sea level rise event over their forecasted life cycle. 

•  The greater Hampton Roads area is very vulnerable to flooding caused by rising sea 

levels and land subsidence.  Navy Region Mid-Atlantic is working with several 
academic, local community, non-profit organizations, and state and federal agencies to 
increase understanding of current and future risks to inform discussions on possible 
adaptation strategies for communities and military bases.  In addition, the cities of 
Norfolk and Virginia Beach are currently engaged in a Joint Land Use Study to identify 
specific conditions, including recurrent flooding, coastal storms, and erosion, outside of 
the military footprint that have the potential to impact Navy operations in the Hampton 
Roads area. 

•  Fort Hood, Texas, endured severe flash flooding in June 2016.  A training exercise that 
involved a low river crossing resulted in the death of several soldiers.  In response, the 
installation replaced the two most dangerous low water crossings with bridges, installed 
stream and depth gauges at critical locations on the west side to better monitor and 
predict flash flooding, and focused on clear signage and training. 

•  To address wildfire risk, Navy Region Southwest successfully worked with the California 

Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CALFIRE) to promote joint training 
opportunities in an effort to protect key infrastructure and communities within San Diego 
County.  Navy squadrons conduct semiannual joint training with CALFIRE to ensure 
interoperability and an immediate response capability in support of local authorities for 

12 

 


