 

costly failures occur.  An example is Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory’s fiber-
optic geophysical sensing package capable of providing real-time information on 
subsurface conditions relevant to infrastructure performance and failure in Arctic 
environments. 
 
At the Military Service level, the Air Force’s 14th Weather Squadron provides 

authoritative data sets and tailored decision aids to the Combatant Commanders, or CCMDs.  
This same information is available to installation managers/planners.  Additionally, the Air Force 
is pursuing more accurate North Slope Alaska shoreline erosion prediction models that take into 
account warming water near the shore, increasing air temperatures, longer periods when sea ice 
is gone, increasing spatial extent of open water, increasing wind speeds, storm surges, wave 
height, and thawing permafrost. 
 

The U.S. Army Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory maintains a 

Permafrost Tunnel Research Facility in Fox, Alaska, for several types of research, including 
studies to better understand permafrost terrains for engineering, military planning, and science.  
In addition, the Cold Regions Research and Engineering Laboratory, together with the 
Construction Engineering Research Laboratory and Geotechnical and Structures Laboratory, 
developed solutions for damage caused by thawing permafrost at Thule Air Base in Greenland.  
A new technology incorporating buried extruded foam insulation boards was used for about 18 
percent of the runway during a repaving project in the summers of 2015 and 2016; the existing 
white paint on the remainder of the runway was deemed sufficiently protective.  New mitigation 
techniques were proposed to stabilize critical buildings that had re-settled after previous 
modifications and remodeling projects. 
 

The Office of Naval Research (ONR) Arctic and Global Prediction Program is motivated 

by the need to understand and predict the environment at a variety of time and space scales in 
geographical areas of interest to DoD such as the Arctic.  ONR is actively working to extend the 
capability to skillfully predict environmental conditions and disruptive weather events to several 
weeks and months in advance.  The ability to provide useful forecasts of the operational 
environment, such as the location of the sea ice edge, the characteristics and evolution of sea ice, 
and the wind and wave conditions at the surface will be critical to enable safe and efficient naval 
operations in the Arctic. 
 
Future Efforts 
 

DoD realizes the need to better understand rates of coastal erosion, natural and built flood 

protection infrastructure, and inland and littoral flood planning and mitigation.  To address this, 
we are focusing on the following in current SERDP Statements of Need that communicate the 
types of research we are interested in pursuing: 
 

•  Continued work to apply, evaluate, and improve scenarios and other tools for projecting 

interactions of sea level rise, storm surge, precipitation/land-based flooding at U.S. 
Military Installations. 

14 

 


