 

Navy Region Mid-Atlantic and the greater Hampton Roads area is one of the most 

vulnerable to flooding military operational installation areas in the United States.  Sea level rise, 
land subsidence, and changing ocean currents have resulted in more frequent nuisance flooding 
and increased vulnerability to coastal storms.  As a result, and to better mitigate these issues, the 
Region has engaged in several initiatives and partnerships to address the associated challenges. 
 
Drought 
 

Drought can negatively impact U.S. military installations in various ways, particularly in 

the Southwest.  For example, dry conditions from drought impact water supply in areas 
dependent on surface water.  Additionally, droughts dry out vegetation, increasing wildfire 
potential/severity.  Specific to military readiness, droughts can have broad implications for base 
infrastructure, impair testing activities, and along with increased temperature, can increase the 
number of black flag day prohibitions for testing and training.  Drought can contribute to heat-
related illnesses, including heat exhaustion and heat stroke, outlined by the U.S. Army Public 
Health Center.  Energy consumption may increase to provide additional cooling for facilities. 
 

Several DoD sites in the DC area (including Joint Base Anacostia Bolling, Joint Base 

Andrews, U.S. Naval Observatory/Naval Support Facility, and Washington Navy Yard) 
periodically experienced drought conditions –extreme in 2002 and severe from 2002 through 
2018.  In addition, Naval Air Station Key West experienced drought in 2015 and 2011, ranging 
from extreme to severe, respectively.  These examples highlight that drought conditions may 
occur in places not typically perceived as drought regions. 
 
 
bases resulting in deep or wide cracks in the soil, at times leading to ruptured utility lines and 
cracked road surfaces. 
 
Desertification  
 

Drought conditions have caused significant reduction in soil moisture at several Air Force 

Desertification poses a number of challenges related to training and maneuvers. 

Desertification results in reductions in vegetation cover leading to increases in the amount of 
runoff from precipitation events.  Greater runoff contributes to: 
 

•  higher erosion rates 
• 
•  deposition of sediment in unwanted areas 

increased stream sediment loads 

 
This reduces the effectiveness of flood risk management infrastructure while increasing the 
potential for siltation of water supply reservoirs.  Following rain, eroded soil may be less suitable 
for native vegetation, resulting in bare land or revegetation with non-native, weedy species.  In 
cases where this results in the expansion of shrub-lands, this could affect the suitability of the 
landscape for military maneuvers and off-road use. 
 
 
Range in New Mexico were identified as vulnerable to current and future desertification, which 

Army installations Camp Roberts in San Miguel, California, and White Sands Missile 

6 

 


