 

environment is critical to the readiness of the Force.  Climate effects to the Department’s training 
and testing are manifested in an increased number of suspended/delayed/cancelled outdoor 
training/testing events and increased operational health surveillance and health and safety risks to 
the Department’s personnel.  Specifically, installations in the Southeast and Southwest lose 
significant training and testing time due to extreme heat. 
 

Climate effects lead to increased maintenance/repair requirements for training/testing 

lands and associated infrastructure and equipment (e.g., roads, targets, buildings).  In addition to 
the loss of use of training and test ranges, these impacts result in increased land management 
requirements due to stressed threatened/endangered species and related ecosystems on and 
adjacent to DoD installations.  Recent specific examples include: 
 

•  Wildfires in the western United States affecting Vandenberg AFB and operations at the 

Western Range and Point Mugu Sea Range. 

•  Hurricanes resulting in damage to infrastructure and delays in training, testing programs, 

and space launches at Tyndall Air Force Base, at the Atlantic Undersea Test and 
Evaluation Centers, and the Eastern Range. 

•  Permafrost thawing at Cold Region Test Center, Fort Greely, Alaska, impacting cold 

weather testing activities. 

•  Rising seawater wash-over and contamination of freshwater on atoll installations. 

 

Mitigation efforts for unplanned climate events necessitate contingency planning for 
training and test events and the minimization of planned range/facility use during historical 
adverse climate condition seasons of the year.  Other climate and non-climate related facility 
maintenance and contingency of operations efforts are included in installation mitigation plans. 
 
II. DoD Efforts to Increase Installation Resiliency & Operational Viability 
 
INCREASE INSTALLATION RESILIENCY 
 
 
processes to include impacts on built and natural infrastructure.  To ensure that DoD facilities 
better withstand flooding and severe weather events, DoD makes appropriate changes to 
installation master planning, design and construction standards. 
 

The Department considers climate resilience in the installation planning and basing 

To continue missions in the event of loss or damage to critical energy and water 

infrastructure, the Department uses the Mission Assurance process (DoD 3020.40, Mission 
Assurance Strategy) to plan and conduct mitigation and remediation actions to improve the 
resilience of critical assets and capabilities to reduce risk to critical missions.  In May 2016, DoD 
updated Directive 4170.11 on Installation Energy Management and developed Installation 
Energy Plan guidance that included a focused goal of increased energy resilience and critical 
energy infrastructure requirements.  In February 2017, the Army added water to this effort and 
released guidance to establish requirements for Army energy and water security to enhance 
resilience on Army installations. 
 

10 

 


