 

The Department has published several issuances to ensure that the Military Services and 
Joint Staff integrate climate scenarios and long-term projections into planning, including DoDD 
4715.21 (Climate Change Adaptation and Resilience) to establish roles and responsibilities and 
DoDI 4715.03 (Natural Resources Conservation Program) requiring consideration of climate 
impacts during development of Installation Natural Resources Management Plans (INRMPs). 
 

Unified Facilities Criteria, or UFCs, provide planning, design, construction, sustainment, 
restoration, and modernization criteria, and apply to the Military Services, the Defense Agencies, 
and the DoD Field Activities.  In June 2018, the UFC on High Performance and Sustainable 
Building Requirements was updated to include and strengthen climate considerations.  The UFC 
20-100-1, Master Planning, also includes language requiring Master Planners to consider 
changes in climatic conditions that may impact new and existing facilities and infrastructure.  
The UFC on Landscape Architecture is being updated to support installation water resilience. 
Additionally, UFC 3-400-02 directs installation planners to request engineering weather data 
(EWD) from Air Force’s 14th Weather Squadron (WS) that focuses on climatic variables of 
temperature, humidity, precipitation, and winds.  Recently the 14th WS moved from a 10 to 5 
year update cycle to ensure climate impacts are captured. 
 

DoD is also updating various built and natural infrastructure design standards to better 

adapt to climate impacts.  The Coastal Assessment Regional Scenario Working Group released a 
report in April 2016 that provided a database with regionalized sea level scenarios for three 
future time horizons (2035, 2065, and 2100) for 1,774 DoD sites worldwide.  The database also 
contains extreme water levels statistics (storm surge without waves and wave run up) for four 
types of annual chance events (1, 2, 5 and 20 percent) based on historical tide gauge data.  This 
information can be used to establish base flood elevation and potential future flood inundation 
areas of concern for installations in coastal and tidal areas. 
 

The Military Services and the Defense Logistics Agency approach installation resiliency 
through the integration of weather and climate considerations into existing plans and processes, 
using partnerships with other federal agencies, state governments, local governments, non-
governmental organizations, and local communities to increase preparedness and resilience.  
Examples: 
 

•  Patrick Air Force Base imposes strict Florida Building Code hurricane requirements and 

finished floor elevations for all new construction based on flood plain and storm surge 
data.  Base staff coordinates with state, county, and academic institutions to ensure these 
requirements are implemented. 

•  As mentioned earlier in this report, flooding at JBLE-Langley Air Force Base has become 
more frequent and severe.  JBLE-Langley is using a flood visualization tool to understand 
flooding impacts across the base.  By modeling different storm flooding elevations, they 
were able to determine where to install door dams, which require less time and less labor 
than sandbags.  The base reduced the number of required sandbags by 70 percent.  JBLE-
Langley also requires that all new development is constructed at a minimum elevation of 
10.5 feet above sea level with some projects planned for higher elevation due to high 
communication intensity and need for greater hardening.  Additionally, the City of 
Hampton recently adopted a Resiliency and Adaptation Addendum to their original 2010 

11 

 


