 

accelerates erosion and increases soil fragility, possibly limiting future training and testing 
exercises.  Air Force bases in western states, including Kirtland, Creech, Nellis, and Hill were 
also identified as vulnerable to current and future desertification. 
 
 
Wildfires 
 

Due to routine training and testing activities that are significant ignition sources, wildfires 
are a constant concern on many military installations.  As a result, the DoD spends considerable 
resources on claims, asset loss, and suppression activities due to wildfire.  While fire is a key 
ecological process with benefits for both sound land management and military capability 
development, other climatic factors including increased wind and drought can lead to an 
increased severity of wildfire activity.  This could result in infrastructure and testing/training 
impacts. 
 

In March 2018 two related wildfires broke out in Colorado during an infantry and 

helicopter training exercise for an upcoming deployment.  Later determined to be due to live fire 
training, gusty winds and dry conditions allowed the fire to spread, reaching about 3,300 acres in 
size, destroying three homes, and causing the evacuation of 250 homes. 
 

A wildfire in November 2017 burned 380 acres on Vandenberg Air Force Base in 

southern California.  While no structures were burned, the fire prompted evacuation of some 
personnel.  Firefighters from the U.S. Forest Service, Santa Barbara County, and other localities 
assisted the Vandenberg Fire Department in managing the fire.  The Canyon Wildfire at 
Vandenberg in September 2016 burned over 10,000 acres and came very close to two Space 
Launch Complexes.  A scheduled rocket launch had to be delayed.  Several facilities on the south 
part of the base were operating on generators due to the loss of electrical power lines. 
 
Thawing Permafrost 
 

Permafrost presents risks for critical built infrastructure.  Soil strength, ground 

subsidence, and stability are primarily affected by the phase change of ground ice to water at or 
near 0°C and when the soil thermal regime changes (by human activity, infrastructure 
emplacement, or systemic shifts related to weather).  Such subsidence may be rapid and 
catastrophic (days), very slow and systematic (decades), or somewhere in between.  Whether 
rapid or slow, thawing permafrost decreases the structural stability to foundations, buildings, and 
transportation infrastructure and requires costly mitigation responses that disrupt planning, 
operations, and budgets.  In addition, thawing permafrost exposes coasts to increased erosion. 
 

Permafrost underlays about 85 percent of Alaska; it is thickest north of the Brooks Range 

and gradually diminishes southward.  Permafrost thaw is relevant to DoD training and testing 
needs.  Thermokarst, which is a type of landscape that results from thawing permafrost, increases 
wetland areas and creates more challenging terrain.  In Fort Greeley, Alaska, Army training 
ranges are built on, or are being planned in permafrost-dominated areas.  Predicting where this 
phenomenon occurs and how permafrost might change is vital to maintaining training operations 
and assessing impending environmental management challenges. 
 

7 

 


