 

January 2019 
Elements of Request for Report 
This report responds to section 335 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 
2018 (Public Law 115-91).  Specifically, this report provides an assessment of the significant 
vulnerabilities from climate-related events in order to identify high risks to mission effectiveness 
on installations and to operations.  In developing this report, we discussed the approach with 
staff from the House and Senate Armed Services Committees, both majority and minority, on 
more than one occasion. 

This report is organized into three primary sections:  
I.    Summary of Climate Effects and Resulting Vulnerabilities 
II.  DoD Efforts to Increase Installation Resiliency & Operational Viability 
III. Conclusions 

Background 
 

The effects of a changing climate are a national security issue with potential impacts to 
Department of Defense (DoD or the Department) missions, operational plans, and installations.  
Our 2018 National Defense Strategy prioritizes long-term strategic competition with great power 
competitors by focusing the Department’s efforts and resources to:  1) build a more lethal force, 
2) strengthen alliances and attract new partners, and 3) reform the Department’s processes. 
 

To achieve these goals, DoD must be able to adapt current and future operations to 
address the impacts of a variety of threats and conditions, including those from weather and 
natural events.  To that end, DoD factors in the effects of the environment into its mission 
planning and execution to build resilience. 
 

For this report, the Office of the Secretary of Defense requested information and inputs 

from the Military Departments, Joint Staff, Geographic Combatant Commands, and other 
organizations. 
 
Planning Handbook on Climate Change Installation Adaptation and Resilience – In January 
2017, Naval Facilities Engineering Command released a handbook for use by planners in 
assessing climate impacts and evaluating adaptation options to consider in the existing 
Installation Development Plan (Master Plan) process.  The Handbook contains an extensive set 
of worksheets to be used in documenting the results of planners’ assessment and evaluation, 
including economic analyses of adaptation alternatives. 
 
Updated United Facilities Criteria (UFCs) – In October 2017, DoD UFC 1-200-02, High 
Performance and Sustainable Building Requirements, was updated to ensure appropriate 
incorporation of climate-related impacts, amongst other updated/new areas.  The UFC provides 
minimum requirements, and guidance for planning, designing, constructing, renovating, and 
maintaining high performance and sustainable buildings that will enhance DoD mission 
capability by reducing total ownership costs. 
 

2 

 


