 

•  Research and products that fuse climate science, design, and decision sciences methods in 

the context of current DoD/Service planning, operations, and management. 

•  Research on materials fragility and implications for infrastructure/building design. 

 
 
 
ENSURE MISSION RESILIENCY 

DoD is continuing to work with partner nations to understand and plan for future 

potential mission impacts.  This is a global issue and a number of Ministries of Defense across 
the world are beginning to plan now for future impacts, as well.  The Department has funded 
cost-effective climate related MIL-to-MIL engagements between the Combatant Commands and 
partner nations through the Defense Environmental International Cooperation (DEIC) program.  
DEIC projects have included: 
 

•  United States Africa Command (USAFRICOM) water security engagements in the Chad 

Basin and Tanzania,  

•  United States Europe Command (USEUCOM) water workshop in the Czech Republic, 

and  

•  United States Northern Command (USNORTHCOM) Arctic mission analysis with the 

Scandinavian countries. 

 

Within the Geographic Combatant Commands, there is a standard review process that 
includes assessing manpower, operations, logistics, cyber, and resourcing operations through a 
resilience lens.  This review also includes ensuring that risk assessment and mitigation, diversity, 
connectivity, reserves, and adequate redundancy are part of our major operations. 
 

At United States Central Command, current and historic climate conditions are factored 

into theater campaign plans, including water scarcity which is a recurring issue in the region.  
Warning indicators are part of the deliberate planning process.  United States Northern 
Command routinely includes severe weather-driven scenarios in training and exercise events and 
has developed planning tools to guide operational response efforts to these scenarios.  United 
States Indo-Pacific Command (USINDOPACOM) focuses their training on readiness to respond 
to and be resilient to natural disasters, as well as sustainable resource management toward 
critical resources scarcity.  This command has also established Pacific Augmentation Teams 
around its Area of Responsibility to identify quickly immediate needs that can be met with 
military assets. 
 

United States Southern Command funded a National Preparedness Baseline Assessments 

to include a gap analysis as well as a five-year plan to build capability and capacity within the 
countries in the region.  The collection of sub-regional data will provide a more nuanced 
depiction of each country’s risks and vulnerabilities to disasters that may be influenced by 
climate as well as their readiness to respond to them.  This command will also seek appropriate 

15 

 


