 

resources to fund assessments to determine the effects of its most serious and likely climate-
related risks. 
 

At USAFRICOM, climate impacts and drivers of instability and factional conflict are 

fully integrated into planning efforts.  Planners must consider the impacts of drought and 
desertification as high potential instability areas and how these two hazards impact bases and 
missions.  USAFRICOM’s capacity-building efforts are nested within its security cooperation 
programs and will adapt to a variety of trends and projections. 
 

The Arctic Security Forces Roundtable is USEUCOM’s engagement effort for nations 
that have security forces within the Arctic region.  It is a forum in which senior military leaders 
from Arctic nations and other stakeholders confer and agree upon actions that can support 
stability and peaceful commercial activity in the region.  Lessons learned from our Arctic allies 
and partners are used to enhance operational safety.  In response to melting ice and newly 
accessible areas of the Arctic, USEUCOM sponsors the ARCTIC ZEPHYR series of table-top 
exercises focused on search and rescue operations in the Arctic. 
 
III.  Conclusions 
 

This report represents a high-level assessment of the vulnerability of DoD installations to 
five climate/weather impacts:  recurrent flooding, drought, desertification, wildfires, and thawing 
permafrost.  From a resources perspective, DoD is incorporating climate resilience as a cross-
cutting consideration for our planning and decision-making processes, and not as a separate 
program or specific set of actions. 
 

Some impacts are closely related or intensify the effects of each other (e.g., drought, 

desertification, wildfire), whereas others are somewhat related (e.g., coastal flooding driven by 
changing sea level can impact river conveyance, compounding riverine flood levels for tidally-
influenced rivers).  Taken together, however, these impacts help describe the overall 
vulnerabilities to DoD installations from changing future conditions. 
 

About two-thirds of the 79 installations addressed in this report are vulnerable to current 
or future recurrent flooding and more than one-half are vulnerable to current or future drought.  
About one-half are vulnerable to wildfires.  It is important to note that areas subject to wildfire 
may then experience serious mudslides or erosion when rains follow fires.  Impacts are dispersed 
around the country.  Not surprisingly, impacts vary by region for coastal flooding, with greater 
impacts to the East coast and Hawaii than the West coast.  Desertification vulnerabilities are 
limited to the sites on the list with arid soils; these are in California, New Mexico, and Nevada.  
Drought vulnerabilities are more widely dispersed across the country.  Wildfire and recurrent 
flooding impacts are the most widely dispersed. 
 

For the most part, if an installation was currently vulnerable to a specific factor, it will 
generally be deemed vulnerable to that same factor in the future.  In a few instances, locations 
considered not currently vulnerable were deemed to be vulnerable in the future.  Seven 
installations not currently vulnerable to impacts from recurrent flooding were estimated to be 
vulnerable in the future.  Five sites not currently vulnerable to drought were deemed vulnerable 

16 

 


