 

 

OPERATIONS 
 
A changing climate can impact DoD’s operations through: 
 

  Changes in the manner in which DoD maintains readiness and provides support. 

  Changes to what DoD may be asked to support. 

 
Vulnerabilities to Mission Execution and Operational/Posture Plans  
 

The National Defense Strategy sets the strategic priorities for the Department and, in 

turn, the Combatant Commands (CCMD).  The CCMD missions may be affected by timing and 
severity of climate events, which may affect mission in some cases. 
 

"When I look at climate change, it's in the category of sources of conflict 
around the world and things we'd have to respond to.  So it can be great 
devastation requiring humanitarian assistance — disaster relief — which the 
U.S. military certainly conducts routinely.” 
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff General Dunford, November 2018 

 
Country Instability Issues:  In the United States Africa Command (USAFRICOM) Area of 
Responsibility (AOR), rainy season flooding and drought/desertification are very important 
factors in mission execution on the continent.  Flooding and earthquake-induced tsunamis in 
Indonesia contribute to instability in the Indo-Pacific Command (INDOPACOM). 
 
Logistics and Mission Support Issues:  Weather conditions over the Mediterranean Sea 
currently impact intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance (ISR), personnel 
recovery/casualty evacuation and logistics flights from Europe to the African continent; 
potentially increasing no-go flight days. 
 

At Naval Base Guam, recurrent flooding limits capacity for a number of operations and 

activities including Navy Expeditionary Forces Command Pacific, submarine squadrons, 
telecommunications, and a number of other specific tasks supporting mission execution. 
 

Additionally, recurrent flooding impacts operations and activities of contingency 

response groups at Andersen Air Force Base, as well as mobility response, communications, 
combat, and security forces squadrons. 
 
Arctic Region Issues:  Climate-related effects impact accessibility and activity in the Arctic.  
The Northern Sea Route generally opens for four weeks each year – usually the month of 
September – and has the potential for increased Arctic maritime traffic.  The demand for Arctic-
specific search and rescue (SAR) resources will grow as Arctic activity increases. 
 

There is need for further military support to civil authorities to enable the peaceful 

opening of the Arctic as access increases.  The role of United States Europe Command 
(USEUCOM) in the high north will expand with enhanced opportunities for cooperation with 

8 

 


