 

water at a particular site.  In general the deep water storm surge is nearly the same as that 
recorded at a tidal gauging station.  Additional surge may occur at other sites.  For planning 
purpose, winds during a Designated Storm will start to generate local surge in water depths 
less than 30 m. 

1.24  Wave Run-up 
The vertical distance that waves run-up the seaward slope of a structure or a shoreline.  The 
vertical  distance  is  measured  from  the  mean  water  level,  which  is  the  same  as  the 
Designated Flood Level. 
For  coastal  flooding  hazard  management  the  Wave  Run-up  is  taken  as  50  per  cent  of  the 
calculated  run-up  elevation  on  the  natural  shoreline.    This  ratio  is  based  on  analysis 
completed  for  this  assignment  (2010)  and  may  be  revised  as  more  information  becomes 
available. 
For defining a Sea Dike Crest Elevation the Wave Run-up is taken to be the vertical distance 
exceeded by no more than 2% of the waves during the Designated Storm at the toe of the 
sea dike 

1.25  Wave Set-up  
An increase in mean water surface close to the shoreline caused by wave action; important 
during storm events as it results in a further increase in water level above the tide and surge 
levels, landward of the location where waves start to break. Wave set-up will lead to larger 
waves existing at the seaward toe of a sea dike than might otherwise be expected. 

1.26  Wave Overtopping 
The passage of water over the top of a sea dike as a result of wave runup or related surge 
and setup.  Water overtopping a sea dike may pass over the dike as a flow of water or as 
spray and the specific characteristics are site and structure specific. 

1.27  Wind Set-up 
A rise of the water surface above the water level on the open coast due to the local action of 
wind stress on the water surface. 

2 

Acronyms and Symbols 

2.1  CD 
Tide and chart datum – in Canadian waters the plane below which the tide will seldom fall.  
Tide  datum  and  chart  datum  is  usually  the  same  provided  the  chart  is  the  largest  scale 
available chart for area.  For a site specific survey tide and chart (sounding) datum may be 
different and the specifics should be stated explicitly. 

2.2  CGD 
Canadian Geodetic Datum.  In 2010 the vertical reference plane in Canada is in the process 
of being changed from a MSL related datum plane – technically known as CGVD28 – to a 
geoid 
at 
http://www.geod.nrcan.gc.ca/hm/index_e.php.  The term CGD is taken to mean the datum as 
defined in 2010 and approximately equal to MSL. 

described 

program 

plan. 

 

based 

datum 

The 

update 

is 

Appendix A 

6 


