 

1 

1.1 

Introduction and Application of this Document 

General 
This document provides guidelines for the design of sea dikes to protect low lying lands that are 
exposed to coastal flood hazards arising from their exposure to the sea and to expected sea level 
rise due to climate change. 
This document will supersede the related sections of the existing “Dike Design and Construction 
Guide  2003”,  which  means  the  “Dike  Design  and  Construction  Guide  –  Best  Management 
Practices for British Columbia”, July 2003, published by the Province of British Columbia, Ministry 
of Water, Land and Air Protection (now the Ministry of Environment). 
This document provides guidelines intended to assist diking authorities, design professionals and 
others  in  fulfilling  dike  design  requirements  as  legislated  under  the  British  Columbia  Dike 
Maintenance Act.  This guideline document presents design standards relating to sea level rise and 
consequential  aspects  in  a  generalized  form  only.    Application  of  this  information  for  specific 
projects, which include new, repaired, upgraded or changed sea dikes, requires site specific design 
and  expert  advice.    This  guideline  document  does  not  specifically  address  geotechnical  design, 
structural design or construction standards, which may be indirectly affected by some aspects of 
sea level rise.  Qualified professionals with specialist engineering or environmental expertise must 
be involved and retained to design specific project components and to facilitate agency approvals. 
This  document,  and  the  companion  document  “Guidelines  for  Management  of  Coastal  Flood 
Hazard Land Use 2010”1 are specific to flood hazards arising from the exposure of BC lands to 
the  sea.  In  some  locations,  specifically  river  estuaries,  the  lands  will  also  be  exposed  to  other 
sources  of  flooding.  These  new  documents  are  companion  documents  to  the  existing  guideline 
documents  which  address  flooding  hazard  from  rivers2.    Analysis  of  flooding  hazard  from  all 
sources – rivers and the sea - will be required in estuaries.  
The Sea Level Rise projections and potential responses described in this document are drawn from 
the Policy Discussion Paper 20103.  

1.2 

Acknowledgement 
Preparation of this document and its companion documents was made possible through funding by 
Natural Resources Canada’s Regional Adaptation Collaborative program and administration by the 
Fraser Basin Council. 

                                                      
1 “Guidelines for Management of Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use”- Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea 
Dikes  and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use in BC. Rev 0”. Prepared by Ausenco Sandwell for the British Columbia 
Ministry of Environment. 
2 “Dike Design and Construction Guide – Best Management Practices for British Columbia”, July 2003, published by the 
Province of British Columbia, Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection (now the Ministry of Environment) 
3 “Draft Policy Discussion Paper - Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea Dikes  and Coastal Flood Hazard 
Land Use in BC. Rev 0”. Prepared by Ausenco Sandwell for the British Columbia Ministry of Environment. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment /Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

1 


