3 

3.1 

 

Design Criteria 

General Requirements 
The primary function of a sea dike is to protect the people and assets behind the dike against the 
effects of flooding or inundation.  A sea dike is not intended to protect the shoreline or the adjacent 
seabed against erosion, although this may become a secondary aspect of the sea dike design, or 
the sea dike may be incorporated into a larger project with erosion protection, shoreline restoration 
or marine habitat preservation as concurrent objectives. 
Design criteria that are required but not specifically addressed in this guideline document include: 

-  The safety standard, design and service objectives to be achieved by the dike 
-  The design life of the dike 
- 

Inspection, maintenance and replacement or decommissioning of the dike. 

Guidance  regarding  these  design  criteria  is  provided  in  the  companion  document:  Policy 
Discussion Paper 20103. 

3.2 

Design Environment 

3.2.1  General 

This section describes the evaluation of physical environmental conditions that will be required to 
define the main functional or geometric aspects of a sea dike. 

3.2.2  Location of Facility (Reference elevation – depth of water) 

The water depths and terrestrial elevations at the location of a sea dike shall be determined from 
site-specific bathymetric and topographic surveys referenced to a common vertical and horizontal 
datum.    Where  bathymetric  and  topographic  surveys  are  undertaken  with  respect  to  a  separate 
datum, the relationship between the bathymetric datum and the topographic datum shall be defined 
over the entire project area. 
The  relationship  between  the  bathymetric  survey  datum,  the  topographic  survey  datum  and  the 
tidal datum for the area shall also be defined over the project area5. 

3.2.3  Sea Level Rise 

Global Climate Change Sea Level Rise 
Sea Level Rise is predicted to be moderate in the period from 2010 to 2025. However, the rate is 
predicted to increase more quickly in the period leading up to 2100, and then continue to increase 
steadily.  For the purpose of this document the current definition of the expected Sea Level Rise is 
provided  in  Figure  3-1.    The  basis  for  this  definition  is  provided  in  the  policy  document:  Policy 
Discussion Paper 20103. 
 

                                                      
5 In 2010 the vertical reference plane in Canada is in the process of being changed from a MSL related datum plane – 
technically known as CGVD28 – to a geoid based datum plan.  The update program is described at 
http://www.geod.nrcan.gc.ca/hm/index_e.php.  For the purpose of this document we use the term CGD to mean the 
datum as defined in 2010 and approximately equal to MSL. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment /Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

4 


