 

1 

2 

2.1 

Introduction 
This Appendix provides a brief summary of investigations undertaken to provide guidelines for 
the preparation of the document: Sea Dike Guidelines, 2010. 
Further investigations are warranted as noted in each case. 

Atmospheric Sea Level Rise in BC Coastal Waters  

Introduction 
Sea levels along the coastal British Columbia coast are strongly affected by the mid-latitude 
storm systems in the North Pacific.  The strong winds and low atmospheric pressures in the 
storms  result  in  a  large,  though  low  in  amplitude,  surge  wave  that  affects  considerable 
portions of the Northwest North American coastline at the same time. 
A  detailed  discussion  of  all  aspects  of  these  storm  systems  is  beyond  the  scope  of  this 
document;  however  a  brief  discussion  is  provided  as  background  to  the  definition  of  storm 
surge used in this document. 
In particular, the connection between the offshore character of the storms and the resulting 
storm surge is discussed.  As an example, the storm of 12 March – 15 March, 2010 is shown 
below.  This storm entered the Gulf of Alaska near the southern tip of the Aleutian Islands on 
12  March  2010,  moving  in  a  generally  easterly  direction  along  the  50th  parallel  of  latitude, 
Figure 2-1. 
The evolution of the storm over the period up to 15 March 2010 is shown in Figure 2-2, by 
which time hurricane force winds were expected in the Hecate Strait area of coastal British 
Columbia.  This storm generated gale to storm force winds throughout much of the Gulf of 
Alaska. 
The surface effect of the storm winds on 12 March can be seen in Figure 2-3, where the red 
shading centred approximately on the 53rd parallel of latitude corresponds to a surge, above 
tide, of approximately 0.6 m.  This large area of surge is being setup by the combination of 
the inverse barometer affect due to the low atmospheric pressure and to the effect of the gale 
to storm force winds circulating around the low pressure centre. 
In  this  particular  case,  the  storm  crossed  the  North  American  coastline  north  of  Dixon 
Entrance and the surge mainly affected Alaska state coastal waters.  A track south of the 50th 
parallel would have brought the deepwater surge directly onto the British Columbia coast. The 
length of coastline affected by the storm surge for a storm of this severity is clearly as long or 
even longer than the west coast of British Columbia. 
 
 

Appendix D 

1 


