 

provided in Chapter 3.0 - BC Sea Level Report (2008). Additional detail on subsidence rates for 
specific areas of coastal BC area are provided in Appendix B. 
 
In general terms, for most of coastal British Columbia, with the exception of the Lower Mainland 
area and the Richmond – Delta regions in particular, vertical land movement is positive (rising) at 
rates between 1 and 3 mm/yr.  Over a period of 100 years this will decrease the expected global 
SLR by 0.1 to 0.3 m, but not enough to overcome the expected effects of climate change. 
Subsidence is expected in the Richmond-Delta region at average rates of 1 to 2 mm/yr.  Over a 
period of 100 years these rates will increase the expected sea level rise due to global SLR by 0.1 
to 0.2 m. 

3.2.4  Astronomical Tides 

Predictions  of  expected  water  levels  due  to  astronomical  tides  are  available  throughout  coastal 
British Columbia from the Canadian Hydrographic Service (CHS), Fisheries and Oceans Canada 
and are published annually under the authority of CHS.  Volumes 5 through 7 of the Canadian Tide 
and  Current  Tables  (issued  annually)  provide  sufficient  information  on  astronomical  tidal 
characteristics for planning and preliminary design throughout most of BC coastal areas, through a 
combination of Principal Reference Ports and numerous Secondary Ports. 
As  the  tidal  information  at  Secondary  Ports  is  often  based  on  limited  durations  of  observations 
(typically one month or possibly less), they may not be current and as they only provide corrections 
for times and heights of specific tide parameters, project specific tidal measurement programs must 
be undertaken for all projects, at the project location, prior to detailed design. 
Indicative tidal ranges are summarized in Table 3-1.  The published data in Volumes 5 through 7 of 
the  Canadian  Tide  and  Current  Tables  for  specific  areas  within  each  general  region  should  be 
consulted as tidal ranges can vary by 1 m or more within each region.  Tidal ranges within a river 
estuary  will  also  vary  significantly;  both  by  location  within  the  estuary  and  according  to  river 
discharge.  Guidelines are available in Volume 5 for the Fraser River. 
The tide ranges given in Table 3-1 have additional variation as noted below: 
 
 

Inter-annual variation due to the 18.6 year cycle of tides (typically of the order of ± 0.1 m) 
Intra-annual (seasonal) variation due to the particulars of the astronomical bodies and orbits 
driving the tidal forcing 

In  coastal  British  Columbia  waters,  the  mean  tidal  water  level  during  the  typical  stormy  winter 
season (approximately mid-October through mid-January) will not be equal to the MWL from the 
CHS published information as represented below in Table 3-1. 
Definition  of  the  Designated  Flood  Level  for  the  design  of  a  sea  dike  will  require  definition  of  a 
combination of appropriate tidal water levels and meteorological related water levels. 
Joint probability analysis methods are often used to define appropriate combinations of tide and 
storm surge that reflect the times of occurrence of the two processes; however, as tide is totally 
independent of storm occurrence and resulting storm surge, reasonable and valid estimates can be 
made  by  treating  the  statistics  of  each  process  as  independent.    In  this  case,  the  combined 
probability is simply the product of the probability of high tide during the time period of interest and 
the probability of the Designated Storm. 
Guidance for defining appropriate combinations of storm surge is provided below in Section 3.2.5. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment /Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

6 


