 

4 

Sea Dike Design 

4.1.1  Crest Elevation 

General 
The crest elevation of a sea dike shall be established to provide the protection required during the 
Designated Storm.  
The Sea Dike Crest Elevation can be defined based on the following: 

Designated Flood Level + Wave Run-up + Freeboard 

  or: 

Designated Flood Level + Acceptable Crest Height 

 where: 
Wave Run-up = vertical distance above the mean water level exceeded, by no more than 2% of 
the waves at the toe of the sea dike 
Acceptable  Crest  Height  =  vertical  distance  above  the  mean  water  level  required  to  keep  any 
wave  overtopping  below  the  chosen  criteria  for  acceptable  rates  of  overtopping,  as  summarized 
below in Table 4-1 or Table 4-2. 
Alternatively an Acceptable Crest Height can be defined based on the results of a Quantitative Risk 
Analysis (QRA) process that identifies an acceptable amount of inundation during the Designated 
Storm. 
In general, a Sea Dike Crest Elevation is established so that any overtopping that occurs during the 
Designated Storm is within limits set to ensure that inundation behind the dike during the storm is 
acceptable, that it is within the limits considered during the design of the dike armour components, 
on the seaward and landward faces, and on the sea dike crest, and that it is consistent with any 
requirement for personnel to be present on the dike during the Designated Storm Event. 
The total quantity of overtopping during the Designated Storm should be defined to ensure that it is 
consistent with the FCL defined for inundation behind a Sea Dike. 
Overtopping of a sea dike can take two main forms.  If wave runup is high enough, relative to the 
crest elevation of the dike, water can pass over the dike as a nearly continuous sheet or plume of 
water.  In the second case, as waves break against the seaward face, a mixture of air and water 
droplets – spray – can be carried over the dike, either by the momentum of the breaking wave or by 
the added effect of entrainment into the onshore winds. Over time, if left undrained, the volume of 
water contained in the spray can accumulate and result in flooding (inundation) behind the dike. 
In  general,  it  is  usually  uneconomic  to  design  a  sea  dike  with  a  crest  elevation  high  enough  to 
prevent all overtopping.  In many cases, other factors, including available land, existing land uses, 
soil  conditions,  access,  visibility  over  the  dike  or  habitat  issues  may  limit  the  sea  dike  crest 
elevation. 
Guidance on acceptable limits for overtopping is available in the Reference Publications.  As initial 
guidance, the average or mean overtopping discharges summarized below in Table 4-1 and Table 
4-2 can be used. The criteria in Table 4-1 apply to a conventional sea dike with gentle seaward 
slopes.  The criteria in Table 4-2 can be used to estimate the crest elevation required for a vertical 
seawall that starts at or near the high tide elevation. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment /Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

12 


