 

1 

1.1 

Examples of Sea Dike Guidelines 

Introduction 
The sea dike examples shown in this Appendix are intended solely as examples of the application 
of the Sea Dike Guidelines and are not intended as specific guidelines for dike requirements at any 
of the locations.  Simplifying assumptions have been made in the development of these examples, 
especially with regard to design criteria, solely for the purpose of developing examples.  A detailed 
planning  or  design  process  will  need  to  undertake  site  specific  investigations  to  develop  the 
appropriate  design  criteria.    The  examples  illustrated  in  this  section  also  do  not  consider 
environmental or land-use issues and the dike footprints shown in these examples do not reflect 
any  consideration  of  these  important  issues.    No  consideration  is  given  to  the  stages  of  design, 
approval  or  construction  that  might  be  necessary  to  implement  these  examples  nor  do  the 
examples reflect any consideration of alternate designs that might be suitable based on detailed 
site specific requirements or design. 

1.2 

Boundary Bay Sea Dike 

1.2.1  Location 

The  existing  Boundary  Bay  sea  dike  is  located  along  the  south  boundary  of  the  Corporation  of 
Delta  (Delta)  and  the  north  shore  of  Boundary  Bay,  Figure  1-1.    The  dike,  which  runs  from 
approximately 17A Ave. in Tsawwassen to the boundary with Surrey in the east, generally protects 
low  lying  agricultural  land.    The  protected  area  also  includes  the  Boundary  Bay  airport  and  the 
Delta Heritage Airport.  
The dike is directly exposed to long-term sea level rise, tides, storm surge and to the local wind 
setup and the wave climate generated by SE through SW winds associated with severe storms in 
the south end of the Strait of Georgia and across Boundary Bay, Figure 1-2.  The maximum direct 
exposure is due S across to Orcas Island in the US Gulf Islands; however, wave generation may 
occur over the open water extending SE towards Rosario Strait, located east of Orcas Island.  The 
maximum available fetch is limited to approximately 45 km. 
The seaward slope of the existing dike is armoured with a conventional armour stone protection 
system.  A gravel road (with some paved sections) is located on the crest, Figure 1-3 and Figure 
1-4.  The landward slope is planted with grass, Figure 1-5. 
The existing dike cross-section in the vicinity of this example is shown in Figure 1-6. 
 Land elevations in the area behind the dike are reported to be subsiding at a rate of approximately 
1-2 mm/year.  Typical present (2010) land elevations behind the dike are approximately 1.5 to 1.8 
m CGD. 
The net expected (including land subsidence) regional sea level rise by 2100 for this area is 1.2 m. 

Appendix C 

1 


