 

Using AEP to define the likelihood of hazard events is preferable to the average return period 
as return period can lead to a false sense of security created by the belief that the indicated 
number of years will pass before the next event of that magnitude occurs. 

1.3  Designated Flood  
A flood, which may occur in any given year, of such a magnitude as to equal a flood having a 
200-year  recurrence  interval  based  on  a  frequency  analysis  of  unregulated  historic  flood 
records or by regional analysis where there is inadequate streamflow data available. Where 
the flow of a large watercourse is controlled by a major dam, the designated flood shall be set 
on a site-specific basis. 
In  coastal  areas,  the  existing  definition  of  a  Designated  Flood  is  not  appropriate  as  the 
probability of flooding from the sea is the result of the joint occurrence of tide and a storm 
crossing the coastal waters of British Columbia and at some time in the future, sea level rise 
due to climate change.  
In  estuaries,  where  a  river  discharges  into  the  sea,  the  definition  of  the  Designated  Flood 
applies to the river. 
In these documents the definition “Designated Flood” is replaced with the term “Designated 
Storm” as defined below. 

1.4  Designated Flood Level (DFL) 
The observed or calculated elevation for the Designated Flood and is used in the calculation 
of the Flood Construction Level. 
In  coastal  areas,  the  Designated  Flood  Level  (DFL)  includes  the  appropriate  allowance  for 
future sea level rise, tide and the total storm surge expected during the designated storm. 

1.5  Designated Storm (DS) 
A storm, which may occur in any given year, of such a magnitude as to equal a storm having 
the designated annual exceedence probability (AEP).  
The Designated Storm has several phenomena associated with it that will define components 
of  the  Designated  Flood  Level,  including  storm  surge,  wind  set-up,  wave  run-up  and 
overtopping for the storm.  These include: 
  A time series of atmospheric pressure during the passage of the storm over the area in 

question 

  A time series of wind speed and direction during the passage of the storm over the area 

in question 

  A time series of wave conditions, including wave heights, periods and directions during 

the passage of the storm in question. 

1.6  Diking Authority 
(a)  The  commissioners  of  a  district  to  which  Part  2  of  the  Drainage,  Ditch  and  Dike  Act 

applies, 

(b)  A person owning or controlling a dike other than a private dike, 
(b1) If the final agreement of a treaty first nation so provides, the treaty first nation in relation 

to dikes on its treaty lands, 

Appendix A 

2 


