 

the West Richmond sea dikes - offshore of the dike.  In these situations the effect of strong winds 
and  waves  may  further  increase  the  water  level  during  storms  and  site  specific  analysis  will  be 
required. 
Methodologies  for  assessing  the  magnitude  of  additional  surge  are  outlined  in  the  Reference 
Publications. 
Examples of the magnitude of these local effects are provided in the sample cases in Appendix C. 

3.2.6  Wave Climate 

Incident Deepwater Wave Climate 
Definition  of  appropriate  sea  dike  crest  elevations  will  require  specification  of  the  incident  wave 
climate during storms that are consistent with the selected design criteria.  For most sea dikes, with 
their seaward face situated at or above normal high tide elevations, the design wave climate will 
generally be controlled by the depth of water a short distance seaward of the toe.  Specification of 
the  appropriate  location  to  define  the  design  wave  climate  is  generally  unique  to  the  design 
methodology being used for a specific component of the dike.   
Reference must be made to the specific requirements in the Reference Publications. 
Local Wave Climate at the Dike 
As a preliminary guideline, the maximum seastate7 that can exist in a given depth of shallow water 
can  be  estimated  using  the  procedures  outlined  in  CIRIA;  CUR;  CETMEF  (2007)  or  US  Army 
Corps of Engineering (2002). 
The seastate that can exist at a sea dike depends strongly on the water depth at the toe of the sea 
dike, the slope of the foreshore in front of the sea dike and in some cases on the seaward slope of 
the sea dike itself. As guidance, the maximum seastate (Hs) 7 may be between approximately 0.5 
and 1.2 times the depth of water.  In general, an iterative procedure will be required during design 
to define the seastate. 
It  will  also  be  necessary  to  check  that  the  seastate  at  the  toe  of  the  dike  is  consistent  with  the 
Designated  Storm  for  the  annual  exceedance  probability  specified  for  the  sea  dike  planning  or 
design process. 
The details of the design seastate that are required for planning or design can be defined using the 
procedures outlined in EA, ENW, KFKI (2007) or specifically in Battjes, et al. (2000). 

3.2.7  Scour 

Waves and currents may cause scour to occur on the seabed adjacent to a sea dike.  The scour 
depth that may occur either during the design life of the sea dike or during the Designated Storm 
should be considered and either allowed for in defining the necessary sea dike crest elevation or 
scour protection should be provided as necessary. 

                                                      

7  The  term  “seastate”  is  used  in  this  document  to  encapsulate,  in  a  general  way,  all  of  the 
parameters and characteristics that may be needed during design to define the waves at a given 
instant in time.  The sea state is the general condition of the free surface of a body of water—with 
respect to wind waves and swell—at a certain location and moment. The sea state is characterized 
by  statistics, including wave  height(s),  period(s),  distribution  and  power spectrum.  The sea state 
varies with time, as the weather or oceanographic factors change.  For engineering purposes the 
seastate is often characterized by the significant wave height, Hs. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment /Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

10 


