 

Similar  testing  has  also  found  that  if  knowledgeable  people  (for  instance;  maintenance  or 
inspection  crews)  or  vehicles  (for  inspection  during  storms)  are  present  on  the  dike,  then  safety 
considerations may limit acceptable rates of overtopping to between 1 and 50 liters/s/m8. 
Along a dike of approximately 1000 m length, a limit of 10 liters/s/m implies that during a six hour 
storm the total volume of water overtopping the sea dike could amount to: 

10 liters/s/m x 1000 m x 6 h x 3600 sec/hr = 216 million liters = 216,000 m3 

This volume of water will amount to approximately 2 m of standing water over a land area of 10 
hectares, unless it can be drained away. 
In the case of the criteria in Table 4-2, it must be noted that reliable guidance does not exist to 
define the effect of distance on the decay rate of overtopping and therefore it may not be clear how 
far  behind  a  given  dike  or  seawall  a  building  must  be  to  satisfy  the  1  liter/m/s  threshold.    Site 
specific engineering investigations are warranted in many situations. 
Specification of a suitable Sea Dike Crest Elevation will generally be an iterative process as the 
volume of overtopping for a given Designated Storm will be significantly influenced by the design of 
the seaward face of the sea dike.  Acceptable quantities of overtopping may also be significantly 
influenced by the design of the landward face of the sea dike, especially if space or land use does 
not  permit  the  1:3  (V:H)  landward  slope  implied  by  the  criteria  in  Table  4-1.  Case  specific 
engineering investigations will be warranted in many situations. 
Examples of the application of the threshold conditions in Table 4-1 and Table 4-2 are provided in 
Appendix C. 

4.1.2  Seaward Face Design 

General 
The seaward face of a sea dike shall be designed to be stable and not vulnerable to breaching 
during the Designated Storm.  The design of the seaward face shall take into consideration any 
scour or erosion that may occur in front of the dike during the Designated Storm. 
Guidance 
Guidance  for  the  design  of  the  seaward  face  of  a  sea  dike  is  provided  in  the  Reference 
Publications. 

4.1.3  Landward Face Design 

General 
The landward face of a sea dike shall be designed to be stable and not vulnerable to erosion or 
scouring by overtopping water during the Designated Storm. 
Guidance 
Guidance  for  the  design  of  the  landward  face  of  a  sea  dike  is  provided  in  the  Reference 
Publications. 
It  should  be  noted  that  design  guidance  for  the  landward  face  of  a  sea  dike  that  is  exposed  to 
overtopping is, in general, limited in scope.  Structure specific detailed engineering investigations 
will  likely  be  required  if  the  design  is  different  from  the  1:3  (V:H)  landward  slope  implied  by  the 
criteria in Table 4-1 and Table 4-2. 

                                                      
8 These limits represent the extreme range that might be applicable.  An upper limit of 10 liters/s/m may be more 
appropriate if personnel are outside of a vehicle. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment /Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

14 


