 

(c)  A public authority designated by the minister as having any responsibility for maintenance 

of a dike other than a private dike, or 

(d)  A regional district, a municipality or an improvement district. 

1.7  Flood Construction Level (FCL) 
Uses the Designated Flood Level plus an allowance for Freeboard to establish the elevation 
of the underside of a wooden floor system or top of concrete slab for habitable buildings. In 
the  case  of  a  manufactured  home,  the  ground  level  or  top  of  concrete  or  asphalt  pad,  on 
which  it  is  located,  shall  be  equal  to  or  higher  than  the  above  described  elevation.  It  also 
establishes the minimum crest level of a Standard Dike. Where the Designated Flood Level 
cannot be determined or where there are overriding factors, an assessed height above the 
natural boundary of the water-body or above the natural ground elevation may be used (as 
defined in the Land Use Guidelines 2004).  
In coastal areas the FCL does not relate to the crest level of a sea dike, nor does it relate to 
the crest level of flood proofing fill exposed directly to the designated flood level.  The FCL 
does; however, include wave – structure interaction effects, to be determined at the location 
of the site of the building. 

1.8  Flood Construction Reference Plane (FCRP) 
The  vertical  elevation  of  an  estimated  future  Natural  Boundary  from  which  the  FCL  is 
determined. 

1.9  Flood Plain 
A lowland area, whether diked, flood proofed, or not, which, by reasons of land elevation, is 
susceptible to flooding from an adjoining watercourse, ocean, lake or other body of water and 
for  administration  purposes  is  taken  to  be  that  area  submerged  at  the  Designated  Flood 
Level. 
In  coastal  areas  the  concept  of  the  Flood  Plain  has  been  extended  to  a  “Sea  Level  Rise 
Planning Area”; defined below.  Special measures may be warranted in this area. 

1.10  Flood Proofing 
The  alteration  of  land  or structures  either physically  or  in use  to  reduce  flood  damage and 
includes the use of building setbacks from water bodies to maintain a floodway and allow for 
potential erosion. Flood Proofing may be achieved by all or a combination of the following: 
  Building on fill, provided such fill does not interfere with flood flows of the watercourse, 

and is adequately protected against floodwater erosion 

  Building raised by structural means such as foundation walls, columns, etc. 
  A combination of fill and structural means. 
In  coastal  areas  exposed  to  flooding,  construction  of  fill  as  a  flood  proofing  measure  may 
substantially increase the freeboard required to define the FCL, if the fill is directly exposed to 
the Designated Flood Level. In this case, the FCL must be equivalent to the crest level of a 
sea dike with the same characteristics as the seaward face of the fill.. 

1.11  Freeboard  
A  vertical  distance  added  to  the  Designated  Flood  Level.  Used  to  establish  the  Flood 
Construction Level.   

Appendix A 

3 


