 

the Netherlands and each ring is the responsibility of a separate organizational entity, subject 
to national overview. 
In BC, multiple Diking Authorities may share responsibility for the same sea dike system. 

1.17  Sea Level Rise (SLR) 
An allowance for increases in the mean elevation of the ocean associated with future climate 
change, including any regional effects such as crustal subsidence or uplift.  

1.18  Sea Level Rise Planning Area (SLR Planning Area) 
An  area  of  land  that  may  be  subject  to  future  flooding  due  to  Sea  Level  Rise.  This  area 
defines a future coastal flood plain.  The SLR Planning Area extends from the existing Natural 
Boundary  landward  to  the  highest  predicted  point  of  potential  flooding  related  to  SLR  plus 
flooding  expected  from  the  combination  of  high  tide,  total  storm  surge  and  expected  wave 
runup during the Designated Storm. 
Predictions  of  SLR  for  the  SLR  Planning  Area  definition  shall  use  best  predictions  for 
minimum periods of 90-100 years and 200 years forward. From time to time, both the Natural 
Boundary and the predictions for SLR are subject to change, and therefore the extent of a 
SLR Planning Area may be revised at regular intervals in the future. 

1.19  Seastate 
The  term  “seastate”  is  used  to  encapsulate,  in  a  general  way,  all  of  the  parameters  and 
characteristics that may be needed during design to define the waves at a given instant in 
time.    The  sea  state  is  the  general  condition  of  the  free  surface  of  a  body  of  water—with 
respect  to  wind  waves  and  swell—at  a  certain  location  and  moment.  The  sea  state  is 
characterized  by  statistics,  including  wave  height(s),  period(s),  distribution  and  power 
spectrum. The sea state varies with time, as the weather or oceanographic factors change.  
For engineering purposes the seastate is often characterized by the significant wave height, 
Hs. 

1.20  Setback  
Means withdrawal or siting of a building or landfill away from the natural boundary or other 
reference line to maintain a floodway and to allow for potential land erosion.   

1.21  Standard Dikes 
Dikes built to a minimum crest elevation equal to the Flood Construction Level and meeting 
standards  of  design  and  construction  approved  by  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
maintained by an ongoing authority such as a local government body. 

1.22  Storm Surge  
A change in water level caused by the action of wind and atmospheric pressure variation on 
the  sea  surface.  The  typical  effect  is  to  raise  the  level  of  the  sea  above  the  predicted 
astronomical tide level, although in some situations, such as when winds blow offshore, the 
actual water level may be lower than that predicted. The magnitude of a storm surge on the 
BC  coast  will  be  dependent  on  the  severity  and  duration  of  the  storm  event  in  the  North 
Pacific, its track relative to the BC coast and the seabed bathymetry at the site. 

1.23  Total Storm Surge 
The combination of the storm surge generated in deep water plus the additional local surge or 
wind setup generated by the effect of the winds during the Designated Storm over shallow 

Appendix A 

5 


