2 

2.1 

2.2 

2.3 

 

Background  

Scope 
This guideline document describes the principles of determining the total water level and sea dike 
crest  elevations  for  sea  dikes,  as  legislated  under  the  British  Columbia  Dike  Maintenance  Act.  
Design will be performed at different levels of detail: 
-  Conceptual design 
-  Feasibility design 
-  Detailed design. 
This guideline is aimed at serving the conceptual design stage. 

Definitions 
A summary of definitions and terminology used in this document is provided in Appendix A. 
Where  possible  the  same  terminology  and  definitions  as  used  in  the  existing  documents;  Dike 
Design and Construction Guide 20032 and Land Use Guidelines 20044 are used; however, as 
the existing terminology and definitions sometimes need modification, clarification or expansion to 
be appropriate for coastal conditions, in some cases new or revised terminology and definitions are 
proposed.    It  is  recommended  that  the  reader  of  the  updated  documents  familiarize  themselves 
with the updated terminology and definitions in Appendix A as necessary. 

Reference Documents 
This Guideline document refers to several publications that are recognized as current examples of 
best  practice  for  the  design  of  coastal  engineering  structures,  including  sea  dikes.    Where  such 
reference  is  made  it  is  intended  to  refer  to  the  most  current  edition,  as  listed  below,  and  to  all 
amendments or updates published thereto.  It should be noted that a Building Code or Standard 
does not exist in Canada for coastal engineering structures. 
The  referenced  publications  and  Standards  listed  below  are  intended  to  provide  guidance  on 
internationally accepted best practice.  In some cases inter-comparison of documents will reveal 
several  approaches  may  apply.    In  these  situations;  theoretical  analysis,  evaluation  of  the 
approaches  for  application  to  the  specifics  of  British  Columbia  coastal  waters  and  recognized 
engineering practise should be used to select among alternative methods. 
Direct  measurement  of  specific  parameters,  over  appropriate  intervals  of  time,  may  also  be 
necessary or advisable. 
Detailed site or structure specific engineering investigations may also provide equivalent guidance 
for design. 

2.3.1  Standards 

International  Organization  for  Standardization,  2007.  Actions  from  Wave  and  Currents  on 
Coastal Structures. ISO 21650:2007(E). 

                                                      
4 “Land Use Guidelines 2004” means the Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines, May 
2004, prepared by the Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection. 

Rev: 0 
Date: 27 January 2011 
Project No:  143111:  BC Ministry of Environment /Climate Change Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use 

2 


