Rioux, C., D. Roussel, A. Eisenberg, M. Kleiser et M.-C. Lévesque. Évaluation économique des risques associés à 

l’érosion des zones côtières et aux méthodes d’adaptation dans le golfe du Saint-Laurent : secteurs de Sept-
Îles, Percé et des Îles-de-la-Madeleine. (Economic risk assessment associated with erosion of coastal areas 
and adaptation methods in the Gulf of St. Lawrence: Sept-Îles, Percé and Îles-de-la-Madeleine). Gestion 
des ressources maritimes, Département des sciences de la gestion, Université du Québec à Rimouski. 
Rapport de recherche remis au Consortium Ouranos et au PIACC de Ressources naturelles Canada 
(project A-1414). 2007. Available at:  
http://www.ouranos.ca/fr/symposium/documents/Eisenberg2012.pdf
This study is an evaluation of the economic implications of erosion risks in coastal zones, measured 
against the costs of protection against such risks. It seeks to establish the economic costs of adaptation. 
The study hones in on three areas, considered to be the most vulnerable to climate change and erosion. 
For each area, estimates are made of the value of properties at risk, the average rate of erosion, and 
future erosion rates and variability. The economic risk is presented as annual costs and compounded 
costs from 2008 to 2050.

 

Savard, J-P, et al. Étude de la sensibilité des côtes et de la vulnérabilité des communautés du golfe du Saint-

 

Laurent aux impacts des changements climatiques (Climate change impact study on coastal susceptibility 
and community vulnerability in the Gulf of St Lawrence). Report Summary, Ouranos, 2008. Available at: 
http://ouranos.ca.
This study summarises multi-stakeholder research undertaken between September 2005 and December 
2007 by Ouranos in collaboration with the Université du Québec à Rimouski, l’Institut des sciences de 
la mer de Rimouski (ISMER), the Ministère de la sécurité publique du Québec and Environment Canada. 
Research evaluates the potential climate change impact on the coastal region of the Gulf of St. Lawrence, 
considers adaptation proposals, and identifies socio-economic vulnerabilities in the region. The study 
looks at the whole of the gulf, but hones in on the Sept-Îles, Percé and Iles-de-la-Madeleine areas.

Senneville, S., and F. Saucier. Étude de sensibilité de la glace de mer au réchauffement climatique dans le golfe 

 

et l’estuaire du Saint-Laurent (Climate change impact study on the susceptibility of sea ice in the Golf of St. 
Lawrence and its estuary). Montreal, QC: Ouranos, 2007. Available at: http://ouranos.ca.
This report uses atmospheric data for regional modelling of sea ice concentration and thickness in 
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, honing in on the areas from Trois Rivières to the Belle Isle and Cabot Straits. 
The study considers the variation in the number of days that ice can protect banks from swells via 
attenuation and reducing wind. Data demonstrates that the sea ice cover is diminishing, which has an 
impact on erosion.

USA 

Dixon, Lloyd, Noreen Clancy, Seth A. Seabury, and Adrian Overton. The National Flood Insurance Program’s 
Market Penetration Rate: Estimates and Policy Implications. Prepared as part of the 2001-2006 Evaluation 
of the National Flood Insurance Program, U.S.A.: RAND, 2007. Available at:  
http://www.rand.org/pubs/technical_reports/TR300.html
This study was prepared as part of the 2001-2006 evaluation of the National Flood Insurance Program. It 
estimated that 49% of single family homes in Special Flood Hazard Areas (i.e., subject to a flood risk of 1 
in 100 years or greater) have flood insurance policies. This includes an estimated 3.6 million single family 
homes. Although one third of flood insurance policies are written outside Special Flood Hazard Areas, 
the market penetration rate is extremely low - approximately 1%.

 

134


