Land Use Change or Restriction Tools

1. Land Acquisition

Tool Description
Local governments can gain ownership of land for the primary purpose of addressing public safety through 
purchase or expropriation. Land can be acquired for a variety of purposes, including structural protection 
works (i.e., a dike or other hard protection), vehicular access or setbacks for public safety. Land can also be 
acquired to prevent the development or to hold it in public ownership for exclusive public use. 

Application
Land can be acquired to accommodate a new dike, for the landward expansion of an existing dike or as the 
land base needed for other forms of structural protection.  

Land acquisition can be used to provide public open space, protect rare or endangered habitat or create 
an ecological reserve. It can also be used to avoid the cost of servicing land at risk due to sea level rise. 
Land purchase may take place to prevent the development of land subject to hazards, however if land is 
required for a public purpose, government cannot simply downzone land for exclusive public use without 
compensating the owner. 

Expropriation is perceived as an option of last resort, as an independent third party or the courts are the 
final determinants of the land value. Expropriation may also be referred to as a compulsory acquisition, 
compulsory purchase or eminent domain.

Enabling Legislation
A municipality is authorized to expropriate property in accordance with the Expropriation Act under  
Section 31 of the Community Charter. Similar provisions to acquire or expropriate land exist in Atlantic 
Canada.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Land acquisition is potentially expensive and there are ongoing costs and liability associated 
with ownership. Any tax revenue generated from the land is forgone once it transfers to local government 
ownership.

Environmental – This tool can be used to protect environmentally sensitive land where development is not 
advisable or for foreshore protection such as soft armouring. Land acquisition may also be used to provide for 
public open space purposes subject to restrictions on improvements and the timing and extent of activities.

Social – There are social considerations and impacts associated with the acquisition of private land to 
protect the public interest. Local governments may have to acquire large sections of land necessary to 
expand a linear corridor (e.g. dike or seawall). Social benefits may include the acquisition of public open 
space and public access along a dike. In communities where expropriation is used, there may be negative 
impacts to local landowners.

50

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
