Regulatory Tools

1. Regulation of Land Use

Tool Description
Land use can be regulated through neighbourhood plans, character guidelines, capital works plans, 
strategic plans, growth management plans and setback regulations. Land use can also be regulated 
through the establishment of appropriate zoning within areas subject to or potentially subject to coastal 
hazards. Zoning can regulate a wide range of activities, including restrictions on land uses, land use 
densities, setbacks, siting circumstances and servicing standards.

Application
Land use regulation – especially zoning – is a tool available in all provinces, although the specific scope 
of regulation ranges from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. The three key elements of land use regulation 
pertaining to sea level rise and coastal hazards consist of minimum building setbacks from coastal hazards 
or structural protection from coastal hazards, minimum elevation of buildings in relation to flood risk, and 
restrictions on land use. This tool can also be used to create new composite zones, such as a Sea Level Rise 
Planning Areas.

Enabling Legislation
In B.C., under Section 903 of the Local Government Act, a local government may by bylaw divide the whole 
or part of the municipality or regional district into zones, name each zone, establish their boundaries 
and regulate the use of land, siting and density of buildings and other structures within each one. This 
legislation could be used to create new zones with respect to coastal areas and enable a local government 
to regulate the use of land.

In B.C., provincial guidelines82 call for new construction containing habitable space to be located above 
the historical 1 in 200 year flood event plus an additional safety margin (called freeboard) to deal with 
uncertainty. The resulting elevation is called the Flood Construction Level (FCL). Section 910 of the Local 
Government Act allows a local government to designate as a flood plain, by bylaw, any area where it 
considers that flooding may occur on land. When an area is designated as a flood plain, the bylaw may 
specify setbacks – based on the provincial guidelines – from the water or a dike and what structural 
support is required to elevate a floor system (or mobile home pad) above the flood level. 

Other provinces have similar land use regulations. Zoning restrictions, minimum setbacks, lot grading, 
minimum building elevations and erosion protection are all commonly used to mitigate hazard risks. 

In Quebec, provincial setback lines differ based on regional variations and available data on erosion rates. 
Most of the coastal areas require a 10–15 metre setback for the protection of the shorelines as established 
by provincial policy in 1987. From 2000 to 2004 a group of five ministries conducted precise erosion 
rate research in the Côte-Nord region. From this research setbacks of between 60 and 160 metres were 
suggested for that region, depending upon the rate of erosion. However, these suggested setbacks were 
not set as policy and therefore not widely adopted as regulation. In 2011, a uniform 30-metre setback 
for all other coastal communities was proposed. Many municipalities, however, have requested similar 
research and detailed erosion maps as were completed for the Côte-Nord to ensure they have irrefutable 
data in the face of potential legal challenges by coastal property owners. The Province is in the process of 
commissioning detailed studies on erosion and subsidence rates in order to develop up-to-date precision 
maps for all the shorelines of Quebec. Studies are being completed one area at a time in order of priority 
related to vulnerability.83 

82  Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines (May 2004)
83 

(Désgagnés 2013)

41

Regulatory Tools
