Advantages

Disadvantages

Dikes can be engineered to provide a reasonably high 
level of protection, if adequately maintained.
Dikes can provide protection for high value development 
and maintain or enhance property values. 
Dikes have the secondary effect of containing internal 
drainage on the land side, requiring it to be discharged 
through floodbox structures that can be closed at high 
sea levels, and pumped or opened to release water at low 
tides. This can also be a disadvantage.
The dike crest may be available for use as a recreation 
corridor.

4. Other Hard Protection

Dikes are expensive to construct and can be unsightly. 
They may restrict access to the shore and reduce the 
recreational value of a shoreline. 
Dikes may cause erosion to adjacent unprotected areas. 
Dikes and revetments tend to absorb wave energy and 
therefore will be subject to damage and will require 
ongoing maintenance and investment.
Dikes can result in a loss of intertidal areas and impede 
natural shoreline migration. 

Tool Description
There are several types of other hard protection structures commonly used within a coastal context. 

Groynes are rigid structures typically constructed of riprap or other heavy material extending from the 
upper foreshore or beach into the water. They are located perpendicular to the shore or at a slightly oblique 
angle. Groynes are used to dissipate wave energy, trap the movement of sediment along an intertidal area 
and reduce the seaward transport of sediment (this may cause erosion on one side and accretion on the 
other). They function by realigning short sections of the shore with respect to the incoming waves.

Breakwaters are rigid structures typically constructed parallel to the coast for the purpose of reducing the 
amount of wave energy reaching the shore. A perched beach retained by a submerged structure may be 
considered a subset of this category.

Offshore breakwaters may also be called bulkheads. They are designed to reduce the intensity of wave 
action in inshore waters and thereby reduce coastal erosion or provide safe harborage. Breakwaters may 
also be small structures placed offshore in relatively shallow water designed to protect a gently sloping 
beach or a vertical retaining wall designed to hold and prevent soil from sliding seaward. 

Seawalls are typically vertical concrete or rock structures constructed to provide protection against erosion 
and flooding. Seawalls are built parallel to the shore and generally have a deep foundation for stability.

Sea dike and upgraded 
Oliver Pump Station, 
Corporation of Delta, B.C.  
(Photo: Graham Farstad)

68

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
