The Cost of Sea Level Rise and Adaptation

The cost of coastal adaptation is considered to be the sum of all investments (and maintenance costs) 
necessary to protect coastline and human settlements located in at-risk areas. The estimated annualized 
cost for optimal levels of protection can be modest, frequently less than 0.1% of national Gross Domestic 
Product (GDP). However, adaptation costs may be high relative to the GDP of coastal areas, as there is no 
guarantee protection costs will be absorbed fully at the national level.125

The National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy released a report, “Paying the Price: The 
Economic Costs of Climate Change for Canada” in September 2011. The study noted that Prince Edward 
Island has the largest proportion of its land area at risk due to flooding by 2050 as a result of climate 
change. B.C., on the other hand, has the lowest proportion of its land area at risk but the majority of 
dwellings at risk, due to the high housing density in the Lower Mainland, much of which is low lying. The 
Lower Mainland, consisting of Metro Vancouver and the lower Fraser River Valley, is very vulnerable to sea 
level rise because of a 127 kilometre system of dikes, which were not built with sea level rise factored into 
the design. This area also has very expensive real estate subject to flood risks. 

The report examined coastal lands that would be at risk without sea level rise (baseline case) and the 
additional lands at risk due to climate change. The report evaluated two adaptation strategies for coastal 
areas: climate related development planning and strategic retreat. The first strategy prohibited future 
construction in areas expected to be at risk of flooding by 2050 in a high climate change scenario. No 
additional growth would be permitted, but existing dwellings could be rebuilt following a storm surge.  
The second strategy involves a gradual abandonment of newly flooded areas. The National Round Table  
found that both strategies reduce the overall cost of climate change, but that strategic retreat produced 
benefits one order of magnitude higher than climate-wise development planning. When pursued in 
combination, the two strategies could lower the cumulative cost by $1 to $6 billion over the next century. 
Funding Projects Related to Sea Level Rise in Canada
There is currently no national program for funding shoreline protection or for combating the impacts of 
sea level rise along the 243,000 kilometres of coastline in Canada. Some funding for shoreline protection 
is provided via programs such as the Building Canada Fund, Gas Tax Fund, Disaster Financial Assistance 
Program, Small Crafts Harbour Program, Infrastructure projects, Highway funding programs, St. Lawrence 
Plan, Green Municipal Fund and other federal initiatives.

Funding is also available from Environment Canada, Environmental Damages Fund for the protection 
of and restoration of wildlife habitats in coastal areas. Natural Resources Canada has also made funding 
available to help assess the impacts of climate change and how to mitigate and adapt to them. The 
Regional Adaptation Collaborative program has contributed valuable funding to help provinces, local 
governments and individuals improve their decision-making in regard to adapting to sea level rise, storm 
surges, heavy to intense precipitation events, flooding and other events related to climate change.

125 

(Hallegate 2011)

94


