Bowron, Beate, and Gary Davidson. Climate Change Adaptation Planning: A Handbook for Small Canadian 

Communities. Mainstreaming Climate Change Tools for the Professional Planning Community, Canadian 
Institute of Planners, 2011. Available at:  
http://www.fcm.ca/Documents/tools/PCP/climate_change_adaptation_planning_handbook_for_small_
canadian_communities_EN.pdf
This handbook helps small Canadian communities to prepare a Climate Change Adaptation Plan. The 
handbook helps community planners take the key steps required to plan for climate change adaptation, 
and decision-makers to determine what strategic actions need to be taken. It is especially useful for 
small communities without “in house” planning resources.

 

Bowron, Beate, and Gary Davidson. Climate Change Adaptation Planning: A Nunavut Toolkit. Atuliqtuq: 

 

Action and Adaptation in Nunavut, Canadian Institute of Planners, 2011. Available at:  
http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/NUNAVUT%20
TOOLKIT%20FINAL.PDF
The toolkit focuses on a community development process for small settlements in Nunavut. The toolkit 
reflects the themes identified in the 2008 Nunavut Climate Change Partnership document entitled 
“Atuliqtuq: Action and Adaptation in Nunavut,” which are:
•  To build capacity for climate change adaptation planning within the Government of Nunavut and 

communities

•  To develop tools to collect, publish, share and communicate climate change adaptation knowledge 

across the communities of Nunavut and beyond and

•  To create scientific information that is regionally and locally targeted to help communities adapt to 

climate change and transfer this capability into Nunavut

Bowron, Beate, and Gary Davidson. Climate Change Planning: Case Studies from Canadian Communities. 

 

Prepared for the Canadian Institute of Planners, Ottawa, ON: Canadian Institute of Planners, 2012. 
Available at:  
http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/CASE%20STUDIES%20
FROM%20CANADIAN%20COMMMUNITIES%20FINAL.PDF
Ten case studies are included in this document as part of the Canadian Institute of Planners’ initiative 
to develop and disseminate best practices recommendations for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation planning. Three of the studies concern sea level rise adaptation measures. 
•  Tantramar Dykelands Infrastructure at Risk Study concerns the marshland between New Brunswick 
and Nova Scotia. The natural floodplain has been modified over several centuries to transform the 
salt marsh into arable land interspersed with freshwater creeks and wetlands. Although the system 
has worked relatively well to date, the future projection is that 90% of the dikes will be overtopped, 
flooding 20% of the Town of Sackville once a decade.
Interim Flood Construction Levels (FCLs) were established in Vancouver B.C. following the May 
2011 release of new provincial climate change adaptation guidelines for sea dikes and coastal flood 
hazard land use. Implementation is taking place in stages starting with public education followed by 
advisory standards with developers given the flexibility to select adaptation options provided the risk 
of flooding is mitigated to meet the new Provincial Guidelines. 

• 

•  Flood management planning was undertaken in Delta, B.C. using a visioning process undertaken by 
the Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning (CALP) at the University of B.C. in co-operation 
with the Corporation of Delta. With a population of 100,000, the community has a large farmland 
base and significant urban area (Ladner) protected from flooding by sea and river dikes. The process 
involved the establishment of a Citizen’s Working Group, the definition of climate change scenarios 
and early exploration of adaptation options. Scenarios included Reinforce and Reclaim, Hold the Line, 
and Retreat. 

123


