Advantages

Disadvantages

For a protect strategy, space requirements in areas with 
existing development or high development potential 
may have attendant high acquisition costs.
A lack of public awareness of the flood and erosion 
protection benefits offered by these environments can  
be a potential barrier to implementation.
Wetland creation is not feasible in many areas due to 
unsuitable bathymetric conditions or excessive erosion.

The main benefit is the reduction of incoming wave and 
tidal energy through dissipation in the intertidal zone. 
Coastal wetlands or salt marshes are cost effective relative 
to static man-made coastal defence structures.108
Wetlands can help reduce coastal flooding and stabilize 
shorelines. 
Wetlands can provide highly productive new habitat and 
environmental benefits.
Coastal wetlands have capacity to improve water quality 
and fishing in coastal waters by providing vital breeding 
and nursery grounds for fish and shellfish.
Provided wetlands are not subjected to coastal squeeze 
and that the rate of sea level rise is not too rapid to keep 
pace, wetlands are capable of adapting to sea level rise 
without further intervention or investment.

2. Dune Building or Rehabilitation

Tool Description
Naturally occurring dunes are wind-formed sand deposits representing a store of sediment in the zone 
just landward of normal high tides. They typically occur along wide sandy coastlines, and are dynamic and 
constantly moving. Natural sand dunes provide an effective defence against coastal erosion and flooding 
by dissipating incoming wave energy from a storm surge, wave run-up or extreme high tide. Dunes form a 
barrier similar in function to a seawall but are more dynamic, as they have the ability to adjust in response 
to changes in wind and wave climate or sea level. 

Artificial dunes are engineered structures created to mimic the function of natural dunes. At its simplest, 
artificial dune construction involves placing sediment from dredged sources and shaping them to form 
dunes.106 Dune rehabilitation refers to the restoration of natural or artificial dunes in order to gain the 
greatest coastal protection. Both natural and artificial dunes can be stabilized through vegetation planting; 
vegetation roots help stabilize the dune. Historically, sand dunes have often been removed or altered, 
either because they represent an economical source of construction materials or are a barrier to coastal 
access or views. Naturally occurring dunes have often been seen as conflicting with human settlement as 
these same coastlines are often the most desirable places for development. 

Application
Dunes occur very infrequently along the west coast of B.C. but are more common on the east coast of 
Vancouver Island and the east side of Graham Island in Haida Gwaii. They occur more frequently in Quebec 
and Atlantic Canada, particularly in P.E.I. They are found most frequently along wide sandy coastlines and 
may be used in combination with beach nourishment. 

Dune creation or restoration requires compatible sediment. Vegetative planting or fences may be used 
to stabilize an artificial dune. A 2011 project by the Souris Wildlife Federation on the causeway at Souris, 
P.E.I. has installed snow fencing and spruce boughs in an effort to trap sand to build up the dunes to help 
protect against future storm surges.

105 
106 

(Singh, Walters and Ollerhead 2007)
(Linham and Nicholls 2010)

75

Non-Structural Tools (Soft Armouring)
