Appendix C – Legislative Matrices

British Columbia

B.C. Legislation
Local Government 
Act, RSBC 1996

Key Elements
Regional 
Growth 
Strategy

Key Provisions

Under S. 849, regional growth strategy objectives can include 
protecting environmentally sensitive areas and achieving 
settlement patterns that minimize the risk associated with 
natural hazards.

Responsible Party

Regional Districts

Under S. 850, the purpose of a regional growth strategy is to 
guide decisions of social, economic and environmental growth 
for a period of at least 20 years.

Regional Districts

Official 
Community 
Plan

Zoning bylaw

Floodplain 
bylaw

Land Title Act, RSBC 
1996

Subdivision 
approval 

Registration of 
covenant

Community 
Charter, SBC 2003

Building 
Inspector

Dike Maintenance 
Act, RSBC 1996

Regulation of 
Dikes

Emergency Program 
Act, RSBC 1996

 

Under S. 852, a regional growth strategy can be mandated 
by the provincial Minister of Community, Sport and Cultural 
Development.

S. 875 includes statement of objectives and policies to guide 
land use planning, S. 876 covers bylaw process, S. 877 covers 
content including land use restrictions due to hazards or 
environmental sensitivity, S.878 addresses regional context 
statement.
S. 903 provides authority for local government to regulate 
land use. Regulation includes siting, location of uses on 
land, different uses, servicing standards, minimum areas and 
regulation of density. Also included is the power to prohibit 
any use in a zone.
S. 910 addresses designation of a floodplain by local 
government bylaw, role of Provincial Guidelines, and 
construction requirements in a flood plain including setbacks 
and minimum building elevations.
S. 85(3) allows Approving Officer to refuse subdivision 
approval if he considers it to be against the public interest. S. 
86 allow a subdivision to be refused if the land is subject to 
flooding and other hazards. The Approving Officer may require 
a report by a professional engineer or geoscientist concerning 
how the land can safely be used as a condition of subdivision 
approval with the report included in a restrictive covenant 
on the land title. The conditions under which a subdivision is 
approved are also included in the Land Title Act.
S. 219 can include limiting conditions necessary for the safe 
use of land as required by a Building Inspector, Approving 
Officer or local government. A covenant can also be used for a 
save harmless provision where the owner accepts the risks of 
development and indemnifies government. 
S.55-56 gives authority to the Building Inspector to require a 
qualified professional to provide a report specifying the means 
by which the land can be safely used for the use intended 
prior to a building permit being issued. The covenant must 
be registered on title with the report concerning safe use 
provisions.
S. 2 provides for flood protection dikes to be subject to the 
written approval of the Inspector of Dikes. This includes 
changes in elevation or any other works. A technical review is 
undertaken to ensure Provincial Guidelines are met. 
Covers emergency planning for the provincial government 
and for local governments. Disaster Financial Assistance is 
administered through the Provincial Emergency Program. 

Minister of Community, Sport 
and Cultural Development. This 
provision was exercised once - for 
the Comox Valley Regional District
Local governments (municipalities 
and regional districts)

Local governments (municipalities 
and regional districts)

Local governments (municipalities 
and regional districts)

Approving Officer - typically 
municipal planner or engineer 
appointed by Council but with 
independent role due to statutory 
powers. Approving Officer is 
Ministry of Transportation and 
Infrastructure employee in non-
municipal areas (i.e., electoral 
areas) and smaller municipalities. 

Building inspector for local 
government

Inspector of Dikes (provincial 
government employee)

Provincial government and local 
governments

109


