United Kingdom
The United Kingdom has approximately 2.2 million homes at risk due to coastal or inland flooding. 
Approximately 330,000 homes have a flood risk greater than 1 in 75 years. Insurers have agreed to provide 
insurance in all areas where the flood probability is less than the highest risk threshold. Where the flood 
probability is greater than 1 in 75 years and improved flood defenses are provided, flood insurance for 
households and small businesses will be maintained. Where the flood probability is greater than  
1 in 75 years and no flood defenses are planned, flood insurance for households and small businesses  
is considered on a case by case basis.117

Flood risk has been grouped according to three classes. The low probability Zone 1 consists of lands with 
a less than 1 in 1,000 year flood risk. The medium probability Zone 2 consists of lands with a probability 
of flooding from the sea of between 1 in 200 and 1 in 1,000 years. The high probability Zone 3 contains land 
with a greater than 1 in 200 year probability of sea flooding (or greater than 1 in 100 probability of riverine 
flooding). Under the policy, development should be steered away from Zones 2 and 3 and toward  
Zone 1. This policy statement includes flood risk changes resulting from climate change, particularly those 
associated with sea level rise.118 

Building insurance is not compulsory in the United Kingdom, but such insurance is generally required to obtain 
mortgage financing. Flood insurance is bundled as part of standard home insurance and is included in the 
building and contents policy. Insurers generally do not refuse flood coverage for residential property, regardless 
of flood risk, and as a result, the vast majority of households have flood insurance coverage.119

Key features of the U.K. approach to flood management include a bundled approach to flood insurance, 
a very high penetration rate of 95% for flood insurance, the option for insurers to exclude very high risk 
homeowners in order to avoid the problem of adverse-selection, risk-based flood insurance pricing, partial 
risk assumption by private homeowners through a system of deductibles, variable premiums and on-site 
risk mitigation. Government responsibilities consist of land use planning, risk assessment through the 
development of flood hazard maps and off-site structural protection measures. The Association of British 
Insurers indicated in 2007 that annual flood defense spending needed to increase from £500 million to a 
minimum of £750 million in order to maintain design-specification levels of protection.120

The national government does not have statutory authority for the management of development in flood-
prone areas. These responsibilities have been delegated to regional and local planning authorities although 
they are permissive, not mandatory. Regional and local planning authorities have the authority to develop 
strategies to appraise and manage flood risk through policy development in areas subject to flood hazards. 

Until very recently the national government’s perspective was reflected in a series of Planning Policy 
Statements concerning town planning. Planning Policy Statement 25 concerned national policy on 
development and flood risk in England. This policy ensured that flood risk was taken into account at all 
stages in the planning process to avoid inappropriate development in areas at risk of flooding, and to 
direct development away from the areas of highest risk. These Planning Policy Statements were replaced by 
a single document called the National Planning Policy Framework finalized in March 2012. This document 
retains many of the previous risk management policies, although in an edited form. 

117 
118 
119 
120 

(Sandink, et al. 2010)
(Department for Communities and Local Government, UK Government 2010)
(Sandink, et al. 2010)
(Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE) 2010)

88


