Variations occur in other provinces. Some but not all Nova Scotia municipalities have Municipal Planning 
Strategies or bylaws to regulate zoning and subdivision in place. Municipalities or non-incorporated areas 
must still comply with the provincial Subdivision Regulations under the Municipal Government Act and the 
Environmental Protection Act in Nova Scotia. 

In P.E.I. the Environmental Protection Act requires an environmental impact assessment for undertakings which 
could have a significant effect on the environment including an effect on any unique, rare or endangered 
feature of the environment, or an effect which causes public concern. This legislation has broad application and 
includes specific references to the alteration of wetlands, interfering with the movement of sand on a beach 
or sand dune, and the destruction of natural stabilizing features such as vegetation. As a result, subdivision 
applications are reviewed through the provincial Environmental Impact Assessment process prior to issuing 
development permits. N.B., N.S. and N.L. all have similar environmental provisions in place.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Economic considerations include the cost of allowing or avoiding development in an area 
subject to coastal hazards, the cost of providing flood protection, and the cost of adapting to the risk. In the 
event of a flood, or if the risk increases and increased structural protection is required (e.g. increased dike 
height), these costs may be borne by different levels of government.

Environmental – Environmental considerations involve the effect on the natural environment of the 
subdivision due to sea level rise and coastal hazards. Subdivision regulation can be used to address 
environmental issues such as suitability of land use and development impact.

Social – Various public stakeholders and potential land owners may be affected by the approval or 
refusal to approve a subdivision. An Official Community Plan or a similar guiding document may provide 
a framework for these decisions and provide guidance on the suitability of subdivision development; 
particularly for residential use.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
This tool relies heavily on accurate information and coastal hazard mapping to provide grounds for 
the approval or refusal of a subdivision. Implementation requires that an Approving Officer or similar 
designate exercise their authority to allow or refuse the subdivision of land at risk from coastal hazards. 
Where the nature and extent of the risk has not been determined, the Approving Officer can withhold 
subdivision approval pending a report from a qualified professional. A qualified professional (i.e., engineer 
or geoscientist) can determine mitigation measures that would allow the land use; however the Approving 
Officer still has the discretion to reject the subdivision.

Advantages

Disadvantages

Most local governments have the legal mandate to 
establish by bylaw the conditions under which the 
subdivision of land can proceed.
The role of the Approving Officer provides for some 
degree of separation from political influence. The ability 
of an Approving Officer to protect the public interest 
by refusing to approve a subdivision has been well 
established by case law.
This tool allows the conditions of future development  
to be regulated. 

The loss of potential development value could result 
in resistance from developers. Reducing subdivision of 
coastal land should not be undertaken ad hoc or without 
supporting guiding policy or a strategy in place.
Without the identification of coastal hazard areas at risk 
of flooding and erosion, it is difficult for the approving 
body to decline subdivision on the grounds of safety.
Subdivision approval is discretionary; but is subject to 
the prescribed scope of authority. The quality of decision 
making is dependent on the capabilities of those 
appointed. 

45

Regulatory Tools
