Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Considerations related to these measures are similar to those of dikes. Groynes, breakwaters 
and storm surge barriers also involve high construction costs. For all hard protection, an engineering 
analysis should be undertaken with respect to capital and operating costs as well as risk and impact 
mitigation. 

Environmental – Considerations are similar to those for dikes except for the linear corridor requirements 
of a dike. Groynes, breakwaters and storm surge barriers may cause negative environmental impacts and 
transfer risk onto nearby properties.

Social – Criteria are similar to those of dikes. 

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation of any form of hard protection will, in most cases, involve large costs and funding. Apart 
from the construction costs implementation of hard protection measures may require land acquisition and 
authorized access to undertake maintenance and emergency measures. A particular challenge affecting 
the implementation of a groyne is the potential to transfer risk from one riparian property to another or 
create a negative economic, social or environmental impact.

Example: Sept-Îles, qC hard protection challenges 

In the municipality of Sept-Îles in Quebec, measures to protect against erosion have primarily involved 
riprap structures constructed and paid for by the municipality, sometimes with assistance from the 
Province or private property owners. Property owners require a permit before such measures can be 
implemented, however, many have built riprap structures without permits over the years. 

The result is a patch-work mix of varying quality and integrity. The riprap installed in the bay to protect 
the downtown core from flooding has held up well over the years and appears to be doing its job. The 
bay is relatively protected from winds; some waves do not hit the rocks with as much force as in other 
areas. It has been observed in the areas that extend out from the bay that riprap structures appear to 
have contributed to increasing erosion particularly in the gap areas where the structures are not as well 
constructed or are absent. 

For this reason, in 2000, municipal officials requested that the province conduct detailed research on 
erosion in the area. As a result of this research, all structural measures, save for adding sand to the 
banks, have been prohibited since 2005.

70

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
