Emergency Management B.C. stresses the importance of volunteers in dealing with emergencies of various 
types, including floods. People are encouraged to establish Neighbourhood Emergency Preparedness 
Programs to help individuals and neighbours prepare to be self-sufficient for an extended period. 
Volunteers are also important in the implementation of emergency response plans.

In Nova Scotia, under the Emergency Management Act, each municipality is required to establish and 
maintain an emergency measures bylaw, an emergency measures organization with an appointed 
coordinator, establish an advisory committee consisting of members of the municipal council and prepare 
and approve an emergency measures plan.80 Similar provisions are in place in New Brunswick and Prince 
Edward Island. 

In P.E.I. the Office of Public Safety assists communities in upgrading their existing emergency response 
plans. Their municipal emergency management guide outlines key components and steps to help 
communities to develop plans, create exercises and ensure resources have been identified before an 
emergency occurs. A municipal self-assessment tool helps municipalities identify key areas of focus and 
to ensure hazards are clearly understood. Emergency planning templates are available for municipalities 
and local businesses to create an emergency plan specific to the community or business requirements and 
emergency training is offered to individuals and organizations that have a role to play in an emergency. 

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Economic considerations include the cost and resources of preparing emergency plans, 
co-ordinating with other agencies and obtaining resources for plan implementation. Input in the form of 
assistance – technical and monetary – for the preparation of emergency plans or planning may come from 
higher government departments, agencies, and NGOs.81

Environmental – This tool is not intended to address environmental issues.

Social – The primary objective of this tool is the protection of human life, followed by the maintenance 
of essential services and the protection of infrastructure and buildings. This tool lays the groundwork to 
prepare for a possible emergency and undertake planning measures including the evacuation of an area  
to protect human life. 

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Challenges include securing adequate resources, updating plans and undertaking disaster simulation 
exercises. Staff training is essential and “dry runs” are highly desirable to test the plans and response 
coordination. This requires resources and commitment from dedicated personnel and the coordination  
of multiple stakeholders.

Advantages

Disadvantages

The quality and effectiveness of emergency management 
plans may vary depending on the level of interest and 
resources allocated.
The plans must be updated regularly to remain current.
The monitoring and enforcement of emergency response 
plans require time and resources.

Local governments have the authority to prepare 
emergency management plans for a wide range  
of risks. Sea level rise represents one additional risk  
to be addressed.
The local government has the authority to declare a local 
emergency, which may be due to sea level rise.
Emergency planning demonstrates that hazards are real, 
particularly when public education is included with the 
planning process.
Emergency management starts from the ground up and 
involves teamwork with other agencies and the Province.

80 
81 

(Birch Hill GeoSolutions 2008)
(Birch Hill GeoSolutions 2008)

40

Planning Tools
