Living Shorelines 

Living shorelines, also termed soft stabilization shoreline alternatives, refer to the management of coastal 
areas in ways that protect, restore, enhance or create natural shoreline habitat. Living shorelines employ a 
suite of techniques to minimize coastal erosion and maintain coastal processes. These include the use of 
sills, groynes or breakwaters used in combination with sand, marsh plantings, or other natural materials.

The benefits of living shorelines include engineering benefits such as cost effective absorption of wave 
energy and storm surges as well as the maintenance of natural shoreline dynamics. Environmental benefits 
include improved water quality (by settling sediments and filtering pollution), greater abundance and 
diversity of aquatic species and a linkage between aquatic and upland habitats. 

Living shorelines have typically been designed and implemented using a collaborative approach; working 
with several levels of government, riparian property owners, nature trust organizations and other 
stakeholders.

One of the leading proponents of living shorelines is the State of Maryland. Maryland has over 11,000 
kilometres (7,000 miles) of tidal shoreline along Chesapeake Bay and other coastal watersheds. The 
state faced an annual loss of over 235 hectares (580 acres) of coastal shoreline and a permitting issue 
wherein soft armouring was at a major disadvantage compared to structural protection. Under the 
Living Shoreline Protection Act of 2008, the State of Maryland adopted non-structural “living shorelines” 
erosion control measures as the preferred method to address the impacts of shore erosion induced by 
sea level rise wherever technologically and ecologically appropriate. This legislation does not prevent the 
implementation of hard structural measures, but requires soft or non-structural measures be considered 
first. Adoption of the Living Shoreline Protection Act followed more than 20 years of research on the 
effectiveness of non-structural erosion control in Chesapeake Bay and other sheltered areas.109 

In Atlantic Canada, Nova Scotia and P.E.I. now employ living shorelines approaches. In B.C., communities 
on Vancouver Island and on the Sunshine Coast have used living shoreline approaches; on the west coast, 
living shores approaches are also known as “Green Shores” projects. 

Green Shores Examples from B.C.110

Green Shores is a trademarked program of the Stewardship Centre for British Columbia.  The Green 
Shores program consists of hybrid techniques that promote the sustainable use of coastal ecosystems 
through planning and design that recognizes their ecological features and functions. Their four 
principles consist of preserving the integrity of coastal processes, maintaining habitat diversity and 
function, minimizing marine pollutants to the environment, and reducing cumulative impacts to the 
coastal environment. A key program component is a Coastal Development Rating System intended for 
use by designers, builders and owners to guide Green Shores design and assess design performance.

110

109 
110 

(Management, Policy, Science, and Engineering of Nonstructural Erosion Control in the Chesapeake Bay 2006)
(Stewardship Centre for British Columbia 2012)

83


