Application
This tool is utilized in association with zoning where the development potential is measurable (e.g. the 
number of dwellings units or floor space ratio). Density transfer could apply to any land use but is typically 
applied to residential uses. The development potential of the “sending” site is reduced and the density of 
the “receiving” site is increased. An Official Community Plan or other similar policy document is needed to 
determine both areas at risk and areas where additional density is deemed suitable. 

Density transfer may be achieved using a “density bank” in which a specific density is removed from the 
“sending” site without the need to identify a “receiving” site. Density transfer relies on an administrative 
process to regulate exchanges and a market to determine value. Density transfer could be applied in any 
municipality and would be best used in conjunction with a strategic plan where managed retreat is an 
objective.

Enabling Legislation
The transfer of development potential can occur within the normal powers of zoning. Its application in 
Canada has mainly been for heritage conservation purposes but it could be used as a tool for adaptation 
to sea level rise. 

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – This tool essentially assigns an economic value to a property’s development potential. The 
development potential of areas at risk are then restricted and the value transferred to areas suitable for 
increased density. A market-based mechanism is used to determine the value of the density transfer. 

Environmental – The successful implementation of this tool could protect sensitive coastal areas at 
risk from development activity. Limited development could lead to the expansion of environmentally 
sensitive habitat, allowing intertidal habitats to expand where otherwise they might be reduced due  
to coastal squeeze.

Social – The primary use of this tool would be to reduce the development or redevelopment potential  
of land in areas at risk due to sea level rise.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation requires both an administrative process and a market that provides an incentive to 
developers. Although largely a market-based tool, it requires organization and administrative support  
from the local government.

Transfer of development potential has received considerable interest in planning literature, particularly 
in the U.S.A. where the concept is referred to as “transfer of development rights.” However, the successful 
implementation of the concept has been very limited, as it poses challenges in terms of equity and 
administration for owners of both donor and receiving sites and does not have particularly wide appeal to 
property developers. As an example, the City of Vancouver used a density transfer system for many years  
to encourage heritage conservation; however, this has resulted in more density “in the bank” than could  
be used, leading to a moratorium on density banking.

52

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
