 

This report is a summary of the CALP’s use of 3D visualization techniques and participatory processes 
for the Corporation of Delta, a local municipality facing serious potential consequences from sea level 
rise if quick, decisive action is not taken. The Local Climate Change Visioning project has developed 
compelling visualization techniques to explore visions of the future under climate change. There were 
two main components of this research. Phase 1 constructed frameworks and methods for downscaling 
climate change impact information and visualizing alternative climate futures at the local scale. Phase 2 
tested the influence of these visualizations on the awareness, emotional responses, and motivation for 
behaviour change of the local community participants.

The City of New York. A Stronger, More Resilient New York. New York City, N.Y.: City of New York, 2013.
 

This plan was the result of New York’s Special Initiative for Rebuilding and Resiliency (SIRR) taskforce 
following the impacts of Hurricane Sandy in October 2012.  The plan proposes over 250 initiatives 
designed to strengthen and protect the built environment and citywide infrastructure of New York City. 

The Sustainable Planning Branch, New Brunswick Department of Environment and Local Government. 

A Coastal Areas Protection Policy for New Brunswick. Fredericton, New Brunswick: New Brunswick 
Government, 2002. Available at:  
http://www2.gnb.ca/content/dam/gnb/Departments/env/pdf/Water-Eau/CoastalAreasProtectionPolicy.pdf
This document, the Coastal Areas Protection Policy, is intended to inform New Brunswick communities 
about the government’s plans for protecting that province’s coastal areas, both now and in the 
future. It covers what is important to protect in N.B.’s coastal areas and why, and explains how future 
development activity will be governed using established zones based on environmental sensitivity.

 

Thomson, R. E., B. D. Bornhold, and S. Mazzotti. An Examination of the Factors Affecting Relative and Absolute 
Sea Level in British Columbia. Canadian Technical Report of Hydrography and Ocean Sciences 260, Sidney, 
B.C: Fisheries and Oceans Canada - Institute of Ocean Sciences, 2008. Available at:  
http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/335209.pdf
The report documents and projects global average sea level rise for six “emissions market scenarios” 
based on the 2007 IPCC report. 

 

Weiss Reid, J. Researching the Role of Communities in Integrated Coastal Management in Nova Scotia. 

Independent Research Project, Prepared in partial fulfillment of a Master of Planning at Dalhousie 
University, Halifax, N.S.: Dalhousie University, 2004. Available at: http://www.ecologyaction.ca/files/
images/file/WeissReid.pdf

  Coastal planning includes the development of strategies and policies specific to the character of the 

 

coast, its resources and uses, ultimately providing a framework for decision-making. This thesis explores 
the role of planning in coastal and marine environments. 
The study notes that the need for management of human activity in marine and coastal environments is 
the result of increasing development pressure around the use of and access to natural resources along 
the coastline. It explores current issues affecting Nova Scotia’s coastline including:
•  Threats to coastal development posed by the impacts of climate change;
•  An increase in uses of coastal areas;
•  The decline of marine ecosystems caused by infilling salt marshes, dunes, and beach areas;
•  Pollution generated from land-based human activity in the watershed.

132


