 

 

 

This strategy was developed by the Delta Committee at the request of the Dutch Cabinet to identify 
innovative measures to protect the Dutch coast and the low-lying hinterland against the consequences 
of climate change and to include the interaction with increased river discharge in its recommendations. 
The Dutch coastline consists of 350 km, with 3,600 km of primary flood defenses, predominately dikes. A 
majority of the country’s population lives in low-lying adjacent areas that are below sea level. 
The strategy is based on two pillars: flood protection and sustainability. The Delta Committee stated 
that a regional sea level rise of 0.65 to 1.3 m by 2100, and 2 to 3 m by 2200 should be taken into account, 
including the effect of land subsidence. 
The study contained 12 recommendations as a matter of urgency based on a conclusion that the level  
of flood protection must be raised by at least a factor of 10. 

  Recommendations focused on building with nature by expanding the coast seaward with increased 
beach nourishment (85 million m3 of sand/year from the continental shelf) and strengthened storm 
surge barriers, including island polders. Safety standards were set as: 1/250 a year for fresh water rivers, 
1/2,000 a year for lower tidal reaches, 1/4,000 a year for an extreme water events (e.g., storm surge) 
for coastal regions other than Central Holland and 1/10,000 a year for Central Holland. Limiting the 
consequences of flooding included regulation such as zoning, compartmentalisation, early warning, 
crisis management and contingency planning.

  A final recommendation consisted of setting up a Delta Fund for flood protection at arm’s length from 
the national budget financed by a combination of loans and part of the country’s natural gas revenues. 
The cost of implementing the Delta Programme was estimated to be €1.2 to €1.6 billion per annum until 
2050, and €0.9 to €1.5 billion per annum thereafter to 2100. Costs included strategic land acquisition 
and compensation for damages and loss of benefits. Including maintenance and management.

Department for Communities and Local Government, U.K. Government. National Planning Policy Framework. 

U.K. Government, 2012. Available at: www.communities.gov.uk

This document reflects the current planning policies of the National Government for England and how they 

are expected to be applied. Local planning authorities are called on to “adopt proactive strategies to 
mitigate and adapt to climate change, taking full account of flood risk, coastal change and water supply 
and demand considerations.” Planning for new development is advised to avoid increased vulnerability 
due to the impact of climate change, including suitable adaptation measures and planning of green 
infrastructure. Significant attention is given to risk assessment management in order to avoid the 
transfer or risk and development in high risk areas. Development in vulnerable coastal areas, referred to 
as Coastal Change Management Areas, is given particular attention.

Department for Communities and Local Government, U.K. Government. Planning Policy Statement 25: 

 

 

Development and Flood Risk. U.K. Government, 2010. Available at: www.communities.gov.uk
The U.K. government’s Planning Policy Statement 25 sets out the national policy for Development and 
Flood Risk as it relates to land use planning. PPS 25 explicitly addresses climate change impacts and 
provides direction on including climate change information (including sea level rise projections and 
associated vulnerability and risk assessments) in land use planning by regional, local and urban planning 
authorities in the U.K. A risk-based approach is called for at all levels of government 
Planning Policy Statement 25 has been replaced by the National Planning Policy Framework (see 
reference above). However, the risk management strategy has not been changed and considerable 
detail is provided in PP 25 which is not available in the current and broader based policy framework.

Department of Climate Change and Energy Efficiency. Climate Change Adaptation Actions for Local 

Government. Canberra, ACT: Australian Government, 2010. Available at:  
http://www.climatechange.gov.au/what-you-can-do/~/media/publications/local-govt/localadaption_
localgovernment.pdf

138


