Environmental – Building restrictions as an adaptation tool only address identified hazards including 
natural hazards such as erosion and flooding.

This regulatory tool is not intended to address environmental criteria. Other planning tools that typically 
occur at an earlier stage in the development process should be used to address environmental criteria (e.g., 
growth management policies, easement, land purchase, subdivision, and zoning).

Social – This tool is designed to address public safety. The intent of this tool is to ensure that the occupants 
of a building are not subject to excessive risk. If a building cannot safely be constructed in a particular 
location or if the cost of doing so is economically prohibitive then it will not be constructed, thus reducing 
the risk to people and property. The use of this tool gives priority to the protection of the public.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
In B.C. the Community Charter and Local Government Act authorizes the local government building 
inspectors to withhold the issuance of a Building Permit unless a qualified professional can provide a report 
certifying the land can be used safely for the intended purpose. Unfortunately, there are a limited number 
of qualified professionals for this specialized work. One challenge cited mainly by smaller and more remote 
municipalities is a lack of knowledge as to who is qualified to undertake this specialized work and whether 
the conclusions arrived at are appropriate. In some smaller communities, local government has chosen not 
to undertake a building inspection function and so in these areas, this tool cannot be used.

Advantages

Disadvantages

The key advantage of this tool is its ability to place 
restrictions on building construction until the hazard risk 
has been addressed. 
This tool enables site specific measures to be 
incorporated as an integral part of the construction  
of a building.
An indirect advantage of this tool is its ability to prevent 
the transfer of risk from one property owner to another 
unknowing purchaser. Registration of a covenant on title 
ensures that any future owner or prospective purchaser  
is aware of the site-specific building requirements. (B.C.)

The application of this tool comes late in the 
development process. This can be a concern if a property 
owner is not aware of any potential risk and only finds out 
when a building permit application is submitted.
Local governments may not have the technical resources  
to give guidance in determining the minimum elevation 
for safe building construction (i.e., Flood Construction 
Level). This is a significant concern for local government 
officials with limited resources.
Reliance on a qualified professional introduces the risk 
of retaining a person who lacks the necessary skills. 
In B.C. the Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists are addressing this risk by preparing 
guidelines for qualified professionals working to 
mitigate flood risks and adapt to sea level rise.
Where building regulation or enforcement has not been 
adopted as a local government function, this tool will not  
be available. 

49

Regulatory Tools
