Adaptation Tools

The following section provides an analysis of a variety of adaptation tools and their applicability in 
communities on Canada’s southern coasts. In each case, a general description of the tool is given, its 
implementation is discussed, and enabling legislation is noted. In addition, economic, environmental and 
social criteria are discussed, as are the potential barriers or challenges to implementation.   

A total of 21 tools are identified in this Primer. They have been organized into five general categories:

n  Planning tools identified in this Primer consist of local and regional government planning and 

management objectives and policies, mapping of potential hazards, risk management and emergency 
planning.  

n  Regulatory tools include the regulation of subdivision, land use and buildings. These regulatory tools 

require the approval of a decision maker or “gatekeeper” responsible for the protection of the public 
interest. The gatekeeper may consist of the municipal council, regional board or other form of local 
government, building inspector or subdivision approving officer.

n  Land use change or restriction tools focus on land use change or the restriction of land use other 
than through the regulatory functions noted above. Some of these tools are at the disposal of local 
government and others have the potential to achieve local government goals indirectly, for example  
the acquisition of land through a Land Trust.

n  Structural tools (flood protection works) consist of physical structures on land or in water to protect 
land and buildings from coastal hazards. A wide range of hard protection or armouring works fit into 
this category. This grouping can be further broken down into on-site and off-site works, which are also 
referred to as property-specific and linear shoreline protection measures.

n  Non-structural or soft armouring measures include the creation or restoration of wetlands, sand dune 
building or rehabilitation and beach nourishment. Both sand dunes and beaches are naturally occurring 
features, created by the interaction of wind and waves, and serve to dissipate the energy of storm surges 
and wave action.70

Structural and non-structural protection methods are frequently used in combinations called hybrid 
shoreline protection systems. Examples include ‘living shorelines’, which manage coastal erosion by 
protecting, restoring, enhancing or creating natural shoreline habitat that includes the use of structural 
materials in combination with sand, marsh vegetation and other natural planting for shoreline stabilization.

70 

(The Sustainable Planning Branch, New Brunswick Department of Environment and Local Government 2002)

28


