Retreat or Managed Retreat refers to any strategic decision to withdraw, relocate or abandon private or 
public assets at risk due to sea level rise and associated coastal hazards. Retreat is an adaptive strategy to 
limit the use of structural protection, discourage development in areas subject to sea level rise, and plan  
for the eventual relocation of buildings and infrastructure to areas with no risk or lesser risk.
Avoid involves ensuring new development does not take place in areas subject to coastal hazards 
associated with sea level rise or where the risk is low at present but will increase over time. This may involve 
identifying future “no build” areas within local government planning documents. A wide range of planning 
tools may be involved, leading to a decision to avoid development in areas subject to moderate to high 
risk. An avoid strategy may involve land acquisition or the transfer of development potential to areas of 
lower risk.

These adaptation strategies are not mutually exclusive. Two or more strategies may be applied in different 
geographic areas by the same local government. The most appropriate strategy for a geographic area may 
also change over time. To implement these strategies, a wide range of adaptation tools are available.
Adaptation tools included in this Primer should be considered in the context of information 
gathering, public education and community engagement, all crucial to informed decision-making 
processes within our democratic system.

Planning tools in this Primer include local government growth management objectives and 
policies, mapping of potential coastal hazards, risk management and emergency preparedness.
Regulatory tools include the regulation of subdivision, land use and buildings. These 
regulatory tools are generally prescribed by legislation and require the approval of a decision-
maker or “gatekeeper” responsible for the protection of the public interest.
Land use change or restriction tools focus on the change or restriction of land 
use other than through the regulatory functions noted above. Some of these tools are at 
the disposal of local government and others may be undertaken by private landowners or 
community groups in order to achieve local government goals.
Structural tools consist of physical structures on land or in water to protect land and 
buildings from coastal hazards. A wide range of hard protection and armouring fit in this 
category. 
Non-structural or soft armouring measures include the creation or restoration 
of wetlands, building sand dunes, or rehabilitation and beach nourishment. Both sand dunes 
and beaches are naturally occurring features, created by the interaction of wind, waves and 
sediment. They serve to dissipate the energy of storm surges and wave action. These natural 
features can be mimicked or recreated to provide an adaptive buffer to sea level rise.

Several of these tools are interdependent and should be used in combination. While structural and non-
structural adaptation tools may appear to represent polar opposites, combining them and creating hybrid 
shoreline protection systems may result in synergies and cumulative benefits. As one example, living 
shorelines are hybrid protection systems that use coastal ecosystems to reduce erosion risk and optimize 
natural shoreline functions.

An analysis of each adaptation tool is provided in this Primer. The analysis includes a description of the tool, 
a discussion of implementation methods and an identification of the enabling legislation, where applicable. 
Advantages and disadvantages of the tool are also examined using a ‘triple bottom line’ approach.

4


