Social – This tool primarily minimises risk to building inhabitants and structures themselves. Social 
considerations include the visual impact, which increases as the amount of structural elevation increases. 
For a single family dwelling or townhouse, there is a risk the owner may convert a crawl space or non-
habitable space below the Flood Construction Level to a living area after building occupancy has been 
obtained. This is most likely to occur where the cost of housing is high.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Structural elevation measures are typically required as a condition of building approval. Structural elevation 
measures can be implemented after a building is constructed but incur greater costs. The challenges increase 
depending on the amount of elevation rise required and the site. A large structural elevation rise on a small 
property may not be feasible. The aesthetics of having elevated and non-elevated structures in the same 
community may be a drawback if the elevation change is significant. 

Providing access for persons with disabilities poses an additional challenge. The structural elevation of 
heritage buildings also poses a particular challenge.

Advantages

Disadvantages

By raising the habitable floor elevation to a specified 
design flood event, the risk of flood damage can be 
measurably reduced. 
Structural elevation enhances resilience by providing  
a secondary means of protection where dikes provide  
the first line of defence. 
One indirect impact of structural elevation is greater 
awareness of sea level rise. Although architectural design 
can address visual impact to some extent, a major change 
in elevation for a dwelling or other habitable structure 
serves as a vivid and constant public reminder that 
flooding is a risk that must be addressed. 
Structural elevation is not a permanent solution, as  
sea levels will continue to rise, but may last the lifetime  
of the building.

The cost associated with raising the elevation of 
a building can be considerable. The cost will vary 
depending on the size of the building floor plate, the 
building design and the amount of elevation rise to 
reach the design requirements. Estimated additional 
building costs for new construction may range from 3% 
to 30%. Associated costs may include additional steps or 
handicapped accessibility provisions.
There is a limit to the amount of structural elevation 
which can occur. As structural elevation requirements 
increase (i.e., become higher), the increase in cost is 
geometric, not arithmetic. 
The placement of fill to raise the ground level may not be 
aesthetically attractive if the elevation change is large. 
This is particularly evident on small infill lots. 

3. Dikes

Tool Description
A dike is commonly a linear compacted earthfill structure intended to protect a designated area from 
inundation caused by high water conditions on an adjacent watercourse or floodplain.94 Dikes typically 
form the key defense element in a protect strategy. The primary function of a dike is to prevent the 
inundation of coastal lowlands from the sea under extreme conditions. Sea dikes typically have a flatter 
gradient on the seaward side, for the purpose of dissipating wave energy. This is not necessary on the 
landward side where a steeper gradient is typical to reduce land requirements. In addition, a sea dike will 
typically have toe scour protection consisting of riprap and an under layer of filter rock or geotextile to 
prevent it from being undermined. 

94 

(APEG Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of BC 2012)

64

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
