in some locations24 of B.C. such as on the west coast of Vancouver Island. In the most sensitive areas, much 
of today’s coastal wetlands, barrier beaches and lagoons will be underwater, and coastal structures will 
become increasingly vulnerable to flood damage. 
Quebec
POPULATION 7,903,001 (2011 CENSUS)

The coastal region of Quebec stretches northeast of Quebec City and around the Gulf of St. Lawrence 
for 3,500 km. The Gulf of Saint Lawrence is the world’s largest estuary covering an area of about 236,000 
square kilometres. The Gulf begins in Quebec as the outlet for the Great Lakes which travel along the Saint 
Lawrence River on their way to the Atlantic Ocean. The north coast (Côte Nord region) has 1,825 km of 
coastline. Just over a third of this coastline is comprised of primarily rocky cliffs, 38% is rocky cliffs with 
shallow beach, lagoon or estuary covering over the rock substratum and the remainder of the coastline 
consists of beaches, lagoons or estuaries. The south coast and islands (Bas-Saint-Laurent and Gaspésie-Iles-
de-la-Madeleine regions), are comprised of 1500 km of coastline. Approximately half of the coastline for la 
Gaspésie consists of rocky cliff escarpments, soft clay cliffs, sandy beaches and marshes.25 Over two thirds of 
the Magdalen Islands (Îles-de-la-Madeleine) coastline is sandy beaches, and the rest are soft clay cliffs and 
lagoons. It is estimated that 40% of the Bas-Saint-Laurent coastline is comprised of sandy beaches and the 
rest consists of marshes, rocky cliffs and clay cliffs.26

The province of Quebec consists of 17 administrative regions under provincial jurisdiction of which the 
regions of Côte-Nord, Bas-Saint-Laurent, and Gaspésie-Iles-de-la-Madeleine have coastlines exposed to 
the effects of sea level rise. Within these regions are 121 municipalities, home to a population of over 
400,000 people. Most of the 121 municipalities along the coastal areas apply a 10–15 metre setback for the 
protection of the shorelines. This was established in 1987 by provincial policy. Some municipalities have 
adopted more stringent regulations based on detailed research on local erosion rates and corresponding 
government recommendations. 

Not all coastal areas of Quebec have been or will continue to experience sea level rise in the same way. 
Some areas, such as Sandy Hook in Havre-Aubert on the Magdalen Islands, are in fact increasing their 
coastal reach into the sea through natural processes of erosion and sediment transport. Other communities 
are extending their coastal land area through dredging. Dramatic erosion during storm events is affecting 
the Côte-Nord region; and subsidence is affecting parts of the Bas-Saint-Laurent region and Chaleur Bay 
(Baie-des-Chaleurs) on the east point of the Gaspésie region.27 

24 
25 
26 
27 

(APEG Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of BC 2012)
(L’erosion littorale en Gaspesie COMPRENDRE - GERER - AGIR 2010)
(Juneau, Bachand and Lelievre 2012)
(Morneau 2012)

14


