Advantages

Disadvantages

The cost of land acquisition may limit the ability of a land 
trust to secure and restore environmentally significant 
land. 
The appeal of land acquisitions varies greatly depending 
on the type of environmentally significant land and the 
cost of maintaining or restoring the land.

Land trusts are primarily used for environmental 
protection and enhancement. 
Many donors are more receptive to private stewardship of 
environmentally sensitive land than to donating the land 
to government. 
Many land trusts have an extensive and exemplary record 
of environmental stewardship. 
Fundraising for privately managed land acquisition by a 
land trust offers opportunities that may not be available if 
government is involved.
Local governments can work collaboratively with 
land trusts to identify areas that may be suited to 
environmental protection and play a facilitation role but 
leave the negotiation with the land owner up to the trust.

5. Foreshore Tenure

Tool Description
A foreshore tenure is a legal instrument that authorizes a use or uses over intertidal and subtidal areas. 
This may include a lease or licence of occupation. In B.C., the foreshore generally refers to the area below 
the natural boundary.92 In Atlantic Canada, the foreshore refers to the area below the high water mark. A 
foreshore tenure by itself will not provide protection from coastal hazards. However, it may, in conjunction 
with zoning, provide the mechanism to enable a more comprehensive approach to shoreline management. 

Application
A foreshore tenure could be applied to almost all of Canada’s southern coasts. Foreshore tenure is generally 
granted by the applicable provincial government, although there are some exceptions, most notably 
with respect to harbours established under the Canadian Marine Act. Foreshore tenure does not affect the 
underlying Crown ownership of land (including land under water) but it can be used by a local government 
as part of a comprehensive approach to shoreline management such as beach nourishment, sand dune or 
coastal wetland creation and/or rehabilitation as well as hard structural protection.

A foreshore lease is one form of tenure. In B.C. foreshore leases require a legal survey to define the tenure 
area and are typically issued for periods of 10 to 30 years. The term “water lot” is frequently used as an 
alternative. If the lease is surveyed and has a term of 5 or more years, it can be registered in the Land Title 
Office. A licence of occupation may be used if the term is short, where minimal improvements are proposed 
or for remote sites where survey costs may be prohibitive. A statutory right of way may also be used to 
accommodate a linear corridor within a foreshore area. 

The issuance of a foreshore lease is typically by application to the provincial government or another agency 
with jurisdiction. The interests of riparian owners and First Nations must usually be considered and the 
lease must be consistent with zoning by local government or other applicable authorities. 

In a few instances, a municipality has partnered with the Crown to take over the administration and 
management of foreshore areas. An example is a head lease.  Under this arrangement, the municipality is 
granted long-term tenure over a foreshore area with a revenue-sharing arrangement with the Crown. In 

92 

In B.C., the “natural boundary” is defined in the Land Act as, “the visible high water mark of any lake, river, stream or other body of water 
where the presence and action of the water are so common and usual, and so long continued in all ordinary years, as to mark on the soil 
of the bed of the body of water a character distinct from that of its banks, in vegetation, as well as in the nature of the soil itself.”

57

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
