Planning Tools

1. Objectives and Policies

Tool Description
Setting objectives and policies is a key tool available to local governments to manage development. 
Objectives and policies may be included in a wide range of documents, and have different scope and 
applicability depending on the jurisdiction involved and the planning framework in place. Objectives  
and policies may be included in comprehensive plans, community plans, neighbourhood plans, strategic 
plans, and growth management strategies.  

Objectives are often general in nature and may aim to accommodate future development, protect residents, 
manage risk on land subject to hazards, and protect environmentally sensitive areas. 

Policies are often more specific and may identify how coastal hazards such as erosion and inundation 
should be addressed. Policies may include setbacks to avoid coastal areas at risk, environmentally sensitive 
criteria for development or other measures designed to reduce vulnerability and increase resilience.

Application
Objectives and policies may be used as an adaptation tool in every coastal community in Canada. They may 
also be added to existing policy frameworks such as Official Community Plans or Regional Development 
Strategies. 

Setting objectives and policies often enables implementation of other tools. Implementation may be 
achieved through the use of regulatory tools such as a zoning bylaw or development permit. Land 
acquisition, land trust, structural protection and soft armouring all represent means of implementing 
objectives and policies and other planning tools.

Enabling Legislation
The Local Government Act in B.C. requires all Official Community Plans (OCPs) to identify restrictions on the 
use of land that is subject to hazardous conditions (e.g. flooding) or is environmentally sensitive. An OCP 
must include the approximate location and phasing of roads, sewers and water systems. This may identify 
infrastructure at risk and enable adaptations.

The Local Government Act also allows for development of regional growth strategies. Only ten of 29 regional 
districts have adopted regional growth strategies, however all coastal areas in B.C. with large populations 
are now covered. Regional growth strategies guide decisions on growth, change, and development. They 
cover a period of at least 20 years and include a comprehensive statement on the future of the region and 
social, economic and environmental objectives. Objectives deal with developing settlement patterns that 
minimize risks associated with natural hazards and protect environmentally sensitive areas.

30

Planning Tools
