Structural (Flood Protection Works)

1. Scour Protection

Tool Description
Scour protection is a property-specific structural tool used to protect shoreline structures or building 
foundations from being eroded or undermined due to the effects of moving water. Scour protection 
consists of riprap or structural elements designed to withstand wave action and the force of moving water. 
It can take different forms depending on the application: a scour apron refers to site-specific protection 
around the base of a building or structure whereas a scour blanket refers to measures to protect a covered 
or partially covered asset such as a pipeline, outfall or underground utility from damage by floodwater. 

Application
Scour protection is typically applied to the foundation of a building or structure and is often used in 
conjunction with structural elevation. In this case the scour protection would be implemented around the 
building or structural element foundation. Other commonly used applications include protecting the base 
of transmission towers, bridge foundations, seawalls, and along coastal corridors containing a highway, 
railway or pipeline. Scour protection can be an integral part of a shoreline protection system such as 
armour rock, gabions, concrete slabs, and similar systems.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – There are costs associated with erosion protection measures. A scour apron, typically includes 
an apron of riprap outside the perimeter wall installed down to the depth of the potential scour around the 
site. The surface may include a gravel topping or filter fabric as well as topsoil for landscaping. Other scour 
protection may take the form of pile foundations designed to derive vertical and lateral support below the 
depth of scour. Pile foundations are more expensive than conventional spread foundations, but they are 
not common for single storey residential structures.

A scour apron may be used to support retaining walls of linear infrastructure (e.g. dikes) to ensure the toe  
of the structure is protected. For a submerged structure such as a pipeline, a scour blanket typically consists 
of an armouring of filter stone around the structure and a cover stone above it.

Environmental – Scour protection primarily addresses the protection of building foundations and linear 
structure foundations. Environmental impacts will be limited for buildings, but may increase in magnitude 
where scour protection is introduced along a linear corridor such a seawall, stormwater outfall or a pipeline 
crossing. Intertidal areas are typically associated with high environmental values, and protective measures 
may result in some reduction or loss of environmental quality.

Social – This tool is intended to minimize risk to the foundations of buildings and structures. If the risk to a 
building is reduced, the risk to inhabitants and employees also decreases. 

61

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
