Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Economic considerations include the availability and cost of acquiring, moving and placing 
sand or other suitable beach material on an eroded shoreline. The allocation of costs between individual 
benefiting property owners and the community as a whole may need to be addressed.

Beach nourishment may offer economic benefits as an alternative to or in combination with other forms  
of structural protection. 

Environmental – Beach nourishment may enhance intertidal areas. However, negative effects could 
occur if the material deposited does not match the size and composition of native beach material, if the 
deposited material provides excessive turbidity or if the depth of material deposited buries existing marine 
organisms. 

Social – Social benefits include reduced risk and enhanced property values for waterfront properties, and 
increased use of beach nourishment areas by the public for recreational purposes. 

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Engineering studies over an extended time period are required to determine the rate and extent of 
shoreline erosion and the volume of beach nourishment required to address the sediment deficit. For  
large-scale beach nourishment applications specialized equipment must be used. Ongoing monitoring  
will be required to evaluate the success of the beach nourishment and when additional beach nourishment 
is required.

Challenges include the cost of implementation, supply limitations, lack of specialized equipment and 
expertise, the need for public education and recognition that the job is never finished. 

Advantages

Disadvantages

Beach nourishment provides sacrificial material to be 
eroded, effectively protecting landward areas from wave 
action.
This tool may provide an alternative to the use of hard 
protection such as groynes which can disrupt natural 
processes of sediment supply to a beach.
Beach nourishment can enhance the value of beaches by 
providing a more aesthetically appealing environment.
As sediment is redistributed by the natural forces or 
erosion, it may also have a positive effect on adjacent 
areas not directly nourished.
Beach nourishment may address multiple objectives, 
including environmental enhancement and protection, 
public and recreational access, and hazard reduction.

The use of beach nourishment is subject to a number of 
widespread limitations, including a consistent supply of 
correctly sized sediment for the long-term and a suitable 
foreshore profile.
Beach nourishment can become prohibitively expensive 
if a supply of sediment is not readily available.
The value of aggregate resources including sand is highly 
dependent on the proximity of supply sources to the 
locations in which they are needed.
Beach nourishment is not a permanent solution to 
shoreline erosion. It will require regular monitoring  
and periodic re-nourishment depending on the rate  
of erosion that takes place.
Beach nourishment may affect the productivity of 
intertidal areas.

78

Non-Structural Tools (Soft Armouring)
