Storm surge is one of the more common coastal hazards associated with sea level rise and a significant 
contributor to coastal flooding. A storm surge refers to a temporary increase in the height of the sea due to 
extreme meteorological conditions such as low atmospheric pressure and/or strong winds. A storm surge 
is independent of a high tide, but its impact may be magnified during a high tide. In addition, sea level rise 
accentuates the risks from storm surge activity as higher water levels advance further inland and affect 
areas of higher elevation. It is anticipated that climate change will cause more intense and frequent storms 
in the northern hemisphere and that sea level rise will increase the coastal areas at risk from these events.5 
While a storm surge temporarily raises relative sea level, wave action is a more destructive force associated 
with storms. Shoreline type and exposure to open water will determine wave intensity and frequency and 
therefore the effects of increased wave action and height on erosion and flooding. In addition to relative 
sea level, waves are affected by bathymetry of the near shore (i.e. off-shore depth and topography). 
Increases in sea level may cause wave impacts to reach further inland or overtop defences that were 
previously sufficient, causing damage and flooding. 

Global factors contributing to sea level rise include thermal expansion, melting of glaciers and ice caps, 
the melting of the Greenland ice sheet and the melting of the Antarctic ice sheet. From 1961-2003, melting 
glaciers and ice caps contributed the most to the increase in sea level rise. From 1993 to 2003, the increased 
global rate was due mainly to thermal expansion.

On the B.C. coast, sea level rise has occurred in most locations but at a lower rate than the global average 
of 17 cm/century. Tectonic changes are a major factor on the B.C. coast, with structural uplift occurring on 
the west coast of Vancouver Island and subduction occurring in the Strait of Georgia. Other regional factors 
include the subsidence of alluvial soils in the Fraser River estuary and postglacial rebound. Historic sea level 
rise changes along the B.C. coast include the following:6
•  Prince Rupert 
•  Vancouver  
•  Victoria 
• 
Tofino 

9.8 cm/century
2.0 cm/50 years
3.1 cm/50 years
-16.8 cm/century 

In Nova Scotia, the present rate of sea level rise is higher than the global mean; during the 20th century,  
the increase was about 30 cm. This trend is exemplified at the Fortress of Louisburg National Historic Site 
(Cape Breton, N.S.) where a 1740s ship’s mooring ring is located half a metre below today’s high tide level 
(see following photo).

18th century mooring ring 
at Fortress of Louisbourg  
(Photo: Ambrose MacNeil)

Stanton, Davis and Fencl 2010)

5 
6  Marine Environmental Data Service, Fisheries and Oceans Canada
8


