Primer Focus Area

This Primer focuses on adaptation tools for Canada’s southern coasts, namely the provinces of British 
Columbia, Quebec, and the Atlantic Provinces of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island and 
Newfoundland and Labrador. At 243,000 kilometres, Canada’s shoreline is the longest in the world.19 Although 
largely undeveloped, coastal areas contain many of Canada’s major population and economic centres. 
British Columbia
POPULATION 4,400,057 (2011 CENSUS)

The B.C. coastline has a total length of approximately 29,000 km,20 including the mainland and all islands 
from Haida Gwaii south to Vancouver Island and the Gulf Islands. Although dominated by rocky high-relief 
shores, the B.C. coast also has numerous long, twisting, deep fjords and some wide sand beaches. Over 80% 
of the population of B.C. lives within 5 km of the coast.21 

In the Lower Mainland, where the majority of the population resides, there are many areas close to sea 
level which are vulnerable to the potential effects of sea level rise. In most cases these areas are currently 
protected by structural features such as dikes. Areas currently protected by dikes include the City of 
Richmond, Ladner and waterfront areas in New Westminster, Port Moody and White Rock as well as all Delta 
and Surrey farmland. Waterfront areas in Vancouver – including Stanley Park, Southlands, False Creek, West 
and North Vancouver and the Vancouver International Airport are also protected by dikes. In addition, most 
Musqueam, Tsawwassen, Semiahmoo, Tsleil Waututh and Squamish First Nations lands, all in the Lower 
Mainland, are close to sea level. Over 4,600 hectares of farmland and over 15,000 hectares of industrial and 
urban residential areas in the Lower Mainland are located within 1 metre of sea level.22 On Vancouver Island, 
almost all communities have ocean exposure and many have vulnerable coastlines or low-lying areas. 
Along the northern coast of B.C., critical infrastructure in the Port of Prince Rupert is close to sea level, as  
are most settlements on Haida Gwaii. 

In all, some 59 of 161 municipalities and 14 of 29 regional districts in B.C. consist of coastal communities 
or have some direct coastline exposure. British Columbia’s Local Government Act allows local governments 
to manage land use in coastal areas using a range of tools including official community plans and 
zoning bylaws. Flood Hazard Area Land Use Management Guidelines released by the province in 2004 
recommend a minimum Flood Construction Level of 1.5 m above the natural boundary of the sea and 
a minimum building setback distance from the sea of 15 m. While local governments are required to 
consider these guidelines when establishing floodplain bylaws, the manner in which the guidelines are 
applied varies by municipality. 

A 2011 study commissioned by the B.C. government23 recommended sea level rise planning levels of 
0.5 metres (50 cm) to the year 2050, 1.0 metres to the year 2100 and 2.0 metres to the year 2200 (see Figure 2) 
plus adjustments for local rates of vertical land movement (uplift or subsidence). Sea level rise will not take 
place uniformly along the B.C. coast. Variations will occur due to the settlement of alluvial soils, aquifer 
reduction caused by fresh water removal, and tectonic change as the Juan de Fuca plate subducts beneath 
the North American plate. In addition, because of land subsidence in the Fraser River delta, relative sea level 
will increase by an additional 1–2 mm per year, primarily affecting Richmond, Delta, Queensborough and 
the New Westminster Quay. Post-glacial rebound and tectonic uplift partially mitigate global sea level rise 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 

(Natural Resources Canada 2007)
(Marine Planning Office, Province of B.C. n.d.)
(Mason 2005)
(Ausenco Sandwell 2011)
(Ausenco Sandwell 2011)

13


