Public education and community engagement are vital components of decision making in a democracy 
and may also be legally required as part of a local planning process. They include addressing key issues 
such as:

•   How much risk is acceptable to a community?
•   How should the risk be managed? 
•   What will the cost be and who will bear it? 

Public education may be challenging. While sea level rise has recently gained increasing attention in 
the public domain, the consequences and the need for adaptation may still be a “hard sell” because the 
time frame is very long and changes will be incremental. This challenge must be recognized and taken 
into consideration when designing public education and community engagement processes. Long term 
residents can play an important role in communicating past extreme events.

Canadian Examples
In British Columbia, the Corporation of Delta partnered with the University of British Columbia’s 
Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning (CALP) to develop future sea level rise scenarios using 2D 
and 3D visualisations. The visual materials generated by this project have been used by staff and a citizens’ 
working group to help them understand the impacts, assess the policy implications and measure the social 
acceptability of various adaptation strategies.

In Quebec, following the release of coastal erosion research in the Côte-Nord, over 100 information sharing 
meetings and consultations took place. These meetings played an important role in developing public 
support for new coastal setbacks.

Scenario-Based Planning

Due to the ‘forward looking’ nature of climate change planning and its reliance on climate models to 
estimate future impacts, there is an inherent degree of uncertainty involved in the planning process. 
One popular community engagement approach for addressing and accounting for uncertainties in 
climate predictions is scenario-based planning.

Scenario-based planning will typically begin with the creation of a baseline scenario of current land 
use, management and other stressors. Predicted changes (e.g. expected/proposed development, sea 
level rise and increased storm surge) and possible elements of interest (e.g. ecological and community 
infrastructure features) to these stressors are then modelled to create future scenarios. From these 
scenarios, decision makers can begin to identify thresholds of change – that is, points at which 
significant impacts will be realized and various management options can be ‘tested’ to see which 
maybe most effective.

Several tools have been developed in the United States to help specifically with scenario based 
planning. These include CommunityViz, NatureServe Vista and SLAMM (Sea Level Affecting Marshes 
Model). 

 

26


