will be low outside of risk areas. For example, flood insurance would generate minimal demand in Regina, 
Saskatchewan compared to Ladner, B.C.

Economic viability is another challenge. Economic viability is threatened when large losses affect an area 
with a large concentration of policy holders. Flood insurance rates would be prohibitively expensive for 
those concentrated in high-risk areas. Some, but not all, of this risk can be addressed through reinsurance 
(i.e., spreading the risk among insurance companies to other areas with different risks).

Both of these challenges are related to a problem called adverse-selection. Demand for flood insurance 
is concentrated in areas with a high risk of flooding; few people would voluntarily purchase insurance 
specifically to protect against flooding if they did not live in a flood risk area. Adverse selection violates  
a basic principle of insurance, which is to spread the risk. Adverse selection results in insurance rates that 
are prohibitively high for homeowners.

There are several ways to address these challenges of flood insurance. By bundling flood insurance with 
other forms of insurance, such as fire and theft, insured risks are spread over a larger pool of properties, 
across different perils and different rating areas. Bundling broadens the risk pool and is used to lower costs 
and increase insurance penetration rates. Bundling insurance to include flood or erosion coverage can 
make it unavoidable, or effectively compulsory. 

The United Kingdom uses this approach to overcome the challenges of flood insurance. There, flood 
insurance, whether inland or coastal, is included with other insured risks and is required by mortgage 
companies. Bundled coverage is also in place in Japan, Spain, Portugal, Switzerland and Israel. 

Another approach is to subsidize the cost of flood insurance. In the U.S.A., flood insurance is partially 
subsidized by the federal government. Flood insurance is intentionally kept affordable in order to enhance 
participation rates. Insurance premiums cover administration costs and operating costs in most years, but 
not the full cost of major disasters.

Flood insurance is widely used in developed countries with extensive coastal lowlands. The following 
provides a summary of how flood insurance is used in the U.S.A., Germany and the United Kingdom.

United States of America
The National Flood Insurance Program is administered through the Federal Emergency Management Agency 
(FEMA) in cooperation with private insurance agencies. The National Flood Insurance Program was created by 
the U.S. Congress in 1968 to help provide a means for property owners to financially protect themselves. Prior 
to that, private flood coverage was excluded from standard homeowner policies and the primary recourse of 
flood victims was government disaster assistance. In its early years, even subsidized rates did not provide a 
sufficient incentive for homeowners to purchase flood insurance or for communities to join the National Flood 
Insurance Program. Subsequent legislative changes in 1974 and 1994 required federally insured or regulated 
lenders to require flood insurance as a condition of granting or continuing a loan for a building located in the 
Special Flood Hazard Area of a participating community. The federal government, through FEMA, sets flood 
insurance premium rates, identifies flood zones and risks and sets the standard for construction in floodplains. 
Local governments are responsible for adopting development regulations that meet National Flood Insurance 
Program standards. Close to 90 private insurers sell flood insurance policies and collect flood insurance 
premiums on behalf of the government but do not assume any risk.

Currently over 20,000 U.S. communities participate in the National Flood Insurance Program. This program 
offers flood insurance to homeowners, renters, and business owners. The incentive is affordable rates of 
flood insurance and coverage up to USD$250,000 for a residential building and up to USD$100,000 for 
personal property (i.e., contents). In return, participating communities agree to adopt and enforce bylaws 
(referred to as ordinances in the U.S.A.) that meet or exceed FEMA requirements designed to reduce the risk 

86


