Advantages and Disadvantages of Potential Insurance Tool for Adaptation to Sea Level Rise

Advantages

Disadvantages

There is an expectation that government will provide 
protection against the consequences of natural disasters. 
The consequences of sea level rise are not intentional 
and residents of areas subject to disasters would not feel 
personal responsibility for flooding. 
Administration of flood insurance claims in other 
jurisdictions is not without controversy. 

Would better align risk management objectives. 
Homeowners who choose to purchase in areas at risk 
would pay for the additional risk and those in low risk 
areas would benefit from risk avoidance. Flood insurance 
provides an incentive for an avoid strategy.
Flood insurance premiums will spread risk with other 
geographical areas also subject to flood risk. 
Owners of residential dwellings would be able to obtain 
insurance for the actual value of improvements (current 
Disaster Financial Assistance limit in B.C. is $300,000).
Flood insurance could be linked with other forms of 
insurance commonly used in Canada (e.g. house and 
mortgage insurance)
Homeowners in high risk areas incur minimal risk at 
present. 

2. Emergency Management
Emergency and post disaster management refer to measures undertaken during and after a disaster. 
Emergency Planning and Preparedness refer to measures undertaken in advance of a disaster and is discussed 
in the section on Planning Tools. Emergency management is distinguished from the Emergency Planning 
and Preparedness for two reasons. First, some emergency management functions are provincial or federal 
responsibilities (i.e., disaster financial assistance and declaration of provincial disaster) whereas emergency 
planning and preparedness is primarily a local government responsibility. This Primer is intended to focus on 
tools available to local government. Second, emergency management takes place during and after a disaster, 
and so cannot be considered a proactive adaptation tool like the utility tools in this Primer.

Emergency activities can be structured in four components: (1) preparedness; (2) response; (3) recovery; 
and (4) mitigation122 or adaptation. The first is discussed under the Emergency Planning and Preparedness 
tool while the following two are discussed in this section. Response refers to warning and evacuation 
measures. Recovery refers to clean-up and compensation for losses. The final component may include any 
of the tools in this Primer and demonstrates that the process is iterative. 

Enabling Legislation
In an emergency situation, federal responsibility (all departments and agencies), where applicable, is governed 
by the Emergency Management Act. The Act also allows for the development of programs to deal with emergency 
events. The federal government has exclusive responsibility for emergencies related to war, armed conflict and 
counter-terrorism. The federal government also has responsibility for First Nations reserves through Aboriginal 
Affairs and Northern Development Canada. This Act recognizes the interests of the provinces, territories and local 
authorities in relation to federal assistance provided during a provincial emergency.123

The Emergency Program Act is the applicable legislation in B.C. Further information about this Act is 
provided under the Emergency Planning and Preparedness tool. The provincial emergency flood response 
is detailed in the British Columbia Flood Response Plan, adopted in April 2012.

The B.C. Dike Maintenance Act of 1996 describes the powers and duties of the Inspector of Dikes, 
orders that may be issued, consequences of failure to carry out an order, offences and appeals. Diking 

122 
123 

(Birch Hill GeoSolutions 2008)
(Birch Hill GeoSolutions 2008)

90


