Sea dike upgrade costing study, Metro Vancouver, British Columbia99 

In 2011 the Province of  British Columbia published a Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for 
Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use (Ausenco Sandwell, 2011), which defined sea level 
rise planning levels and flood protection requirements. The guidelines propose an updated design 
methodology for coastal flood protection measures, including new design criteria for sea level rise, 
subsidence, storm surge and wave effects. 

To gain a greater understanding of what implications the new guidelines would have on the ground, 
the B.C. Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations commissioned a study to develop 
a ‘Class D’ estimate of the cost to adapt flood protection to meet the rise in sea level predicted by 
2100. The study covered the Metro Vancouver coastal shoreline and the Fraser River shoreline as far 
east as the Port Mann Bridge, some 250 km of shoreline and dikes in total. Within this area both diked 
shorelines and low-lying areas that may require protection as sea level rises were considered.

The report calculated the full costs of establishing flood protection for seismic stabilization of the 
diking system and the sea level rise projected to take place by 2100, including land acquisition, 
engineering, environmental design, relocation of utilities, and upgrading of pump stations and other 
associated works. The total estimated cost was $9,470 million, including a 50% contingency factor.  
The estimated cost for sea level rise alone, including associated infrastructure and property acquisition 
was $2,810 million. 

99
Environmental – Environmental impacts include the lost intertidal areas from the seaward expansion of a 
dike, or of agricultural and open space areas where a landward expansion is involved. The presence of dikes 
impedes natural shoreline migration – an adaptive response of coastal habitats to rising sea levels.

Social – Social implications include the loss of housing due to land acquisition, impacts on views and loss 
of community amenities in and around dikes.

Dikes provide some assurance of land stability and therefore tend to promote shoreline development. 
Unless such structures are designed to meet a long-range design standard, they can lead to a false sense of 
security. If Flood Construction Levels and setbacks are not increased due to sea level rise and other climate 
change effects, the level of protection provided by a dike will gradually decrease over time. 

Hard protection methods have a long history of successful use, although in the rare instance of failure, the 
consequences can be very severe. Dikes can also provide a secure corridor, such as a road or trail, and often 
enhance recreation value.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Apart from the high costs for construction, dike implementation measures require land acquisition for the 
linear corridor occupied by the dike as well as access for maintenance and emergency measures. The linear 
corridor may affect numerous landowners and may require the relocation or removal of other structures. 
There are often environmental and social issues as outlined above.

99 

(Ausenco Sandwell 2011)

67

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
