Dune protection 
consisting of sand 
fence with spruce 
boughs, Souris 
Causeway, P.E.I. 
(Photo: D. Jardine)

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Economic considerations include the availability and cost of sand, the cost of equipment, the 
frequency with which dunes need to be replenished and the cost of the land or foreshore lease required  
to accommodate dune building.

Environmental – Dune creation and protection is one of the limited number of tools likely to have a 
positive environmental impact (e.g., increased habitat in limited supply, tool that works with nature).

Social – On one hand, creating dunes on the landward side may result in a loss of land for existing residents 
and property owners. Loss of views and direct access to coastal areas may affect existing residents. On 
the other hand, opportunities for passive recreation could increase. Implementation could serve as a 
community education process about non-structural measures used in adapting to sea level rise. Creating 
dunes on the ocean side may not be feasible.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation requires an area (land or foreshore) to be set aside, a source of sand to create or 
rehabilitate dunes, equipment to move and shape sand into a dune, and funding sources for capital 
and ongoing maintenance. Key challenges include the availability of suitable material, the cost of 
implementation and maintenance, the equitable allocation of project costs between benefiting property 
owners and society as a whole, and obtaining public support. 

As an example of potential challenges, Sept-Îles in Quebec has a regulation107 banning all structural 
protection for private property owners, except for sandbanks. Construction of these banks requires a 
provincial permit which the Province will not presently issue to individuals, a challenge to the cohesive  
use of this tool.

107  Règlement No. 02-2005, Règlement do contrôle intérimaire relatif aux zones de risque d’érosion littorale en bordure du fleuve Saint-Laurent 

et de l’estuaire de certaines rivières du territoire de la MRC de Sept-Rivières (Regulation number 02-2005, Interim regulation related to 
erosion risk zones along the St. Lawrence and for certain river estuaries in the RCM of Sept-Rivières). Adopted in 2005, dated in 2010.

76

Non-Structural Tools (Soft Armouring)
