Nova Scotia
POPULATION 921,727 (2011 CENSUS)

The province of Nova Scotia has 13,300 km of jagged coastline that includes some 3,800 coastal  
islands, bays and estuaries.36 Development in Nova Scotia tends to be clustered with a high intensity  
of residences along the coast. The Province of Nova Scotia estimates 70% of the province’s population 
lives on or near the coastline.37 

Much of Nova Scotia is considered highly sensitive to sea level rise and has been experiencing extensive 
construction and creation of parcels in scenic coastal locations – many of which will be in hazard zones in 
a few decades.38 The south coast and eastern shores of Nova Scotia have been shown to have significant 
sensitivity to sea level rise and associated storm impacts.

The Province of Nova Scotia includes 55 municipalities, three regional municipalities, 21 rural municipalities 
and 31 towns – the majority of which are on the coast or in areas potentially subject to coastal hazards 
associated with sea level rise. The Province has delegated land-use, or zoning powers, to the municipalities 
through the Municipal Government Act and the Halifax Regional Municipality Charter. These powers allow 
municipalities to develop planning strategies and bylaws to regulate land use. In spite of this, only about 
45% of provincial land has comprehensive municipal plans or land-use bylaws in place.39 Development on 
the shoreline continues with no buffers mandated except for a few designated protected beaches. 

Nova Scotia has in place a Coastal Management Framework, which provides a foundation for governments 
and citizens to work together to ensure the sustainable use and protection of coastal areas and resources. 
The provincial priority coastal issues include coastal development, coastal access, sea level rise and storm 
events, working waterfronts, coastal water quality, and coastal ecosystems and habitats. This Framework 
provides an outline of how the province plans to move forward in protecting and maintaining its valuable 
coastal resources.

In 2002, the Province of Nova Scotia created a Provincial Oceans Network, which is comprised of 
representatives from provincial departments and agencies with responsibilities and interests in coastal 
and ocean management. Chaired by the Department of Fisheries & Aquaculture, the Provincial Oceans 
Network serves two core functions: 1) to provide advice and expertise in implementation of the Coastal 
Management Framework, and 2) to facilitate coordination on coastal and ocean management issues and 
initiatives within the provincial government.40 

The Government of Nova Scotia has made coastal management a priority with the release of its State of 
Nova Scotia’s Coast Report. This Report provides baseline information on the province’s coastal areas and 
resources which will be used to develop a Coastal Strategy. A draft of the Coastal Strategy was released in 
2012 and one of the key objectives is that buildings and infrastructure be located, built and maintained  
in a manner that minimizes impacts from rising sea levels and storms.

Present rates of relative sea level rise differ all over Nova Scotia due to varying rates of vertical land 
movement across the province. Estimates of relative SLR for Nova Scotia range between 0.7 to 1.4 m  
by the end of the century.41

36 
37 
38 
39 
40 
41 

(Province of Nova Scotia 2009)
Ibid
(Shaw, et al. 1998)
(Province of Nova Scotia 2009)
(Province of Nova Scotia 2009)
(Province of Nova Scotia 2009)

17


