Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation requires that an Official Community Plan designate a DPA. This includes an amending bylaw 
and public hearing. Once a DPA is in place, a resolution of approval is required from the local government for 
a specific development. The main challenge is preparing background studies of hazards and environmentally 
sensitive areas to justify the DPA.

Advantages

Disadvantages

Hazardous areas must be documented and identified 
prior to their designation. Smaller jurisdictions may lack 
the necessary planning or technical resources. 
The use of a Development Permit is an additional 
procedural requirement for a developer or landowner. 
However, the additional time by itself can be as little as 
four weeks and a Development Permit can be processed 
concurrently with a rezoning or subdivision application. 
Objectives and guidelines need to be well crafted. A 
Development Permit cannot be turned down by the local 
government if the specified objectives and guidelines are 
met. This can be an advantage as well as a disadvantage.

The use of a Development Permit enables land use 
planning objectives to be implemented prior to a 
development proceeding. 
A DPA can be included in an Official Community Plan 
with a narrative describing the objectives that justify the 
designation and specifying the guidelines for addressing 
the objectives, accompanied by a map.  
The scope is very broad, as it includes subdivisions, 
building construction (whether or not a building permit 
is required) and alteration of land (e.g. re-grading, soil 
removal or soil deposition). 
The use of a Development Permit allows for an 
independent professional to address risk (i.e., professional 
engineer with relevant expertise) at the applicant’s 
expense.
No change in existing legislation is needed to create  
a Sea Level Rise Development Permit Area or Coastal 
Hazard Development Permit Area.
Use of this tool requires a notice to be filed in the Land 
Title Office. As a result, any purchaser is deemed to be 
notified of hazardous conditions. 

4. Building Regulation

Tool Description
Local communities have a tools which can be used to influence the manner in which buildings are situated 
and constructed.

Application
This tool is applicable to all building construction or significant retrofits. The use of this tool is the last 
opportunity to avoid exposure to hazards, including coastal hazards.

Enabling Legislation
Under the terms of the Constitution Act, building regulation in Canada is the responsibility of provincial and 
territorial governments. The Canadian Commission on Building and Fires Codes works with stakeholders 
and researches to develop a model National Building Code. Most provinces and territories have adopted 
the National Building Code or adapted it with variations and additions. The National Building Code does 
not have specific design requirements to protect buildings from coastal hazards but does ensure that 
buildings are constructed to certain safety and design standards.

47

Regulatory Tools
