In Newfoundland and Labrador, responsibility for land use planning is shared by the provincial, federal, 
municipal, Innu Nation and Nunatsiavut governments. The Department of Municipal Affairs generally 
focuses on communities, although the Urban and Rural Planning Act provides a broader mandate that 
includes regional planning, the setting of plan objectives and policies, zoning and implementation 
measures. The Department of Environment and Conservation oversees ownership and use of the seabed 
within harbours and bays in the province and reviews all applications for land use to ensure compliance 
with existing regulations and policies.

The Department’s Policy for Development in Shore Water Zones establishes criteria for issuing permits for all 
development activities in and affecting shore water zones.86 This policy does not permit infilling, drainage, 
dredging, channelization, or removal of surface or underwater vegetation on or along shore water zones 
which could aggravate flooding problems. Shoreline activities on crown land are covered by provincial 
rules, though some municipalities do have development guidelines that restrict what can happen in 
the buffer zone. All individuals applying for unencumbered Crown land in Newfoundland and Labrador 
must maintain a 15 metre buffer zone between the shoreline and the boundary of the issued title though 
there is a reduction to 10 metres for residential lots and some older land grants are exempt. As in other 
provincial jurisdictions, municipalities and regional planning authorities can implement measures under 
their own plans and bylaws to protect coastal areas from sea level rise, flooding, erosion or other hazards. 
Newfoundland and Labrador has two regional planning authorities responsible for planning issues in their 
respective areas. As an example, the regional planning authority for Corner Brook – Humber Valley has 
included climate change adaptation as an issues to consider in their planning process.87

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Land use restrictions, by their nature, confer development rights, with different rights for 
different zones and areas. While these restrictions have significant economic implications, they may be 
introduced in the public interest, for example, to meet changing community needs and manage competing 
interests and conflict.

Environmental – Regulation may facilitate identification and protection of environmentally sensitive areas 
and manage environmental hazards.

Social – Regulation and zoning must be balanced to accommodate future population needs, while 
protecting infrastructure from hazards and locating essential services in low risk areas.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation measures include the adoption of a zoning bylaw or other land use regulation by a local 
government. Challenges include having the information resources or capabilities to identify areas at risk 
and the degree of risk to be addressed. Related tools include topographic mapping to identify the location 
of areas at risk, and engineering expertise to address appropriate protection or adaptation measures 
needed to avoid the risk or reduce the risk to acceptable levels. Technical requirements to address coastal 
flood risks may be expensive. Public acceptance may also pose a challenge.

There may be challenges in cases where there is conflicting information on appropriate land use 
restrictions. For example, in Quebec, Côte-Nord established a setback line using the probability of a  
1-in-100 year flood event. This conflicted with previous proposal to establish setbacks using the probability 
of a 1-in-25 year flood event. This situation has resulted in potential grounds for legal challenges.

86  A shore water zone means the land that is intermittently occupied by water as a result of the naturally fluctuating surface water level in 
a body of water which can be either a fresh or salt water body and, in either case, the low water mark and high water mark of the water 
body defining the edges of the shore water zone. 

87  See draft Humber Valley Regional Land Use Plan 2011-12.

43

Regulatory Tools
