Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation typically occurs following an engineering analysis of risk and appropriate mitigation measures. 
A design drawing is produced, showing the minimum requirements to implement the erosion/scour protection 
measures. The contractor or other responsible party then constructs the scour protection according to the 
specifications provided. The tool may be implemented in conjunction with other requirements as determined 
by a building inspector, approving officer or the terms set within a covenant on title.

Challenges can occur if the extent of the risk increases over time or is not known or identified, with the 
result that scour protection measures are not requested. If there are no gatekeepers responsible for public 
protection, the risk to a specific building or infrastructure corridor may be overlooked even if the property 
owner is conscientious. In the absence of regulatory requirements or regular inspection, information 
resources can provide general guidelines alerting a property owner to the benefits of scour protection in 
areas subject to flooding and sea level rise.

Advantages

Disadvantages

Provide a barrier to protect the foundation of a building 
or other structure from wave action or other form of 
rapidly moving water. 
The presence of erosion/scour protection provides two 
secondary messages:
•  a vivid and constant public reminder to passers-by that 

the site is subject to flooding or inundation risks; and 

•  a reminder that adaptation measures have taken place.

Aesthetic disadvantages include the often harsh 
appearance of the erosion/scour protection. This can 
often be mitigated by providing an erodible top to cover 
the scour protection or provide a more gradual grade 
away from the building. 
Where services are provided to a building, the erosion/
scour protection will only protect services within the 
scour protection area, not the services beyond.
Costs can be significant and include designing, 
transporting, installing and maintaining erosion/scour 
protection. 

2. Structural Elevation

Tool Description
Structural elevation can be achieved in several ways, including: raising the ground elevation with the 
placement of structural fill; raising the elevation of habitable areas within a building; or raising the entire 
building by using stilts, foundation walls or similar elevating structures. This tool is mainly used for new 
construction but can also apply to a major addition or retrofit. This tool is also sometimes referred to as 
super elevation or dry floodproofing.

Application
This tool can reduce the risk of damage to buildings and infrastructure by raising their elevation. The 
increase in elevation above the natural ground level can be determined through a risk assessment by a 
qualified professional or in accordance with local government requirements, guidelines or policy. In rural 
areas, this tool typically involves the use of fill to raise the elevation of a house or other buildings above a 
flood plain or other flood hazard. In urban areas where lot areas are smaller, this tool may involve creating 
non-habitable space (crawl space or cellar) in areas subject to flooding. A combination of fill and building 
design changes may be used for new development on a neighbourhood level or for infill redevelopment 
within an existing area. 

62

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
