In Quebec, the Ouranos consortium brings together expertise concerning climate change and adaptation 
to provide data for decision makers. Since 2000 they have worked in collaboration with various universities 
to research erosion rates in coastal zones. Additional work identified adaptation strategies for the 
municipalities most at risk from sea level rise. This collaborative research proved instrumental in the 
development of subsequent municipal regulations.

The Government of Newfoundland and Labrador has made a three-year commitment to establish a new 
Coastal Erosion and Mapping Program so that data and reports will be available to all communities for 
planning and development purposes. The New Brunswick District Planning Commissions manage and 
plan for development in their areas and provide advice to the province and municipalities with respect 
to community planning. As an integral part of their mandate, Planning Commissions provide access to 
building inspectors, GIS technicians and a development officer to communities in their regions. In Halifax, 
Nova Scotia, the local government has a current project to develop wave modeling for Halifax Harbour as 
a critical addition to the ongoing development of the Halifax Regional Municipality’s overall adaptive land 
use planning approach.

Fisheries and Oceans Canada – Aquatic Climate Change Adaptation Services  Program 68

In 2011 the Government of Canada committed $16.5 million for implementation of a five-year aquatic 
climate change program called the Aquatic Climate Change Adaptation Services Program. This program 
is funding:

•  Research projects to expand our understanding of how climate change will impact the delivery  

of Fisheries and Ocean’s Canada programs and policies;

•  The development of adaptation tools to enable integration of climate change considerations  

into the delivery of Fisheries and Oceans Canada programs and policies, including work to:
–  Develop high resolution modelling of changes in extreme sea level and ocean waves; 
–  Produce high resolution digital elevation models in intertidal and shallow zones.

68

Public Education and Community Engagement
Public education and engagement help communities to increase their understanding of how communities 
may be directly affected by sea level rise now and in the future. Recent adaptation programs suggest a 
shift towards stakeholder engagement, improved planning tools and governance processes and away 
from technical solutions and physical measures alone.69 A collaborative approach to adaptation offers 
an opportunity to improve public understanding and generate support. Ideally, public education and 
community engagement should take place throughout the adaptation process to ensure transparency  
in the decision-making process. Approaches to engagement may include:

•  Understanding how communities may be directly affected by sea level rise now and in the future  

by applying various tools and approaches, such as visualizations, scenarios and mapping;

•   Making information available from a wide variety of sources;
•   Holding public information seminars, workshops and conferences.

68 
69 

(Fisheries and Oceans Canada 2013)
(Barron, et al. 2012)

25


