Framework for Decision-Making

Communities need adaptation strategies and tools to minimize the long-term economic, environmental 
and social impacts of sea level rise on development in coastal areas. 

Adaptation strategies can be grouped into four broad categories:57

Protect is a reactive strategy to protect people, property and infrastructure from sea level rise and is 
typically the first response considered. Protecting the coastline through structural mechanisms such as 
dikes,58 seawalls and groynes has been the traditional approach to dealing with sea level rise in many parts 
of the world.59 Such measures range from large-scale public projects to small-scale efforts by individual 
property owners. Protection strategies tend to be expensive and may have limited long-term effectiveness 
in highly vulnerable locations.60 

A protect strategy alone creates an expectation that coastal defences will be maintained in perpetuity, which 
may lead to a false sense of security. It may also compound risk by encouraging further development behind 
dikes and other structural protection elements, thereby increasing the number of people and amount of 
property at risk if these fail. Protection strategies are especially attractive if the costs of protection are borne 
by governments at different levels (i.e., if individual property owners bear little or no risk) and if land use is not 
managed with a long term perspective by local governments. 

Communities may use a protect strategy as an interim measure, providing time to implement a retreat 
or avoid strategy; however the strategy should be recognized as a temporary solution and not used to 
encourage further development.

Other forms of protection can take place. There is growing recognition of the benefits of non-structural (soft 
armouring) protection measures, including beach nourishment and coastal wetland restoration and creation. 
These measures can be implemented as sea levels rise, and may complement or supplement structural 
protection. Such non-structural adaptations can enhance the natural resilience of the coastal zone and can be 
less expensive than structural protection, which can lead to unwanted effects on erosion and sedimentation 
patterns if not properly implemented.61

Accommodate is an adaptive strategy that allows continued occupation of coastal areas while changes are 
made to human activities and/or infrastructure to adapt to sea level rise. Accommodation can also involve 
retrofitting a building or making it more resilient to the consequences of sea level rise. Accommodation 
measures for new construction include the use of structural fill to raise the elevation of habitable space, 
restricting building areas subject to flooding to garages, crawl space or other nonhabitable uses, and 
increasing setbacks from watercourses. Strategies such as covenants indemnifying governments from the 
consequences of coastal hazards may also be used to reduce local government liability. 

Retreat (or Managed Retreat) refers to any strategic decision to withdraw, relocate or abandon private 
or public assets at risk due to coastal hazards. Retreat is an adaptive strategy designed to limit the use of 
structural protections, discourage development in areas subject to sea level rise, and plan for the eventual 
relocation of buildings and infrastructure to areas with no risk or a lesser risk. Communities in Prince 
Edward Island have applied this strategy where storms have resulted in significant shoreline loss. 

57  Note: Although these strategies are commonly used, there is considerable variation in their organization and description. Other 

approaches include Preserve, Business as Usual and Attack (based on Land Reclamation).

58  The spelling of dike and dyke (also dikeland and dykeland) are both commonly used in Canada. The term dike is preferred by the 

Government of B.C. and has been used throughout this report except where the spelling of dyke is contained in a legislative reference  
or publication.
(Adaptation – Coastal Zone 2007)
(Adaptation – Coastal Zone 2007)
(Adaptation – Coastal Zone 2007)

59 
60 
61 

21


