Information Gathering
Information gathering in the context of this Primer refers to the identification of the potential effects of sea 
level rise, the identification of areas at risk from associated coastal hazards and the assessment of vulnerability. 
This provides a baseline and serves to guide decision makers, stakeholders and the community. Such 
information can be converted and used to spatially depict “coastal hazard zones” or “sea level rise planning 
areas” (see Figure 6 – Sketch of Coastal Hazard Mapping Components).
Mapping environmental constraints and opportunities can demonstrate land sensitivity, including: lands 
vulnerable to sea level rise; increases in tidal surges; changes in low and high tides; increases in coastal and 
riparian flooding; changes in high and low water tables; and impacts on aquatic and terrestrial habitats. 
Before determining possible responses, a discussion of sea level rise should take place. Relevant topics may 
include the following:
•  How will the environment change? 
•  What impacts can be anticipated?
•  What areas are at risk?
•  What is the nature and magnitude  

  Figure 6 - Sketch of Coastal Hazard Mapping Components65

UPLAND

Cross-Section

The Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium 
(PCIC) also provides climate services 
and information to users across British 
Columbia. PCIC recognized that climate change impacts do not affect every region of the province in the 
same way and so developed the Plan2Adapt tool. Plan2Adapt generates maps, plots, and data describing 
projected future climate conditions for regions throughout British Columbia. The impacts can be viewed 
by sector – agricultural, infrastructure, hydrology and land use planning – or by impact category – sea level 
rise/storm surge or possible flooding.67 

(Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd. 2011)

65 
66  Note the presence of dikes or other flood protection work has not been factored into the analysis and the floodplain areas have not been 

prepared with high-resolution digital elevation models. Information displayed should be considered preliminary and used to highlight 
areas requiring high resolution coastal floodplain maps.
(University of Victoria n.d.)

67 

24

of the risk?

•  What is the value of property and  

buildings at risk?

•  What infrastructure (including  
transportation links) is at risk?

•  What is the overall community  

vulnerability?

Canadian Examples
In British Columbia the B.C. Ministry of 
Environment has prepared an online 
inventory of information resources 
including a series of maps showing 
potential coastal flood hazard areas in 
B.C.. These display potential year 2100 
floodplain areas based on approximate 
flood construction levels (incorporating 
sea level rise).66

T s u n ami

2200 Sea Level Rise Planning Area

2200 Flo odplain Limit
2 1 0 0   F l o odplain Limiit

2100 Sea Level Rise Planning Area

2 0 1 0   F l o o d p l a i n   Limit
M e a n   S e a   L e v el

OCEAN

Plan

UPLAND

Tsunami

2200 FCL

2100 FCL

OCEAN

2010 FCL

Mean Sea Level


