Advantages

Disadvantages

Although not currently widely used, this tool is within a 
local government’s zoning authority.
This tool is market-based and could be structured so local 
government requirements are limited to administrative 
costs.
Transfer of density potential could be combined with 
land acquisition in which the local government acquires 
ownership of the land and transfers the development 
potential to the former owner elsewhere in the same 
municipality.
Density transfer may provide a less costly alternative 
to land acquisition (whether voluntary or through 
expropriation). 

This tool depends upon the assumption that every parcel 
of land has development potential that can be quantified 
and transferred to an alternative location. 
Density transfer has limited potential for small 
communities or ones with a static or declining 
population.
Owners of coastal properties may resent land use 
restrictions or “down-zoning” if they perceive no 
imminent risk.
As a voluntary undertaking, the transfer of development 
potential may not prevent the development of areas at 
risk from coastal hazards.

3. Easements and Covenants

Tool Description
An easement is a legal agreement in which one landowner grants the use of some real property rights to 
another for a specific purpose. It represents an interest in land but not the right of exclusive possession. 
It can be used to allow access over, use of or other limitation that benefits one piece of land (known as 
the dominant tenement) and burdens another (known as the servient tenement) without resulting in a 
change of ownership. In B.C., a statutory right-of-way is similar to an easement. This B.C. variation is used 
to avoid the need for two properties, one with a dominant and the other with a servient tenement. The use 
of a statutory right of way is restricted to a government body, Crown Corporation or similar entity. Both 
covenants and easements “run with the land”, meaning they bind current as well as future owners.88

A covenant can be used to restrict the use of land for a particular purpose. In B.C. and P.E.I., a covenant can 
also be of a positive or negative nature requiring an undertaking by a landowner. Examples of positive 
undertakings would be requirements to plant trees or to maintain privately owned flood protection works. 
Restrictive or negative requirements would include a limitation on development for flood protection 
purposes or prevention of the use of fill. 

In Quebec, the Civil Code of Quebec makes provision for servitudes. A servitude is a charge on one parcel 
of land for the benefit of another. A servitude closely corresponds to an easement. Each of these legal 
instruments can be used to restrict part or all of a property for a particular purpose without the need for  
a change of ownership.89 

Application
An easement, covenant, right-of-way or servitude can be registered on the title of any piece of property; 
however, the agreement of the property owner is required. Easements are commonly used to provide 
the right of access through a property. A statutory right-of-way is similar but involves a public body. Both 
typically involve a legal survey or explanatory plan registered as a charge on the property title. 

A covenant is a written agreement between two or more parties to limit the use of the land in a particular 
way or require the land be used in a particular way. For an easement, statutory right-of-way or covenant  
to be enforceable, a purchaser of property must be given notification of its existence. The purchaser is 

(Richardson and Otero 2012)

88 
89  For a more detailed discussion, see Conservation Easements, Covenants and Servitudes in Canada A Legal Review, Report No. 04-1,  

North American Wetlands Conservation Council (Canada). 

53

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
