return the head lease transfers responsibility for management and environment issues to the municipality.  
Head leases are not commonly issued to municipalities unless there is demonstrated business case with a 
high benefit to the Province.

Example of Foreshore Tenure from West Vancouver head lease, B.C. 

Since 1974, the District of West Vancouver has held a head lease with the Province of B.C. for the 
management of land covered by water from the high water mark extending 1,000 m into Burrard Inlet. 
Only the foreshore areas controlled by the Vancouver Port Authority and the B.C. Ferries Terminal in 
Horseshoe Bay are excluded. As a result of this partnership, a new 30 year head lease will commence  
in 2014. 

The lease covers any community purposes under the Community and Institutional Crown land policy. 
This includes public access infrastructure such as walkways, seawalls, boat ramps, piers, wharves, and 
five marinas. Utility works are included, as well as natural enhancements such as groynes, rock reefs 
and riprap. The lease authorizes subleases and includes a revenue sharing agreement with the Province 
of B.C., while the District of West Vancouver assumes management responsibility and liability under 
the head lease. The head lease is subject to the rights of riparian owners or occupiers of adjoining land. 
The District also has adopted Official Community Plan policies to protect the foreshore and a 5 year 
foreshore protection plan. A number of enhancement works are currently underway with the active 
support of affected riparian owners.

Enabling Legislation
In B.C. foreshore leases and licences of occupation are typically granted by the Province under the Land Act. 
The Local Government Act provides for local government regulation over the surface of the foreshore area 
through Official Community Plans and zoning authority. 

The province of Nova Scotia has a Beaches and Foreshores Act which allows for grants or leases of any tidal 
flat, beach or foreshore. The N.S. Department of Natural Resources issues leases on submerged crown lands 
for commercial purposes such as wharves, marinas, power generation, utility cables, etc. 

In Newfoundland and Labrador, the Lands Act, Section 7, provides for a reservation of shoreline on Crown 
lands that border a lake, pond, river, the seashore or foreshore, and that are granted, leased or licensed to 
another party, that a 15 metre wide strip of land is maintained as a reserve by the province. The Lands Act of 
Newfoundland and Labrador also gives authority to the provincial government to issue leases on foreshore 
areas for aquaculture licensing. 

On P.E.I., water lots in waterfront areas can be privately owned. The Department of Fisheries and Oceans 
administers the licensing and leasing of aquaculture operations via the Fisheries Act. The infilling of 
harbours, such as a project in Summerside in 2002, requires federal approval under subsection 35 of the 
Federal Fisheries Act.

New Brunswick has had the authority under Common Law to issue foreshore leases or grants for oyster 
fishing, for up to a 10 year period, since 1866.

58

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
