Grannis, Jessica. Adaptation Tool Kit: Sea-Level Rise and Coastal Land Use: How Governments Can Use Land-

 

Use Practices to Adapt to Sea-Level Rise. Washington, DC: Georgetown Climate Centre, 2011. Available at: 
http://www.georgetownclimate.org/sites/default/files/Adaptation_Tool_Kit_SLR.pdf
This tool kit, prepared by Jessica Grannis with assistance from students in Georgetown Law’s Harrison 
Institute for Public Law, provides local and state governments and their citizens with practical 
knowledge to help adapt to sea level rise in a prudent and balanced manner. The Tool Kit offers a menu 
of currently available legal devices that can reduce the harmful impacts of future sea level rise. A strong 
theme of the Tool Kit is that local governments have significant legal authority and tools now to plan for 
future changes. The 18 tools identified in this document are grouped under planning tools, regulatory 
tools and spending tools. Each tool is described, and how it can be used to facilitate adaptation outlined, 
examples of how the tools have been used are also included. Finally, the Tool Kit also provides a top-
level analysis of the advantages and disadvantages of each tool.

Hirschfield, Daniella, and Brian Holland. Sea Level Rise Adaptation Strategy for San Diego Bay. U.S.A.: ICLEI 

 

Local Governments for Sustainability, 2012. Available at:  
http://www.icleiusa.org/climate_and_energy/Climate_Adaptation_Guidance/san-diego-bay-sea-level-
rise-adaptation-strategy-1
This report sets out projected impacts of climate change in San Diego Bay and calls for development of 
an official adaptation strategy. The report was prepared through a collaborative regional stakeholder 
process that included most public agencies and private sector representatives with a major interest in 
the future of San Diego Bay. The report identifies key vulnerabilities and recommends action including: 
public education, stakeholder engagement, incorporation of future risks from sea level rise in FEMA 
maps associated with Flood Insurance Studies, incorporation of sea level rise change into local and 
regional plans, and clear and consistent regulatory guidance from regulatory agencies. 

 

Rozum, John S. and Sarah D. Carr. Tools for Coastal Climate Adaptation Planning: A guide for selecting tools 
to assist with ecosystem-based climate planning. Coastal-Marine Ecosystem Based Management Tools 
Network and NatureServe 2013. Available at  
https://connect.natureserve.org/toolkit/ebm-tool-network/climate-adaptation-planning-tools.
The purpose of Tools for Coastal Climate Adaptation Planning is to provide the information necessary for 
coastal natural resource managers and community planners to select appropriate tools for their projects. 
This guide focuses on spatially explicit solutions for climate-related planning. It provides detailed 
information on a set of key tools that either alone or used in conjunction with other tools can facilitate 
multi-sector climate adaptation planning (i.e. climate adaptation planning that incorporates elements 
of ecosystem health and social wellbeing) and describes the utility and role of tools in relevant planning 
processes. The guide focuses on software and web-based tools that help incorporate data (geophysical, 
environmental or socioeconomic) and specialized analyses into the planning process. This guide is 
targeted at practitioners and decision makers involved in coastal zone management, natural resource 
management, protected area and habitat management, watershed management, conservation, and 
local planning in the coastal United States including the Great Lakes. The information and tools in this 
guide are also highly applicable to many inland and international regions.

Stanton, Elizabeth A, and Frank Ackerman. Florida and Climate Change - The Costs of Inaction. Tufts 

 

University, 2007. Available at: http://www.ase.tufts.edu/gdae/Pubs/rp/Florida_hr.pdf
This report examines the potential costs to Florida if greenhouse gas emissions continue unchecked. 
To do this, it compares an optimistic scenario (“rapid stabilization”) and a pessimistic one (“business-as-
usual”). 

  Within the two scenarios identified, the report estimates monetary values for four major categories:

• 

loss of tourism revenue, if the more unpleasant climate of the business-as-usual case makes Florida 
no more attractive year-round than it is today in its slowest season (autumn);

135


