Executive Summary

Climate change is here, increasing global loss of life and property damage as weather patterns change. We 
now know that with climate change comes rising seas – and that this sea level rise will dramatically affect 
Canada’s southern coastal communities.1 These communities  will require resilience and adaptive capacity 
to ensure their long-term sustainability. 

Coastal hazards associated with sea level rise include:
•   Coastal inundation and reduced drainage capacity;
•   Coastal erosion;
•   Changes to coastal habitats and loss of wetlands such as salt marshes;
•   Reduction in coastal sea ice; and
•  More frequent and intense storms, storm surge and wave action.

This Primer provides an introduction to past and future sea levels, an overview of four different adaptation 
strategies, a recommended framework for decision making and finally a total of 21 adaptation tools to 
support local adaptation action. 

The B.C. Ministry of the Environment commissioned the preparation of this Sea Level Rise Adaptation 
Primer for Canada’s Atlantic and Pacific coasts. Although this Primer was prepared in B.C., legislative 
provisions, policies and local government applications discussed in this Primer include B.C., southern 
Quebec and the Atlantic coasts of New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland  
and Labrador. Coastal communities along Hudson Bay and in the Arctic face a different set of vulnerabilities 
and were not considered within the context of this research.
Adaptation strategies to sea level rise can be grouped as follows:

Protect

Accommodate

Retreat

Avoid

Protect is a reactive strategy to protect people, property and infrastructure from sea level rise and is 
typically the first response considered. Protecting the coastline through structural mechanisms such as 
dikes, seawalls and groynes has been the traditional approach to dealing with sea level rise in many parts 
of the world. With increasing sea level rise and coastal vulnerability, this strategy may be prohibitively 
expensive and have limited long-term effectiveness in highly vulnerable locations.
Accommodate is an adaptive strategy that allows continued occupation of coastal areas while changes 
are made to human activities and/or infrastructure to adapt to sea level rise. Accommodation can also 
involve retrofitting a building or making it more resilient to the consequences of sea level rise. Other 
accommodation measures may include liability reduction, such as a covenant indemnifying governments 
from the consequences of coastal hazards regardless of protection works undertaken.

1 

(Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 2007).

3


