Delcan. Cost of Adaptation - Sea Dikes & Alternative Strategies. Final Report, Victoria: Province of British 

 

 

Columbia - Forests Lands and Natural Resource Operations, 2012.
The purpose of this study, commissioned By the Ministry of Forests Lands and Natural Resources, was 
to develop a ‘Class D’ estimate of the cost to adapt flood protection measures in the Lower Mainland 
to meet the rise in sea level predicted by 2100. The study area covered the Metro Vancouver coastal 
shoreline and the Fraser River shoreline as far east as the Port Mann Bridge, totaling over 250 km. 
The estimated cost of adaptation to sea level rise by 2100 from the study totalled $9,470 million. Of 
this $880 million was for structural flood protection; $350 million was estimated for utility impacts, 
pump stations and flood boxes; and $1,580 million was for property acquisition. The estimate also 
included costs for seismic upgrading which were estimated at $3,250 million. In addition to this, the 
estimate included monies for environmental requirements ($90 million) and site investigation, project 
management and engineering costs of $190 million. Finally, the estimate included a 50% contingency  
of $3,160 million to address the high-level uncertainty.

Forbes, D., G. Manson, J. Charles, K. Thompson, and R. Taylor. Halifax Harbour Extreme Water Levels in the 

Context of Climate Change - Scenarios for a 100-year Planning Horizon. Geological Survey of Canada Open 
File 6346, Ottawa, Ontario: Geological Survey of Canada, 2009. Available at:  
http://www.halifax.ca/regionalplanning/documents/HRM-OF_v5.pdf
This study provides the scientific basis for a set of plausible scenarios for a 100-year planning horizon  
for coastal areas in Halifax, Nova Scotia.
The HRM Regional Municipal Planning Strategy (RMPS), adopted by Council in August 2006, included 
policies to address climate change. The RMPS recognized the effects of climate change, including 
sea level rise and storm surges, on Halifax Harbour and other coastal areas in HRM and endorsed the 
precautionary principle as an important policy consideration.

 

 

Forbes, D., G. Parkes, G. Manson, and L. Ketch. “Storms and shoreline retreat in the southern Gulf of St. 

 

Lawrence.” Marine Geology, 2004: 169-204.
This article summarizes storm related shoreline retreat in southeastern Canada. Storms play a major role 
in shoreline recession on transgressive coasts (i.e., sea level rise relative to the land, with the shoreline 
moving toward higher ground). In the southern Gulf of St. Lawrence (GSL), southeastern Canada, long-
term relative sea level rise off the North Shore of Prince Edward Island has averaged 0.3 metres/century 
over the past 6,000 years (>0.2 metres/century over 2,000 years). This has driven long-term coastal 
retreat at mean rates >0.5 mm/annum but the variance and details of coastal profile response remain 
poorly understood. As one example, Charlottetown tide-gauge records show mean relative sea level rise 
of 3.2 mm/annum (0.32 m/century) since 1911. A further rise of 0.7 metres ±0.4 metres is projected over 
the next 100 years. 

Frail, J. Community Sea-Level Rise Resource Requirements. Clean Nova Scotia and N.S. Climate Change Centre, 

 

2009.
The goal of this project was to identify and create an inventory of sea level rise adaptation resource 
needs from a sample of Nova Scotia’s coastal communities. The intent of this study was to gain a general 
perspective from a varied sample of coastal communities on what is needed to move forward with sea 
level rise adaptation. This information was gathered through a series of qualitative interviews.

125


