Marlin, Amanda, Jeff Ollerhead, and David Bruce. New Brunswick Dyke Assessment Framework: Taking the First 

Steps. St John, N.B.: New Brunswick Trust Fund, 2007. Available at:  
http://www.mta.ca/research/rstp/NB_Dyke_Assessment_Framework_ETF_Final_Report_c.pdf

  Many salt marshes in New Brunswick have been diked and drained, but as sea level continues to rise, it 

will become more and more costly to maintain dikes. This report identifies 3 options: reinforce, realign or 
remove the dikes and allow the salt marshes to return. Salt marshes act as buffer areas which naturally 
absorb the impact of wave action and flooding. The removal of certain dikes, allowing the return of salt 
marshes, is one adaptive response to sea level rise; however, it is not an easy or obvious choice. In some 
regions of New Brunswick, such as the Tantramar Marshes, reinforcement or realignment of dikes will 
likely be preferred due to the vital infrastructure they protect.
In order to discuss the future of a given dike, a systematic method is needed to evaluate the dike and 
the land uses it may protect. The goal of this project was to develop a tool that communities can use to 
assess a local dike for possible salt marsh restoration. Criteria for the assessment of dike infrastructure, 
ways to measure each criterion, and the degree of difficulty or cost are identified.

 

Marlin, Amanda, et al. Examining Community Adaptive Capacity to Address Climate Change, Sea Level Rise 

 

and Salt Marsh Restoration in Atlantic Canada. Submitted to the Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
Program, Sackville, N.B.: Coastal Wetlands Institute, 2007. Available at:  
http://www.mta.ca/research/rstp/CCIAP_Project_A1106_Final_Report1.pdf
This report focuses on the ecologic, economic, social and policy conditions under which a community 
might employ dyke removal and salt marsh restoration in the Bay of Fundy region as an adaptive 
response to future climate change and sea level rise. It is a multidimensional study involving six separate 
but linked research activities including the monitoring of a restored marsh at Musquash, N.B. as well 
as looking at some of the main planned salt marsh restoration projects in the Maritime provinces. The 
importance of community consultation is discussed and a brief discussion on the policy environment for 
salt marsh restoration in N.B. and N.S. is presented.

Mason, G. K. “On the Coastal Populations of Canada and the World.” Canadian Coastal Conference 2005. 

 

Dartmouth, N.S.: Geological Survey of Canada-Atlantic, 2005.
This paper provides a national assessment of the vulnerability of Canadians to coastal processes, hazards 
and changing climate requires. The paper concludes that relative to the rest of the world, the percentage 
of Canadians living in the coastal zone is higher and growth is occurring at a higher rate, though mean 
population density is much lower. Compared to the global coastal population, the Canadian coastal 
population is very small, and the contribution of Canada’s coastal population growth to that of the 
global coastal population is barely significant.

National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy. Paying the Price: The Economic Impacts of 

 

Climate Change for Canada. Climate Prosperity Series Report 04, Canada, 2011. Available at:  
http://nrtee-trnee.ca/climate/climate-prosperity/the-economic-impacts-of-climate-change-for-canada/
paying-the-price 
This report provides the results of the first national study to estimate the economic consequences of 
climate change to Canada under four separate scenarios involving two factors: global GHG emissions 
and Canadian economic and population growth. The focus is on the economic impacts and cost-
effectiveness of adaptation strategies for three representative areas: timber supply, coastal areas and 
human health. The report finds that flooding damages to coastal dwellings, resulting from climate 
change induced sea level rise and storm surges could cost between $1 billion to $8 billion per year  
with higher-than-average cost impacts in Atlantic Canada.

127


