Non-Local Government Adaptation Tools

Insurance and emergency management are also essential adaptation tools. Insurance plays almost no  
role in Canada, but is widely used in other developed countries. Emergency management is present in  
all provinces, but responsibility is shared with senior governments.
1. Insurance
Insurance is widely used to encourage sea level rise adaptation in other developed countries with extensive 
shorelines and coastal areas at risk. However, it is not currently a tool available to local governments, and its 
availability in Canada is very limited.111 

Insurance premiums are commonly based on estimates of previous losses incurred. While this approach 
can discourage asset investment within high-risk hazard areas, it also puts pressure on local, provincial 
and federal government to provide “protection” against the hazard. Flood insurance due to overland flows 
(such as storm surge or high river levels,) surface water flooding or flooding caused by groundwater is not 
available to homeowners in any province in Canada, though it is available for commercial development. A 
2004 survey of 2,100 homeowners by the Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction reported that close to 
70% believed they were insured for flood damages.112 

In Canada, provincial and federal governments provide financial support when uninsurable disaster-related 
property damage occurs. A drawback to such government relief in contrast to private insurance is that it tends 
to create distance between a household’s actual exposure to risk and the household’s perception of risk.113 
This distance between actual and perceived risk can encourage people to reside in flood-prone areas with  
the understanding that government will bear the cost of some flood-related damages.114

According to the insurance industry, certain conditions must be in place in order for insurance to be a viable 
tool; these conditions include:

1.  Mutuality – a large number of people must combine to form a risk pool or community.

2.  Need – there must be a need for insurance to cover an anticipated risk such as flooding or erosion.

3.  Ability to be assessed – the peril must be measurable and quantified in terms of possible losses of 

economic value. 

4.  Randomness – the risk  must be independent of the will of the insured and the event must not be 

predictable, except in a general way.

5.  Economic viability – the risk community must be able to cover the anticipated losses.

6.  Similarity of threat – the risk community must be exposed to the same threat and the occurrence of 
anticipated damages must result in the need for funds in the same way for each member of the risk 
community.

The success of insurance depends on how these six conditions are addressed. 

Not all of these conditions are present for flood insurance in Canada. The biggest challenge to the 
introduction of flood insurance in Canada is mutuality. The risk of flooding does not apply equally 
throughout a province or throughout most communities; it is limited to specific areas. Property owners 
most exposed to a flood risk will be motivated to purchase flood insurance. Demand for flood insurance 

111 
112 
113 
114 

 (National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy 2011)
 (Sandink, et al. 2010)
 (National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy 2011)
 (Hallegatte 2006)

85


