Implementation Measures and Challenges
Key challenges in the acquisition of land include obtaining the necessary funds for a land purchase, 
agreeing on fair market value and obtaining political support for land expropriation. Land expropriation 
is typically undertaken by a local government but may include a provincial government agency. Strategic 
or Official Community Plans may identify properties needed for future land acquisition and, if so, make 
provisions for funding these acquisitions. 

Example of Land Acquisition from Bas-Saint-Laurent, Quebec

In 2010 in the Bas-Saint-Laurent of Quebec, 100 homes were destroyed due to a storm event which 
eroded seven metres of shoreline. In response, the Province of Quebec offered to compensate 
homeowners for relocation, and the properties were then offered for sale to the municipality for $1.00. 
The role of the Province in this case allowed the municipality to acquire the land at risk and gain control 
of it to prevent future development. 

Advantages

Disadvantages

An important tool for implementing linear protection 
measures (e.g. dikes) where existing land ownership 
boundaries do not allow a cost effective configuration  
for shoreline management. 
Land purchase may be used in combination with other 
tools to reduce the cost of flood protection (e.g., dike 
vs. seawall). This will require a comparative analysis of 
options that includes the cost of land and structural tools.
Where necessary, expropriation enables property 
acquisition if a voluntary purchase is not possible.
Land purchase may also be the preferred outcome of 
a cost-benefit analysis where other options are more 
expensive. 
Land purchase can be a key element in a managed  
retreat strategy.

This tool is primarily used to protect urban development 
and may include the high costs of acquiring and 
demolishing existing building improvements. 
Land acquisition involves the use of scarce financial 
resources. Both local and senior governments may be 
reluctant to set aside funds for land acquisition unless 
this is part of a capital improvement project. 
Expropriation has the disadvantage that price is not 
controlled by the acquiring agency. 
Expropriation is typically seen as an option of last resort 
and is not typically viewed favourably by the general 
public or land owners.
The availability of land offered for public acquisition often 
has a short window of opportunity following the decision 
of an owner to sell the land or the death of an owner.

2. Transfer of Development Potential

Tool Description
This tool refers to the transfer of a property’s development potential under current zoning provisions from 
one site or property to another. If a parcel is considered at risk, the “as of right” development potential can 
be relocated to another area of land or parcel not at risk. 

Density transfer is primarily a voluntary, market-based concept in which the transfer of development 
potential offers protection for sensitive coastal resources and removes it from hazard areas. The tool can 
direct development away from the area at risk by designating the “donor” or “sending” area and allocating  
it to an appropriate “receiving” area where development or increased density can be safely accommodated. 

51

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
