Columbia, Land Trust Alliance of B.C., The Land Conservancy (TLC) of B.C., Nature Action Quebec, the Nature 
Trust of New Brunswick, the Island Trust in P.E.I, and the Nova Scotia Nature Trust.

Application
Land trusts work with individual donors, foundations, corporations, and all levels of government to acquire 
and maintain land for environmental conservation purposes. Land trusts may work in a variety of ways to 
address their individual mandates; these can include accepting gifts of land from private donors, undertaking 
fundraising to acquire land to prevent the loss of environmentally significant values, and managing land in 
public ownership to protect and enhance its habitat and other environmental characteristics. 

A conservation agreement is central to land trusts. While this does not specifically refer to adaptation to sea 
level rise, the conservation objectives of existing land trusts can easily accommodate this aspect, particularly 
with habitat creation or enhancements such as coastal wetland and sand dune creation, or rehabilitation.

Englishman 
River Estuary on 
Vancouver Island, 
B.C. 76.7 Hectare 
Acquisition by the 
Nature Trust of B.C.  
(Photo: Nature 
Trust of B.C.)

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – The cost of land acquisition as well as the cost of restoration and maintenance would likely 
be borne by the land trust organization. Local government could facilitate involvement of a land trust 
without necessarily expending financial resources and achieve the objective of protecting people from 
coastal hazards.

Environmental – This tool is well suited to acquire and protect environmentally sensitive land without local 
government having to take on responsibility for the land itself. 

Social – This tool can either restrict or enhance public access to environmentally sensitive land or habitat 
rehabilitation areas. In addition, this tool potentially has wider appeal for application by those wishing to 
conserve environmentally sensitive areas in perpetuity.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
The implementation of this tool can include acquiring land by a land trust through fundraising, eco-gift, or 
government transfer, preparing a conservation agreement, and undertaking the necessary restoration and 
maintenance of the land once an easement, covenant or other restriction is in place. Challenges include 
obtaining the resources to acquire, restore, and manage environmentally significant lands. Time constraints 
may also apply.

56

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
