Natural Resources Canada and Environment Canada. From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 

 

Climate 2007. Government of Canada, 2008. Available at:  
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132
This national assessment, produced by the Canadian government, finds that adaptive capacity in 
Canada is generally high but is unevenly distributed between and within regions and populations. Some 
adaptation is occurring in Canada, both in response to and in anticipation of, climate change impacts. 
The assessment concludes that integrating climate change into existing planning processes, often using 
risk management methods, is an effective approach to adaptation. The assessment also recognizes that 
barriers to adaptation action need to be addressed, including limitations in awareness and availability of 
information and decision-support tools.

New Brunswick Department of Environment. Impacts of Sea-Level Rise and Climate Change on the Coastal 

Zone of Southeastern New Brunswick. Executive Summary, St John, N.B.: Environment Canada, 2006. 
Available at:  
http://www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/default.asp?lang=En&xml=297D1933-034A-4BD2-996E-
C83FAA1C8016
The objective of this three-year (2003-2006) multidisciplinary research project was to quantify the 
impacts of climate change — specifically, sea level rise, storm surge and coastal erosion — on the Gulf of 
St. Lawrence coastal zone of southeastern New Brunswick. The results of the study support sustainable 
management, community resilience and the development of adaptation strategies.

 

Newfoundland & Labrador Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture. Coastal and Ocean Management 

 

Strategy and Policy Framework. St. John’s : Government of Newfoundland and Labrador, 2011.
This framework provides long-term strategic direction on sustainable use of coastal and ocean resources 
in Newfoundland and Labrador. It provides a long-term vision for planning and management, and 
conservation and sustainable use of the province’s coastal and ocean areas and resources. The strategic 
direction outlines the actions needed to achieve overarching goals and address priority issues. Within 
this document is the policy framework, intended to guide the coordination of provincial coastal and 
ocean policy in relation to priority issues identified for the province, with increased collaboration 
between governments, stakeholders, and communities.

Parewick, K., R. Keenan, Dr. K. Vodden, and Dr. N. Catto. Climate Change Adaptation Tool Development: 

 

Community Consultations. Final Report, Municipalities of Newfoundland and Labrador, n.d. Available at: 
http://www.municipalnl.ca/userfiles/files/CLIMATE%20CHANGE%20TOOLKIT%20CONSULTATION%20
FINAL%20REPORT.doc 
This paper is a summary of consultation undertaken by the Municipalities of Newfoundland and 
Labrador and is one step on the way towards developing a climate change adaptation toolkit. While 
this paper discusses climate change in a more general way, its focus is the way in which adaptation will 
take place at the municipal level and how the toolkit can best address and support small economically 
challenged communities at risk. This paper includes a discussion of what modifications might be 
necessary to make existing tools applicable to each participating community.

128


