Appendix E – Annotated Bibliography

Arlington Group Planning + Architecture Inc. Flood Protection Strategies in British Columbia. Report for the 

 

British Columbia Real Estate Association (BCREA), Vancouver: BCREA, 2010. Available at:  
http://www.bcrea.bc.ca/docs/government-relations/2010-11flood-protection-strategies-report-in-bc---
final.pdf?sfvrsn=2
This study reviews the legislative provisions available in British Columbia to address flood hazards. 
This included a detailed documentation of key provincial statutes, policies, information sources and 
the tools they provide for mitigating flood hazards. Potential funding sources were also identified. The 
effectiveness of current flood protection strategies is discussed in light of major changes in provincial 
legislation in 2003 and 2004 including a detailed survey of flood hazard practitioners. Although it is 
not the primary focus of the report, sea level rise is discussed in the context of highly variable coastal 
conditions, the need for updated floodplain mapping and analysis and public education. 

Arlington Group Planning + Architecture Inc. Floodproofing Options for Historic Settlements. Commissioned 

 

by Fraser Basin Council, Vancouver: Fraser Basin Council, 2001. Available at:  
http://www.fraserbasin.bc.ca/publications/documents/floodproofing.pdf
This report includes practical and cost-effective design options for floodproofing new residential 
and commercial construction within historical settlement areas. These settlement areas consisted of 
communities in the lower Fraser Valley where flood protection from the Fraser River or the sea took the 
form of dikes or other off-site structural protection. The report addresses a series of on-site mitigation 
measures that could alter the current total reliance on off-site structural protection. Design options were 
to limit flood damages, maintain or increase public safety, minimize adverse visual impacts, minimize 
adverse drainage and soil displacement impacts, minimize cleanup and repair costs, and comply with 
current statutory and regulatory requirements. Ten design scenarios were prepared; these included 
single family residences, townhouses and small commercial lots. Three lot frontages were considered 
(9.1 m, 12.2 m and 15.2 m) and two FCL increases above grade (1.7 m and 2.5 m). Geotechnical 
considerations for development in organic soils and compressible silts were also addressed. Designs for 
each scenario were prepared, illustrating conventional building areas needed for market acceptability 
while addressing on-site floodproofing requirements. Cost implications for each scenario as well as their 
advantages and disadvantages are also documented. 

Atkins, Judy, Ann Hillyer, and Arlene Kwasniak. Conservation Easements, Covenants and Servitudes in Canada -  

 

A Legal Review. Report No. 04-1, Ottawa, Ontario: North American Wetlands Conservation Council 
(Canada), 2004. Available at: http://www.wetlandscanada.org/conseasecov04-1.pdf
This report is an update to a 1995 publication which reviewed the state of conservation easement, 
covenant and servitude legislation at the time. Since the original publication there has been an 
increase in the use of statutorily-based easements and covenants for conservation purposes across 
Canada. More jurisdictions have introduced legislation enabling the use of such instruments 
specifically for conservation purposes and more covenants and easements have been placed on 
private land to conserve and protect open space and important ecological values on the land. During 
this same time, the federal and provincial governments have improved income tax benefits associated 
with private land protection, which has enhanced the attractiveness of the use of these tools. This 
report lists the primary statutes or portions of statutes enabling the use of conservation easements, 
covenants and servitudes in Canada.

121


