Greene, Kate, and Armand G. Robichaud. Climate Change Adaptation Action Plan for Stratford, P.E.I. 

 

Mainstreaming Climate Change Tools for the Professional Planning Community, Canadian Institute of 
Planners, 2010. Available at:  
http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/CCMAP%20TOWN%20
OF%20STRATFORD%20COMPLETE.PDF
This report aimed to integrate relevant existing scientific climate change data and adaptation processes 
with community knowledge of climate change, to develop new tools that incorporate climate change 
concerns in community planning initiatives. The major issues identified during this study were coastal 
erosion, increased potential for more flooding from storm surge and more intense rainfall events,The 
report outlines some suggestions for Official Plan Policy such as monitoring the progress of climate 
change impacts; providing setbacks from coastal and low lying areas;allowing for construction and 
maintenance of sea walls to protect infrastructure; and not approving subdivisions which could be 
negatively affected by climate change impacts.; 

Keenan, Eileen, and Andrew Yan. The Local Effects of Global Climate Change in the City of Vancouver: A 

 

Community Toolkit and Atlas. Vancouver: BTAworks, 2011. Available at:  
http://www.btaworks.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/BTAworks_Local-Effects-of-Global-Climate-
Change-Community-Toolkit-and-Atlas_FINAL.pdf
This toolkit and atlas outline the impacts of climate change on Vancouver, British Columbia. It notes that 
a sea level rise of 1 m would affect 3% of the City’s land area but if an additional 2 metres is added above 
the high tide line to buffer any effects such as wave spray, overtopping, or abnormally high tides, the 
impacted area would increase to 8% of Vancouver’s 144 km2 landmass. Maps showing the location of 
areas affected by 1 m, 2 m, 3 m, 4 m 5 m and 6 m rise in sea level are shown. A spreadsheet and graph of 
the relative impact of these changes in sea level rise on different land use are also shown, as well as cross 
sections of Granville Island now and with sea level change. A brief discussion of the mitigation costs is 
included; these are $5,000/lineal metre for an earth dike and $10,000/lineal metre for a seawall; however, 
these estimates exclude the costs for waterfront property acquisitions and the new provincial seismic 
construction standards for dyke infrastructure published in 2012.

 

 

 

Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd. Coastal Floodplain Mapping – Guidelines and Specifications. Final Report for 
Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations (MFLNRO), Victoria, Canada: MFLNRO, 2011. 
Available at: http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/fhm-2012/draw_report.html#3.
The purpose of coastal floodplain maps is to identify the coastal flood hazard(s) and to provide the 
technical basis for land use planning and developing floodplain bylaws. Floodplain mapping is an 
important first step in developing a flood hazard management plan, as floodplain maps identify the 
flood hazard(s) and provide information on the spatial distribution of Flood Construction Levels (FCLs).
This report contains guidance on estimating of some of the Flood Construction Level components, as 
well as a scope of work for more detailed site-specific engineering studies that also must be undertaken 
in order to derive the FCL. In addition, the report summarizes recommended standards for topographic 
mapping that also will be required in the production of coastal floodplain maps. A sample coastal 
floodplain map and Design Brief as an illustration of the coastal floodplain mapping process prepared 
for the City of Campbell River is provided in the report. In conjunction with this project, a series of maps 
showing potential coastal flood hazard areas for the year 2100 was developed for coastal B.C. based on 
approximate FCL’s. 
This report is intended to provide a technically sound basis for local governments to develop coastal 
floodplain maps, including an estimation of Flood Construction Levels based upon best mapping 
and engineering practices. In light of rising sea levels, coastal floodplain maps will also allow local 
governments to define sea level rise planning areas which will facilitate land use planning and 
development decisions.

126


