Rodshaw Environmental Consulting Incorporated and CCAF A041 Project Team. Coastal Impacts of Climate 

Change and Sea-Level Rise on Prince Edward Island. Climate Change Action Fund project CCAF A041 - 
Synthesis Report, Dartmouth, NS: Government of Canada, 2001.

Rozum, John S, et Sarah D Carr. Tools for Coastal Climate Adaptation Planning: A guide for selecting tools to 

assist with ecosystem-based climate planning. Report for Coastal-Marine Ecosystems-Based Management 
Tools Network, Arlington, VA: NatureServe, 2013.

RSPB, Environment Agency, Natural England and Defra. Coastal Futures - Humber Community Project.  

2 November 2010. http://www.coastalfutures.org.uk/humber.html (accès le February 2, 2012).

Sandink, Dan, Paul Kovacs, Greg Oulahen, et Glenn McGillivray. Making Flood Insurable for Canadian 

Homeowners. A Discussion Paper, Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction & Swiss Reinsurance 
Company Ltd, 2010.

Savard, Jean-pierre, interviewer par Geneva Guerin. Oceanographer, Ouranos Consortium (3 February 2012).
Savard, J-P, et al. Étude de la sensibilité des côtes et de la vulnérabilité des communautés du golfe du Saint-

Laurent aux impacts des changements climatiques (Climate change impact study on coastal susceptibility and 
community vulnerability in the Gulf of St Lawerence). Report Summary, Ouranos, 2008.

Senneville, S., et F. Saucier. Étude de sensibilité de la glace de mer au réchauffement climatique dans le golfe 
et l’estuaire du Saint-Laurent (Climate change impact study on the susceptibility of sea ice in the Golf of St. 
Lawrence). Montreal, QC: Ouranos, 2007.

Shaw, John, Robert B. Taylor, Steven Solomon, Harold A. Christian, et Donald L. Forbes. «Potential Impacts of 
Global Sea-Level Rise on Canadian Coasts.» The Canadian Geographer / Le Géographe canadien 42, n° no 4 
(1998): 365-379.

Sheppard, Stephen R.J. Visualizing Climate Change - a guide to visual communication of climate change and 

developing local solutions. Canada: Routledge, 2012.

Singh, Keith, Bradley B. Walters, et Jeff Ollerhead. «Climate Change, Sea-Level Rise and the Case for Salt 

Marsh Restoration in the Bay of Fundy, Canada.» Environments, 2007: 71-84.

Stanton, Elizabeth A, et Frank Ackerman. Florida and Climate Change - The Costs of Inaction. Tufts University, 

2007.

Stanton, Elizabeth A., Marion Davis, et Amanda Fencl. Costing Climate Impacts and Adaptation - A Canadian 

Study on Coastal Zones. a Report Commissioned by the National Round Table on the Environment and the 
Economy, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), 2010.

State of New South Wales - Department of Planning. NSW Coastal Planning Guideline: Adapting to Sea Level 

Rise. NSW, Austrialia: State of NSW, 2010.

Stewardship Centre for British Columbia. Green Shores. 12 Oct 2012. http://www.stewardshipcentrebc.ca/

greenshores/ (accès le June 4, 2013).

Stewart, P., R. Rutherford, H. Levy, et J. Jackson. Guide to Land Use Planning in Coastal Areas of the Maritime 
Provinces. Canadian Technical Report of the Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences No. 2443, Dartmouth, Nova 
Scotia: Oceans and Environment Branch, Maritime Regions, Department of Fisheries and Oceans and 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography, 2003.

Tatebe, Kristi, Alison Shaw, et Stephen R.J Sheppard. Technical Report on Local Climate Change Visioning for 
Delta: Findings and Recommendations. Report Prepared for the Corporation of Delta, Vancouver, Canada: 
The Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning at UBC, 2010.

The Sustainable Planning Branch, New Brunswick Department of Environment and Local Government. 

A Coastal Areas Protection Policy for New Brunswick. Fredriction, New Brunswick: New Brunswick 
Government, 2002.

147


