Managed retreat is a strategy typically undertaken with a long-term perspective. Small scale managed 
retreat may include site-specific relocation within a property or relocation to another site. Large scale 
relocation may include an entire community. As part of a managed retreat strategy, homes, lighthouses, 
roads and even barns have been moved further inland to protect them from erosion and storm surge. The 
strategy is often used when property owners have enough room on their parcel or when the ongoing costs 
of storm repairs and safety concerns outweigh the costs of retreating. The strategy may also be used to 
provide space for coastal ecosystems to expand or reclaim areas as the sea level rises.62 

Managed retreat is not currently used as frequently as other strategies. There is often a threshold (e.g. 
number of coastal residents or value of properties at risk) above which retreat becomes less likely. Retreat 
from urbanized areas is theoretically possible but politically difficult, and there are few (if any) examples 
of successful and peaceful retreat in densely populated areas. However, it is anticipated that the use of 
managed retreat will increase in the future as the rate of sea level rise increases or the cost of a protect  
or accommodate strategy becomes excessive.

Avoid involves planning so that development does not take place in areas subject to coastal hazards 
associated with sea level rise or where the risk is low at present but will increase over time. This may 
involve identifying future “no build” areas within local government planning documents. A wide range of 
planning tools may be involved in coming to a decision to avoid development in areas subject to moderate 
to high risk. Regulatory tools may include the designation or zoning of lands for limited development or 
nonhabitable uses. An avoid strategy may include land acquisition or restriction tools such as a land trust, 
or the transfer of development potential to areas with low or no risk due to sea level rise.

Business as Usual is not specifically included as a strategy in this Primer but it can be considered as a 
composite of existing strategies. All four adaptation strategies are currently applied to varying degrees 
in different local government jurisdictions throughout coastal Canada. It would be inappropriate to call 
“business as usual” a “do nothing” strategy as there is widespread recognition of coastal risks and the 
application of various tools to address risk. However, the consequences of “business as usual” are not 
neutral as sea level rise will lead to increased vulnerability or require the use of new tools, a different mix 
of tools and higher expenditures. If nothing is done, the consequences of Business as Usual will mean the 
acceptance of additional risk, whether by intention, omission or lack of resources.

An attack strategy refers to options that reclaim land from the sea through dredging, diking, etc. These 
are also referred to as land reclamation, land claim, or “advance the line.” This strategy has seen some 
application in other jurisdictions, particularly in the Netherlands, Hong Kong and Singapore. All these 
locations have small physical coastal land areas and some of the highest population densities in the world. 
In these jurisdictions, some low-lying land has been diked and/or filled to accommodate agriculture, 
port and airport development, and for residential purposes. In the Dutch case, the current use of ocean 
sediment dredged from one location to another represents a form of soft armouring to protect vulnerable 
areas behind dikes.

An attack strategy refers to measures that reclaim land from the sea through dredging, diking and fill. This 
strategy is also referred to as land reclamation, or “advancing the line” and has seen some application in 
other jurisdictions, particularly in the Netherlands, Hong Kong and Singapore. An attack strategy is not 
considered a viable response to sea level rise in Canada. The economic and environmental costs of land 
reclamation, wherever implemented, are extremely high. Instances of land reclamation in Canada take the 
form of soft armouring or hard protection implemented as part of a protect strategy.63 

(Abel, et al. 2011)

62 
63  Local infilling to create or enhance harbours and farmland has historically occurred in Atlantic Canada and in the Lower Mainland of 

British Columbia but is considered to have minimal applicability for the future due to prohibitive costs and environmental impacts.

22


