The two main applications of a cost-benefit analysis for risk management with respect to coastal hazards 
are: 
•  To determine if the proposed action is a sound financial decision. (Can it be justified? Is the proposed 

action feasible?)

•  To provide a basis for comparing possible projects (e.g., dike vs. seawall + beach nourishment). This 

involves comparing the total expected cost of each option against the total expected benefits, to see  
if the benefits outweigh the costs, and by how much.

A ‘multiple account’ cost-benefit analysis recognizes that all values are complex and that not all consequences 
can be expressed in monetary terms or incorporated into one summary measure of net benefit. 

Environmental – Risk management may be used to reduce sea level rise risks to environmental assets and 
species at risk. The protection of wetlands is of particular importance due to historic losses, as are intertidal 
areas, due to their high productivity.

Social – Social criteria is embedded into most risk management processes. Assessments identify acceptable 
risk levels, community assets needing protection, and when or if a different strategy should be adopted 
to respond to the long-term consequences of sea level rise. The experience of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 
demonstrated the extreme vulnerability of persons lacking mobility, particularly those with low income 
and the residents of nursing homes.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation of risk management measures depends on the overall strategy adopted and the tool 
or combination of tools selected to manage identified risk within acceptable levels. Challenges include 
selecting an acceptable level of risk, selecting the most appropriate tools to manage the risk, and 
committing the capital and maintenance costs required to implement the risk management plan.

Advantages

Disadvantages

A long-term perspective is often required to manage 
risks to large scale linear infrastructure. Risk management 
allows for a phased or cumulative risk management 
approach.
Risk management may involve a rigorous, defensible 
analytic approach with reliable information used to  
support decision making.
Risk management can be an essential tool to help 
determine the most appropriate response to coastal 
hazards.

There may be a significant cost. However, the cost  
must be measured against the risk.
The absence of detailed studies may impede some 
initiatives but should not prevent the use of interim 
measures to reduce risk (e.g. minimum setback and 
elevation from the natural boundary or other potential 
risk). 

38

Planning Tools
