Ausenco Sandwell. “Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land 

 

Use.” Draft Policy Discussion Paper, 2011. Available at:  
http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/fhm-2012/draw_report.html#2
This guideline document describes the principles for determining the exposure of low lying lands 
to a flooding hazard due to their exposure to the sea and provides guidelines and direction for their 
management. It also provides guidelines intended to help local governments, land use managers and 
approving officers develop and implement land-use management plans and make subdivision approval 
decisions for lands exposed to coastal flooding hazards and sea level rise.

Barron, Sara, et al. “A Climate Change Adaptation Planning Process for Low-Lying, Communities Vulnerable 

 

to Sea Level Rise.” Sustainability, 2012: 2176-2208.
This research demonstrates a process to model, visualize and evaluate potential flood impacts and 
adaptation options. The study focus is on South Delta and Ladner and includes economic, social and 
environmental perspectives. The results of the scenario development, mapping and visualization 
imagery and assessment of indicators provided the community and decision-makers with a structured 
set of options and holistic listing of relative impacts and implications of flooding associated with sea 
level rise. The authors note a major success of this methodology is the ability for the visioning packages 
to engage in more meaningful conversations about specific adaptation strategies, their implications, 
phasing, implementation, acceptability and how they may be refined into coherent policy pathways.

Batterson, M., and D. Liverman. “Past and Future Sea-Level Change in Newfoundland and Labrador: 

 

Guidelines for Policy and Planning.” Newfoundland and Labrador, Dept of Natural Resources, Geologic 
Survey Report, 2010: 129-141. Available at:  
http://www.nr.gov.nl.ca/mines&en/geosurvey/publications/CR2010/2010_Batterson-Liverman.pdf
This report aims to promote understanding of the direction and magnitude of future sea level change, 
which is important in creating policy and planning measures for development in the coastal zone. 
To determine guidelines for the province, local trends in sea level are examined by using tide gauge 
records, salt marsh research and other indicators of past sea level changes. These local trends are 
combined with estimates of future global sea level change to provide predictions of likely changes in 
sea level for the province. Estimates of sea level change leading up to 2050 and 2100 are provided for 
four zones covering the province. 

Birch Hill GeoSolutions. Climate Change Adaptations for Land Use Planners. Project A1209, Natural Resources 

 

Canada, 2008. Available at: http://www.cakex.org/sites/default/files/Birch_Hill_Geosolutions.pdf
The purpose of this project was to develop a toolkit for use by community Land Use Planners, with 
assistance from municipal and consulting engineers, for assessing climate change impacts on their 
community and adapting to them. An underlying theme was that more science and engineering input 
is already needed in sustainable community Land Use Planning, and climate change may increase that 
need, since it could exacerbate existing environmental impacts on development, and vice versa. The 
focus was climate change impacts in rural areas of Atlantic Canada, with test sites in Annapolis Royal 
and the Pereau River watershed in southwestern Nova Scotia. This study reviewed implementation tools 
for their applicability to climate change, including: 1) Engineering Codes of Practice; 2) Regulations 
and Administrative Practices Related to Land Use Planning; 3) Building Codes; 4) Sustainable Building 
Adaptations; and 5) Emergency Management. 

122


