Major damage from the December 2010 storm in the Bas-Saint-Laurent Region, qC

In December 2010, a major storm event in the Bas-Saint-Laurent Region, QC  eroded seven metres 
of the shoreline and destroyed nearly 100 homes in the region. In the absence of a regulatory 
framework for dealing with such natural disasters, the Minister of Public Security announced that  
the province would compensate property owners up to $150,000 toward rebuilding elsewhere on 
safer grounds.

The agreement required owners to sell their property to the municipality for $1. The municipality, 
as owner of the land, was not able to build on the land but could use it for recreational purposes. 
Eighty compensation packages were issued once evaluations were conducted by the provincial 
government. Many owners refused the packages, as $150,000 was not enough money for relocation. 
In some cases, residents unable to supplement the compensation were forced to remain in damaged 
homes in high-risk areas. Given the lack of regulation on erosion in the area, construction and 
reconstruction permits are still being issued in high risk areas. 

Recognizing that it would not be able to offer similar compensation in the future, in 2011 the 
province suggested the region adopt a 30m standard setback. Neither the region nor any of its 
municipalities adopted this standard, and requested more detailed research be completed in order 
to establish setback lines per coastal zone based on regionally specific science (J.-p. Savard 2012).

Quebec is a province with significant funds available for adapting to seal level rise. The financing available 
to municipalities for adapting to sea level rise comes via the Framework for Natural Disaster Risk Prevention 
Funds from the Ministry of Public Security. In November 2006, the province designated $55 million to 
support municipal adaptation projects to climate change, with $26.6 million specifically earmarked for 
adaptation to coastal erosion. Municipalities apply to the fund and contribute a portion of the total initial 
budget. The provincial money represents a one-time investment – the municipality is responsible for the 
cost of maintenance over time. This fund is expected to be renewed under the 2013-2020 Climate Change 
Action Plan. 

Under this program, Sept-Îles was approved for a $6 million project to rebuild the sandbank on the east 
end of the city. The municipality would have to contribute $2 million of the total budget, and would be 
responsible for all maintenance costs over time. The local government had difficulty obtaining public 
support for the levy needed to raise funds, as it would have been applied to all residents while only the 
ocean-front property owners would benefit. In the end, Sept-Îles declined the grant, as it could not find  
a realistic means of coming up with their portion of the contribution required. 

Municipalities in Atlantic Canada that own property or infrastructure along the coastline have taken action 
to protect their capital assets from sea level rise, storm surges and other climate events. This includes 
installing shoreline protection systems at facilities such as waste water treatment facilities, streets, parks, 
recreational facilities, and other municipal infrastructure. In 2011, Nova Scotia implemented a new 
requirement for Federal Gas Tax Reporting for the period 2010- 2014. Nova Scotia municipalities must now 
prepare Municipal Climate Change Action Plans (CCAP) to access the Gas Tax funds. These plans must be 
submitted by December 31, 2013. 

Municipalities in British Columbia have also taken proactive action. Responses vary considerably, but 
measures include updated Official Community Plans, updated floodplain mapping, increasing Flood 
Construction Levels, raising dike elevations and appurtenant flood protection structures, installing artificial 
reefs and public education measures. Federal-provincial cost sharing programs in B.C. have played an 
essential role in the implementation of structural protection measures.

95


