Non-Structural (Soft Armouring)

1. Coastal Wetland Creation or Restoration

Tool Description
Wetlands are some of the most ecologically important and vulnerable coastal habitats. Coastal wetlands 
are found in the “transition zone” between land and sea, and have both upland and aquatic characteristics. 
As a result, they are extremely productive ecosystems and often have a richer flora and fauna than other 
environments.102 Functionally, coastal wetlands assist with wave and tidal dissipation, and their vegetation 
and root systems act as a trap for sediments, facilitating accretion and reducing erosion. In the absence of a 
barrier to migration, if a wetland or salt marsh is losing area on its seaward side, it is likely claiming area on 
its landward side. This adaptive ability contrasts sharply with traditional human-made coastal defences that 
are static and typically require the continuous input of resources.103 The most commonly restored coastal 
wetland ecosystems are salt marshes.

Application
On the seaward side, this tool can be used as part of a protect or accommodate strategy. On the landward 
side, wetland creation can be part of an avoid strategy or provide a transitional land use as part of a long-
term strategy of managed retreat. This tool does not apply to rocky coastlines or where the ocean depth 
drops rapidly.

Enabling Legislation
There is no specific legislation governing wetland restoration although the Federal Species at Risk Act may 
apply. Wetland creation may be facilitated through Environment Canada’s Ecological Gifts Program. 

To effectively manage and conserve wetlands, the New Brunswick Provincial Government developed a 
Wetlands Conservation Policy. The policy, approved in 2002, had two main objectives: (1) the maintenance 
of wetland function and (2) the securement, stewardship, education and awareness of wetlands. 
Subsequently, parts of the policy were dropped after complaints from some businesses and landowners 
that it was too restrictive.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Considerations include the economic benefit of reduced flood risk to people and property, the 
cost of securing the land (which includes land covered by water) through a foreshore lease or other means, 
the cost of creating or restoring the land and the cost for long-term management. Environment Canada’s 
Ecological Gifts Program, through which a landowner donates ecological sensitive land and receives a tax 
benefit, may be of assistance, although this program does not apply to existing intertidal areas, which are 
owned by the Crown throughout Canada. 

102 
103 

(Ecology Action Centre n.d.)
(Singh, Walters and Ollerhead 2007)

73

Non-Structural Tools (Soft Armouring)
