In B.C., the authority for structural elevation is most clearly stated in Section 910 of the Local Government 
Act. If a local government considers that flooding may occur on a piece of land, the local government may 
adopt a bylaw requiring a minimum elevation for the underside of a floor system of a house on that land. 
Such a bylaw must consider the provincial guidelines, which take sea level rise and related impacts  
into account.

The standard of protection varies from province to province. In British Columbia, the design standard of 
protection is for a 1 in 200 year return period. This means the elevation of buildings should be raised to 
withstand a flood with an annual probability of 0.5% or a 1 in 200 year flood. In B.C. the minimum elevation 
for habitable construction is called the Flood Construction Level (FCL). This is the minimum elevation of 
the underside of a wooden floor system or the top of a concrete slab for habitable buildings. The Flood 
Construction Level typically includes an additional vertical distance (freeboard) of 0.3 metres to 0.6 metres 
to the calculated flood level to accommodate uncertainties in flood levels. There is a relationship between 
the standard of protection and resulting risk. If the design standard is reduced to withstand a flood with  
an annual probability of 1.0%, the cost of protective measures will decrease but the risk increases.

Flood construction requirements in Atlantic Canada may reference a minimum elevation above sea level 
datum, geodetic datum or protection for a 1 in 100 year return period or a 50 year design standard. In 
Newfoundland and Labrador, the design standard is based on a flood event with a 1 in 100 year return 
period. The other Atlantic Provinces rely on generally accepted coastal engineering design standards for the 
life of structures in coastal areas of 50 years. A notable exception is the Confederation Bridge between New 
Brunswick and Prince Edward Island, which was built a metre higher to account for sea level rise over the 100 
year design life of the project.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – The cost of structural elevation depends on a numbers of factors, one of which is the cost of 
fill. The affected site area will include the building footprint area plus a sloped area for the fill, typically at 
a 3:1 slope, to return to the natural ground level. Alternatively, a retaining wall or other structure could be 
used to reduce or eliminate the sloped area. The amount of fill could be substantial. For a 1 metre elevation 
rise to accommodate a two storey building with 200 m² of living area and a building footprint of 10 metres 
by 10 metres plus a 3:1 slope back to the natural elevation, nearly 200 m² of fill would be required. For a 
2 metre elevation rise, the amount of fill would increase to over 500 m². If a lesser amount of fill is used 
without reducing the Flood Construction Level, the building could be designed without livable space on 
the ground level. This often takes the form of a crawl space with a low ceiling height, a garage, an entry 
foyer, laundry room or a small storage area. Electrical outlets would have to be raised and a furnace located 
above the Flood Construction Level.

The key economic consideration is the cost of reducing the risk through structural elevation. The cost of 
providing public infrastructure93 (roads, bridges) in an area at risk is another economic consideration that 
will increase over time. The cost of floodproofing can also be compared to the cost of development in an 
area without risk of coastal flooding or inundation.

Environmental – This tool primarily addresses the protection of buildings and property.  Environmental 
impacts will be more significant where a large area is subject to fill placement, such as previously 
undeveloped areas, wetlands and other natural areas. The cost of floodproofing can also be compared  
to the cost of development in an area without risk of coastal flooding or inundation.

93  Critical infrastructure includes all the services that support development in an area subject to the risk of flooding.

63

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
