Authorities own and operate the public diking systems in B.C. and they are obliged to have a flood 
response plan, which should be integrated with the Local Authority Emergency Response Plan, and 
provide emergency response.

The British Columbia Flood Response Plan describes the methodology the Province will utilize for coordinating 
activities to manage response to a flood event, depending on its magnitude. This includes the roles and 
responsibilities of other levels of government, provincial ministries and agencies and other stakeholder groups.

Other provinces also have emergency management provisions. For example, in Nova Scotia, the Emergency 
Management Act is the governing legislation dealing with emergency management and emergency powers 
legislation. The Act creates and gives powers to the Emergency Management Officer (EMO) to act on 
government’s behalf in an emergency.124

In Quebec, disaster relief funds from the Ministry of Public Security currently include support for damage 
incurred by major storm events, both for public infrastructure and for private property. For private 
properties damaged or destroyed in coastal areas from storm surges, up to $150,000 in compensation can 
be paid out to those willing to relocate, under the following conditions:
•  The property in question is the primary residence (secondary residences are not covered)
•  The lot and remaining structure is sold to the municipality for $1
•  The municipality cannot erect any new construction, but can create a recreational area on such lands
•  The home relocated to must fall outside the setback established by the provincial government for the region

For the time being this mechanism is ad hoc, activated on a case-by-case evaluation of storm events 
undertaken between the Province and the impacted municipalities.

Application
Local authorities (i.e., municipalities and regional districts) have the primary responsibility for emergency 
management within their jurisdiction. As noted in the section on the Emergency Planning and 
Preparedness tool, this includes the preparation of local emergency plans. Should flooding occur, the 
local government is responsible for activating emergency plans and their emergency operations centre, 
notifying the provincial authority of local emergency response activities, issuing evacuation notices, as 
required, establishing local centres for public inquiries and providing post-flood information. If the local 
government requires emergency powers within the Emergency Program Act, including the evacuation of 
residents, a state of local emergency should be declared.

The British Columbia Flood Response Plan details that province’s approach in co-ordinating the ministries 
involved in flood management during an integrated provincial response event. Emergency Management 
British Columbia has the primary responsibility for co-ordinating the provincial management structure. 
The Provincial Emergency Program (PEP), a division of the Ministry of Public Safety and Solicitor General, 
Emergency Management B.C., works with local governments year-round, providing training and support 
before, during and after emergencies. 

Other provincial agencies and responsibilities include the following:
•  Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure – safety of provincial highways and bridges
•  Ministry of Health – monitoring and managing public health impacts including sewage disposal and 

drinking water expertise

•  Ministry of Environment – hazardous material, flood debris management and other threats to the 

environment

124 

(Birch Hill GeoSolutions 2008)

91


