The report also suggested that coastal floodplain maps contain the following elements:
•  Flood Construction Levels (FCLs) to the years 2100 and 2200; 
•  Floodplain limits to 2100 and 2200; 
•  Sea level rise planning areas for 2100 and 2200; and 
•  Tsunami evacuation planning areas (if applicable).72

Coastal flood hazards are determined by the interaction of storm surges and waves with seabed 
bathymetry and coastal land cover. To effectively map the extent of coastal hazards, accurate topographic 
data is required, ideally with a contour interval of 1 m or less. The traditional method is to conduct field 
surveys of the topography. However, LiDAR (Light Detection and Ranging) data, collected from an aircraft 
using a laser, is increasingly being used. 

LiDAR offers both an accurate and economical means of topographic mapping, particularly where large 
surface areas are involved. The set of elevation points generated by a LiDAR survey can be brought into a 
geographical information system (GIS) and used to build surfaces that represent the earth’s topography 
with great precision. This provides an ideal base map which can be used to determine coastal hazard risk.73 

Ground surveys provide the highest accuracy; however, to cover an entire coastline using this method may 
be impractical and prohibitively expensive. Ground surveys may be used to supplement or monitor the 
accuracy of the results received from LiDAR or other technologies. 

Ground surveys are still required to establish ground and floodproof elevations at a specific site where  
the FCL has been derived from a floodplain map. Floodplain map topography should not be relied upon  
to establish specific building elevations.74

An engineering analysis is then used to map areas at risk. A review of long-term water level records is a key 
resource in assessing historic coastal flood levels and return periods. For coastal areas, these records are 
collected by tide gauges, operated by the Canadian Hydrographic Service (CHS) of the Department  
of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO). Coastal water level records are available on the DFO website.75 Hazard maps 
typically show the physical boundaries of areas and what the hazard risks are based on risk analysis factors 
such as a design flood. With sea level rise, hazard mapping will not only need to incorporate the increase 
in water levels, but the effects of storm surge, wind and tides, in various combinations. These will vary 
depending on the local climatic conditions. 

In recent years there has been a lack of sea ice during the winter months in several coastal areas of Atlantic 
Canada. This lack of sea ice must also be documented as a coastal hazard. The ice has historically provided a 
buffer for the coastline, but with reduced quantities, wave energy now often reaches the shoreline and hits 
exposed cliffs, glacial deposits, sand dunes, sand spits, barrier bars, marshes, shoreline protection systems 
and other coastal features. The P.E.I. National Park has been monitoring “ice foot”76 in recent years as they 
have observed significant damage to the park shoreline and dune systems after storm surges during  
winter months.

(Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd. 2011)
(Birch Hill GeoSolutions 2008)
(Kerr Wood Leidal Associates Ltd. 2011)

72 
73 
74 
75  www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
76 

Ice frozen to the shore having a base at or below the low-water mark and formed as a result of the rise and fall of the tides, freezing spray, 
or stranded ice.

33

Planning Tools
