Advantages

Disadvantages

There is a history of using hazard maps to support 
planning and development policies by identifying high 
risk locations and steering development away from these 
areas. 
The identification of new or emerging risk areas helps 
with effective emergency response plans. It is essential 
that certain infrastructure, such as electricity supplies, 
sewage treatment, and services, such as the emergency 
services, continue to function during a hazard event. The 
creation of hazard maps allows communities to locate 
these elements in low risk areas. Alternatively, mapping 
may highlight a requirement to defend these elements 
from coastal hazards. 
Coastal hazard mapping can quantify what is at risk (e.g. 
the number of houses or businesses). This can assist in 
managing risk by helping set priorities and determining 
the most suitable strategy. 
The creation of coastal hazard mapping promotes 
greater awareness of the risks of sea level rise. This can 
be beneficial in encouraging hazard zone residents to 
prepare for the occurrence of flooding.
By identifying buildings at risk of flooding, awareness 
raising campaigns can also be targeted at high risk 
properties. 

3. Risk Management

In itself, new coastal hazard mapping will not cause 
a reduction in risk nor address sea level rise. The 
information must be integrated into other regulatory, 
land use change, and structural and non-structural tools 
before the full benefits can be realised.
To realise the full benefits of coastal hazard mapping, it 
is important to provide people in the areas at risk with 
information about emergency procedures and ways of 
reducing risk. If information on what to do in the event  
of an emergency is not provided, coastal hazard maps 
may serve to increase fear and anxiety, as residents are 
more aware of the risks.
The collection of topographic and bathymetric data 
to complement extreme water level and wave height 
information could be expensive.
Due to the lack of observed extreme event data, more 
advanced, accurate coastal hazard maps are likely to rely 
on complex numerical models. This requires a degree of 
expertise to implement.
Coastal hazard maps need to be updated periodically  
to reflect changing climate and other factors.

Tool Description
Risk management is a process widely used to identify and manage the adverse impacts of a change in 
conditions. The magnitude of a risk is calculated by examining the probability of the occurrence of an 
event and the severity of its impact.77 Risk management with respect to sea level rise and associated coastal 
hazards generally has two components. The first involves the identification, assessment, measurement,  
and prioritization of risks from sea level rise (risk assessment). The second involves selecting and 
implementing management measures. The measurement process may be quantitative, such as calculating 
the probability of a flood in excess of current linear protection, or it may be qualitative, documenting 
increasing vulnerability and reduced resilience. Coastal hazards due to sea level rise may include the risk  
of a major disaster such as a dike failure as well as risks from gradual changes such as increasing salinization 
of groundwater. 

A risk assessment may have aspects that affect people, the environment and the economy. Risk 
management methodologies can also provide a way to explore public attitudes and perceptions of risk – 
information which can be fed back into the assessment.78 The setting of priorities reflects the importance  
of the coastal hazard and leads to a discussion on how those risks should be managed.

77 
78 

(Richardson and Otero 2012)
(Richardson and Otero 2012)

36

Planning Tools
