DESIGN FLOOD LEVEL* is the calculated water surface elevation of the Design Flood.
DESIGN FLOOD* is a flood, which may occur in any given year, with a 200 year recurrence interval, based 

on a frequency analysis of unregulated historic flood records or on regional analysis where there is 
inadequate data available.

DIKE (or DYKE) is an embankment, berm, wall piling or fill constructed to prevent the flooding of land or 
to provide protection from a high tide plus a storm surge, possibly in combination with wind setup and 
wave run-up. The term levee is used in the U.S.A.

EROSION refers to the loss of land or bed materials due to the action of flowing water, which can be regular 

or highly episodic.

ESTUARY is a partly closed coastal or tidal body of water with one or more streams or rivers flowing into it 

and a free connection to the ocean.

FLOOD CONSTRUCTION LEVEL (FCL)* is the Design Flood Level plus the allowance for Freeboard used 

to establish the minimum elevation of the underside of a wooden floor system or top of a concrete slab 
for habitable buildings. In the case of a manufactured home, the ground level or the top of the concrete 
or asphalt pad, on which it is located, shall be equal to or higher than the above-described elevation. It 
also establishes the minimum crest level of a Standard Dike. Where the Design Flood Level cannot be 
determined or where there are overriding factors, an assessed height above the Natural Boundary of the 
water body or above the natural ground elevation is typically used.

FLOODBOX is a drainage culvert through a dike that conveys the internal drainage from a watercourse 
from inside the dike to the body of water (i.e., river or ocean) outside the dike. A gate is installed at the 
outlet end of the floodbox to prevent backflow from the body of water to the inside and to allow gravity 
flow from inside to the outside.

FLOODING refers to the overflowing of water onto land. Inland flooding usually results from faulty 

infrastructure or sudden and/or heavy precipitation that exceeds the design capacity of infrastructure. 
Coastal flooding usually results from high tides and storm events also called storm surges. 

FLOODPLAIN is a lowland area, whether diked, floodproofed, or unprotected, which is at an elevation 

susceptible to flooding from an adjoining watercourse, lake, ocean or other body of water based on the 
area submerged by the Designated Flood plus freeboard.

FLOODPROOFING refers to the alteration of land or buildings to reduce flood damages. Floodproofing 
may include adding fill to raise the elevation of a building site, structural measures such as foundation 
walls or columns to raise a building, or combinations of fill and structural measures. Floodproofing also 
includes wet floodproofing, in which water-resistant building materials are used to reduce damage.

FREEBOARD is the vertical distance (typically 0.6 m) added to the calculated elevation of the Design Flood 

level to accommodate uncertainties. Such uncertainties include hydraulic and hydrological variables, 
potential for wave run-up, storm surges and other natural phenomena.

GABIAN BASKET OR WALL is a form of rip-rap consisting of a cage or basket of heavy wire containing 

rocks designed to protect shorelines from erosion.

GEODETIC DATUM means a set of constants specifying the coordinate system used for geodetic control 
(i.e., for calculating the coordinates of points on the Earth). The Canadian Geodetic Vertical Datum is the 
current orthometric height reference in Canada. 

GROYNE (or GROIN) is a rigid structure built from an ocean shore or a river bank that interrupts the flow of 
water and limits the movement of sediment. An ocean groyne is typically constructed of rip rap or other 
heavy material perpendicular to the shore, extending from the upper foreshore or beach into the water.

HABITABLE AREA means any room or space within a building or structure that is or can be used for human 

occupancy, commercial sales, or the storage of goods, possessions or equipment (including furnaces) 
which would be subject to damage if flooded.

99


