Advantages

Disadvantages

Zoning or floodplain related bylaws allow the restriction 
of land uses based on identified risks within a specified 
area (e.g., floodplain).
Zoning gives a local government great flexibility in 
addressing different conditions and needs within its 
physical boundaries.
Zoning is well suited to public education and 
involvement.

Local government may not be able to impose zoning that 
will render the land sterile (i.e., unable to be used) but it 
can restrict the way in which land and buildings are used 
so that risks can be addressed.
Technical supporting documentation to address 
coastal flood risks may be expensive (e.g., floodplain 
mapping, design briefs, updated flood risk assessment, 
implementation measures to adapt to or reduce  
flood risk).
Interim measures may lack technical documentation 
but can be undertaken at modest cost (e.g. sea level rise 
study area).

2. Subdivision Regulation

Tool Description
Subdivision regulation can be used to prevent or establish conditions for the subdivision of land at risk 
from coastal hazards associated with sea level rise. A proposed subdivision must go through a review 
process, which culminates in the approval (including approval with conditions) or refusal of the proposed 
subdivision by the Approving Officer or other appointed official. A subdivision refers to establishing a 
separate title of land. This can include a simple property, bare land strata lot, or strata unit (e.g., townhouse, 
row house, or condominium unit in an apartment building).

Application
This tool applies to the subdivision of land at risk of coastal hazards due to sea level rise and can be utilized 
in conjunction with zoning. 

Enabling Legislation
In most regions across Canada, subdivision decisions are governed by some form of an approving officer. 
The nomenclature used to identify this approving officer, their specific role and level of government where 
the position is located varies in Quebec and Atlantic Canada but their basic “gatekeeper” function is similar.

In B.C., the subdivision of land is an administrative responsibility given to an Approving Officer and is 
separate from the responsibility of an elected Council or Board. An Approving Officer appointed by a 
municipality is typically the Municipal Engineer or Chief Planning Officer. For small municipalities, the 
Approving Officer may be the Chief Administrative Officer or a person contracted to undertake that 
responsibility. In non-municipal areas of regional districts, the Approving Officer is an employee of the 
Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure. 

Under Section 86 of the Land Title Act, an Approving Officer may refuse to approve a plan for subdivision 
if the land is subject to, or could reasonably be expected to be subject to, hazards such as flooding and/or 
erosion. A subdivision can also be refused if the cost to government of providing public utilities or other 
works and services would be excessive or if the subdivision would adversely affect the natural environment.

Section 86 also allows the Approving Officer to require a report by a qualified professional that the land 
may be used safely. Under Section 219 of the B.C. Land Title Act, the report is included in a covenant and 
registered as a charge on title and remains on the title of any parcels created by the subdivision, regardless 
of future ownership. 

44

Regulatory Tools
