It is important to recognize that, because agricultural land can tolerate some overtopping, the construction 
elevations and design of earthen dikes to protect agricultural land may be lower than for the protection of 
life and property. Depending on the province and location, municipalities may have no control over private 
agricultural dikes within their boundaries. They are not financially responsible for repairs to such dikes but 
may be affected by the impacts of a dike breach.

Application
Recent research,95 has resulted in a re-evaluation of the vulnerability of communities to flooding due to 
storm surges and wave action. In B.C., a 2012 study indicated the need for a higher dike crest elevation 
for over 250 km of shoreline in the Lower Mainland study area, most of which is protected by dikes. The 
increased risk is due to a combination of sea level rise as well as an increased provision for storm surges  
and wave run-up and seismic considerations.

Dikes are typically designed by a qualified professional in accordance with local and provincial 
regulations and guidelines. In B.C., there are various applicable provincial documents, including the 
recent Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use,96 which 
are divided into three volumes: Draft Policy Discussion Paper, Sea Dike Guidelines and Guidelines for 
Management of Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use. There are numerous technical publications which 
provide guidance on engineering design.

Assets protected by dikes can include infrastructure and agricultural lands. Both New Brunswick and 
Nova Scotia have legislation to protect agricultural land and to create marsh bodies, although not all 
development that has taken place in low-lying areas is behind a dike or protected by this mandate. In  
New Brunswick, the legislation is referred to as the Marshland Reclamation Act (O.C. 82-14). Nova Scotia 
has been more progressive, updating the Marshland Reclamation Act of 1989 with numerous amendments 
through the Agricultural Marshland Conservation Act (c.22, s.1, amended 2004). 

New Brunswick has 37,000 acres of marshland protected from the tidal waters of the Bay of Fundy. Some 
of this land is protected by a variety of earthen infrastructure (including dikes) constructed over 300 years 
ago. Much of the earthen infrastructure was constructed in the early 1950s and is currently maintained by 
the N.B. Department of Agriculture, Fisheries and Aquaculture.

2011 Upgrade to Dike in Fraser 
River Estuary, Richmond, B.C. 
(Photo: City of Richmond)

95 
96 

(Ausenco Sandwell 2011)
(Ausenco Sandwell 2011)

65

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
