Tol, Richard S J, Richard J T Klein, and Robert J Nicholls. “Towards successful adaptation to sea level rise 

 

along Europe’s coasts.” Journal of Coastal Research, 2008: 432-442. Available at:  
http://www.bioone.org/doi/full/10.2112/07A-0016.1
This paper examines the current status of adaptation to sea level rise and climate change in the context of 
European coasts. At the European Union Level, while coastal management is a focus, this effort is mainly 
targeted at today’s problems. This paper suggests a need for a concerted effort to address adaptation in 
coastal zones across Europe. Sharing experience among countries would facilitate this process.

 

UNESCO/IOC. Sea-level Rise and Variability – A Summary for Policy Makers. France: United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural Organization; Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, 2010. Available at:  
http://unesdoc.unesco.org/images/0018/001893/189369e.pdf
This paper summarizes the importance of determining local sea level change and local land motion 
to better understand at a local level the potential. Coastal zones have changed profoundly during the 
21st century, with increasing populations, economies and urbanization. Today, low elevation coastal 
zones below 10 m elevation contain about 10% of the world’s population. With coastal development 
continuing at a rapid pace, society is becoming increasingly vulnerable to sea level rise. Rising sea levels 
have been and will continue to be felt most acutely through extreme events (periods of above average 
sea level).

UKCIP. U.K. Climate Impacts Programme: Projections, Adaptation Tools, Case Studies. Available at:  

 

www.ukcip.org.uk/tools
Since 1997 UKCIP has been leading the way in developing tools and resources to support climate 
change adaptation by government, business, civil society and other agencies. The UKCIP Adaptation 
Wizard is one such tool, which walks the user through five steps to assess vulnerabilities, identify 
adaptation options, implement, monitor and evaluate. This is accompanied by other supports such 
as a risk-based decision-making framework and Local Climate Impacts Profile tool, all of which can be 
applied to sea level rise. A list of climate change adaptation case studies in the U.K. is also available.  
At least two (Chichester District Council and The Broads Authority) deal with sea level rise. 

Environment Agency. U.K. Flood & Coastal Erosion Risk Management Programme. Available at:  

 

 

 

http://evidence.environment-agency.gov.uk
The Environment Agency and Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra) recently 
partnered to deliver the “Flood and Coastal Erosion Risk Management Programme” for the U.K. This 
joint program continues to build on years of work by both agencies on climate change impacts and 
adaptation, including the extensive body of work by UKCIP. More information is 
The Environment Agency has produced two recent reports of interest. The 2009 report “Investing for 
the Future: Flood and Coastal Risk Management in England, a Long-term Strategy” outlines current 
flood and coastal erosion risk in the U.K. along with an assessment of the level of investment that would 
be required to manage the increasing risk through 2035. This includes an analysis of the benefits of 
investment and potential for new sources of investment. The study concludes that investment should 
almost double to £1 billion annually (from £570 million in 2009).
In 2010 the Environment Agency released “The Coastal Handbook: A Guide for all Those Working on 
the Coast,” which was developed as a comprehensive resource on information for coastal management 
in the U.K., and to improve understanding by Environment Agency and local government staff, of 
respective roles and responsibilities. A chapter is devoted to “Coastal change, adaptation, resilience and 
land management,” and other supporting information for adapting to sea level rise and coastal erosion 
is included in other sections.

141


