Sea Level Rise Adaptation Process
Developing and implementing sea level rise adaptation measures at a local level does not begin with the 
implementation of an adaptation tool. Prior to the implementation of any of the adaptation tools discussed 
in this Primer, a process of information gathering, public education and community engagement should be 
undertaken by local community decision makers.64 

Figure 5 - Sea Level Rise Adaptation Framework

•  Internal capacity building
•  Study of local conditions that  

could modify sea level rise

•  GIS mapping
•  Assessment of potential  

local impacts of sea level rise

•  Determination of cost  

implications of different  
adaptation tools

•  Assessment of risk  

and vulnerability

Information 
Gathering

•   Educate and consult stakeholders
•   Find out what degree of risk the community  

is prepared to live with

•   Establish community priorities  

 and preferred strategy

•   Assess community  

    vulnerability

•   Prepare scenarios,  
     visualizations

Public 

Education & 
Community 
Engagement

•  Effectiveness of  

chosen tools

•  Monitoring of 

measurable indicators

•  Re-evaluation of community’s  

acceptable risk

Monitoring & 
Evaluation

Adaptation 

Tools

•   Determine most  
    suitable adaptation  

    strategy

•   Selection of the most  

    appropriate adaptation tools  

    to implement strategy

Through a process of information gathering, including risk and vulnerability assessment, local governments 
will be able to identify their resource limitations and any knowledge gaps. This process may involve building 
internal capacity, identifying champions and establishing a cross-departmental steering committee to 
address sea level rise. After sufficient baseline information has been gathered, public education and 
community engagement should begin. The inclusion of community input at this early stage can help  
foster a sense of ownership and provide valuable information that may otherwise be overlooked. While  
public education and community engagement are shown in Figure 5 as one part of the process, in practice 
they should be included throughout the adaptation process. Establishing community priorities and a 
preferred strategic direction will help narrow down the choice of adaptation tools that may be applicable  
in individual communities. 

Many of the adaptation tools identified in this Primer will require ongoing public input and support to 
be successfully implemented. As the science of estimating sea level rise and its effects evolves, so too will 
adaptation. In order to incorporate new data into the adaptation process and assess the effectiveness of 
adaptations tools already implemented, monitoring and evaluation are required to feed back into the process.

The following provides a brief introduction and some examples of information gathering and engagement. 

64  A community may be undertaking other climate change impacts at the same time.

23


