•  Water Management Branch, Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural Resource Operations – provide flood 
forecasts and bulletins, liaise with Environment Canada regarding weather forecasts, provide oversight 
to dam and dike owners, and modeling to support flood level efforts

•  Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development – guidance and assistance to local government 

regarding infrastructure including emergency funding, as required

The following regulations under the Emergency Program Act further describe the program:
•  Emergency Program Management Regulation, 1994

This regulation defines the obligations of the Provincial Emergency Program, emergency plans and procedures 
of ministers and government corporations, the Inter-Agency Emergency Preparedness Council, the role of 
ministers in relation to hazards, the role of ministers and government corporations in emergency or disaster.
•  Compensation and Disaster Financial Assistance Regulation, 1995

This regulation describes compensation and disaster financial assistance, eligibility for assistance and what 
is covered. Disaster financial assistance may be claimed for eligible personal expenses (i.e., the principal 
residence of the owner of a structure damaged or destroyed in a disaster and “the necessities of life” of 
a tenant, small business expenses, farm operation expenses, charitable or volunteer expenses and local 
government body expenses). Assistance is limited to 80% of an accepted claim over a deductible of $1,000 
up to a maximum of $300,000. Financial assistance to repair or rebuild a structure may be denied  
if assistance has been provided on two previous occasions.
•  Local Authority Emergency Management Regulation, 1995

This regulation outlines the required contents of Local Emergency Plans and defines the powers and duties 
of a local authority under the Act.

As previously noted, Quebec provides for up to $150,000 in compensation for those willing to relocate. 
Where the market value of the damaged property is less than $150,000, disaster relief has served its 
intended purposes of providing compensation for private losses and acquiring high risk property to ensure 
the Province is not subject to repeat claims for compensation. A key challenge is where the value exceeds 
$150,000, since property owners lack a financial incentive to relocate or undertake additional protective 
measures; this leads to continued or increased vulnerability on the same site.

Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements
Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements are designed to provide financial assistance from the federal 
government on a sliding scale where disaster damages exceed $1.00 per capita of provincial population. 
For disasters below this threshold, no federal assistance is provided. The federal contribution increases 
to 50% where damages are between $1.00 and $3.00 per capita of provincial population. The federal 
contribution increases to 75% if the damages are between $3.00 and $5.00 per capita of provincial 
population and to 90% if they exceed $5.00 per capita of provincial population. Examples of federal 
government assistance include the 1997 flooding in Manitoba’s Red River Valley, the 2003 wildfires in  
B.C.’s Okanagan Valley, and the 2013 floods in Calgary and High River, Alberta. 

Each province is responsible for the development and implementation of disaster recovery assistance 
programs, for deciding when disaster payments are provided, and for determining the amount that will 
be provided in their jurisdiction. A 2008 revision allowed for a 15% supplement of total disaster recovery 
payouts to provinces in order to mitigate the impacts of future hazard events. The key objective of the 
revised program is to reduce or prevent the recurrence of damages. 

92


