In British Columbia approval to construct dikes and other hard protection must be obtained from the 
province under the Water Act and the Dike Maintenance Act and, where applicable, from the federal 
government under the Fisheries Act and the Environmental Assessment Act.

The Nova Scotia Department of Agriculture has a mandate to protect agricultural land behind dikes in 
the Annapolis Basin, Upper Bay of Fundy and other regions of the province. The Department is currently 
responsible for tidal dike maintenance, while landowners are responsible for maintenance of internal dike 
roads and the acquisition of land required for the reconstruction of dikes. Historically, earthen dikes have 
been used to protect this land. These dikes have been raised to maintain a minimum critical elevation 
relative to tide levels. Many dikes were originally built by the Acadians 300 years ago and were upgraded 
in the 1950s. In 2000, the provincial Agricultural Marshland Conservation Act was passed to protect these 
soils for future generations. It is thought that a majority of the diked land is at risk from rising sea levels and 
storm surge.97 Under a joint Atlantic Regional Adaptation Collaboration project with New Brunswick, a 2012 
GIS assessment of dike vulnerability based on LiDAR data in the Tantramar marshlands area concluded 
that the region was at immediate risk of flooding.98 With an average height of 8.9 metres, the vast majority 
of dikes (89%) would be overtopped with a frequency of 1:10 years (i.e. once in 10 years). This would 
potentially flood over 20% of Sackville during a storm surge.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Economic considerations include: 
•  The cost of new dike construction where a dike is not present; 
•  The cost to accommodate a higher dike due to sea level rise; 
•  The structural stability of the new dike; and
•  The ongoing cost of dike maintenance; and land acquisition to accommodate the land base for the dike 

and road access for maintenance and emergency management purposes.

Where an increased dike height is involved, the economic, social and environmental implications of a 
seaward versus a landward expansion must be examined. Hard protection measures tend to be expensive 
(in the order of thousands of dollars per metre for revetments and dikes). The standard for flood protection 
measures (i.e., Flood Construction Level for current sea level vs. projections for 2050 or 2100) will have 
a critical impact on the economic costs. Given the cost implications, it is anticipated that greater use of 
hybrid techniques such as living shorelines will occur and increased attention will be given to retreat 
and avoid strategies. The capital and operating costs of dikes may limit their implementation to selected 
locations, such as densely populated areas, areas with high natural or cultural importance, and high value 
infrastructure.

Funding for dike upgrades requires a large capital outlay, and requires approval by different levels of 
government. Intermittent funding programs may not be appropriate where the need for upgrades  
is ongoing and long-term. It may be difficult to obtain public acceptance depending on the capital costs 
and the distribution of those costs, especially if property views are impacted. 

97  Refers to an extreme tide which occurs every 18.03 years in the Gulf of Maine-Bay of Fundy region when 3 tidal elements peak at the 

same time: anomalistic, synodical and tropical monthly cycles.
(Liekse and Bornemann 2012)

98 

66

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
