• 

increased hurricane damages, due to the greater frequency of Category 4 and 5 storms predicted by 
many climate scientists;
the value of residential real estate that is at risk from sea level rise; and
• 
• 
increased costs of electricity generation as temperatures and air-conditioning requirements rise.
The report concludes that for just these four categories the annual costs of inaction are projected to 
total $92 billion by 2050 and $345 billion by 2100 - figures that respectively would constitute 2.8% and 
5.0% of the state’s projected Gross State Product. The report goes on to state that if estimates were 
included for other sectors such as agriculture, fisheries, insurance, transportation, and water systems – 
to say nothing of ecosystem damage – the totals would be even larger.

 

 

U.S. Climate Science Program and the Subcommittee on Global Change Research. “Coastal Sensitivity to Sea 
Level Rise: A Focus on the Mid-Atlantic.” U.S. Climate Change Science Program Synthesis and Assessment 
Product 4.1, 2009. Available at: http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap4-1/
This synthesis and assessment product (SAP) examines potential effects of sea level rise from climate 
change along the mid-Atlantic coast of the U.S. into the 21st century. This SAP describes the physical 
environments; potential changes to coastal environments, wetlands and vulnerable species, societal 
impacts, and impacts of sea level rise; decisions that may be sensitive to sea level rise; opportunities  
for adaptation, and institutional barriers to adaptation.

U.S. Department of Homeland Security; and FEMA. The State of FEMA - Leaning Forward: Go Big, Go Early,  

Go Fast, Be Smart. Annual Report, FEMA, 2012. Available at:  
http://www.fema.gov/pdf/about/state_of_fema/state_of_fema.pdf
This is a summary of the state of FEMA for the 2013 budget year. It includes a detailed breakdown of 
where FEMA’s funding is allocated. One of the components of this breakdown is a flood hazard mapping 
and risk analysis program.

 

International

 

Abel, Nick, et al. “Sea level rise, coastal development and planned retreat: analytical framework, governance 
principles and an Australian case study.” Environmental Science & Policy 14 (2011): 279-288. Available at:  
https://publications.csiro.au/rpr/pub?list=BRO&pid=csiro:EP101185
This article explores the option of planned retreat to allow natural defences to reclaim lands as 
one adaptation option to address sea level rise. The authors use an analytical framework to explore 
obstacles and opportunities for planned retreat. This framework is applied to South East Queensland, 
Australia, where the authors note the option of planned retreat is disappearing The authors offer the 
following guiding principles to implement the changes in coastal governance required for successful 
planned retreat: (a) allocate authority and resources between levels of governance according to their 
effectiveness at each level; (b) strengthen development rules and incentives to relocate as an unwanted 
threshold is approached; (c) allow for uncertainties by enabling rules and incentives to be changed 
when circumstances change; (d) reassign public and private benefits, costs, risks, uncertainties and 
responsibilities from governments to beneficiaries of development; (e) institutionalise catastrophes as 
opportunities for change, not signals to rebuild. 

Allison, I., N.L. Bindoff, R.A. Bindschadler, P.M. Cox, N. de Noblet, M.H. England, J.E. Francis, N. Gruber, A.M. 

Haywood, D.J. Karoly, G. Kaser, C. Le Quéré, T.M. Lenton, M.E. Mann, B.I. McNeil, A.J. Pitman, S. Rahmstorf, 
E. Rignot, H.J. Schellnhuber, S.H. Schneider, S.C. Sherwood, R.C.J. Somerville, K. Steffen, E.J. Steig, M. 
Visbeck, A.J. Weaver. 2009. The Copenhagen Diagnosis, 2009: Updating the World on the Latest Climate 
Science. University of New South Wales Climate Change Research Centre (CCRC), Sydney, Australia. 
Available at: http://www.copenhagendiagnosis.com/

136


