Setbacks in Îles-de-la-Madeleine

Updated maps for the municipality of Îles-de-la-Madeleine were completed in late 2012 by UQAR on 
commission by the province. Once all the data has been translated into a directive by the province to 
the municipality, it has 120 days to integrate the new setback rules into its master plans, as per the loi 
sur l’aménagement et l’urbanisme (Planning and Urban Planning Law), article 56.14.84

The municipality of Îles-de-la-Madeleine is one of the most vulnerable areas of Quebec. Zoning 
regulations adopted in 2010 increased the setback from 15 to 30 metres. Although a provincial 
directive was not issued, this increase occurred as a result of public consultation and multi-stakeholder 
research on sea level rise in Îles-de-la-Madeleine, undertaken by the Ouranos Consortium. 

84

In New Brunswick, the Community Planning Act has a provision for municipalities and rural communities to 
enact a flood risk area bylaw with provincial approval. Once such an area has been established, the bylaw 
can specify engineering standards, designs and techniques for development in flood risk areas. This Act 
also allows for land use planning throughout the province and allows for the creation of District Planning 
Commissions. These Commissions are responsible for providing building, development and planning 
services to municipalities and unincorporated areas of the province.

Cap Bimet, Grand 
Barachois, N.B.

In Nova Scotia, the Province has designated land use or zoning powers to the municipalities through the 
Municipal Government Act and the Halifax Regional Municipality Charter. These powers allow municipalities 
to develop planning strategies and bylaws to regulate land use.85 

In P.E.I, zoning and development bylaws have been enacted in a number of coastal municipalities, 
pursuant to the Planning Act Subdivision and Development Regulations. These municipalities must follow 
the provisions of the Environmental Protection Act Watercourse and Wetland Protection Regulations, under 
provincial legislation. Municipalities can alter the setback requirements specified in the Planning Act 
Subdivision and Development Regulations for setbacks from coastal areas and beaches. 

(Province of Nova Scotia 2009)
(Province of Nova Scotia 2009)

84 
85 
42

Regulatory Tools
