Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Economic considerations can include the cost of restricting land use to reduce the risk of 
damage to land or buildings. A Save Harmless provision in a covenant can be used to protect a local 
government from financial damages in the event of future flooding. The cost of an easement or statutory 
right-of-way will vary depending on the applicable conditions – an appraisal is frequently used to 
determine fair market value. Compensation to the owner could be through a lump sum or an annual 
payment based on a percentage of market value. A local government may be able to issue a tax receipt  
for a conservation easement if it is classified as a charitable gift by the Canada Revenue Agency.

Environmental – This tool is well suited to conservation purposes. Part or all of the land may be restricted 
for habitat conservation and a covenant may also be used as means of requiring an undertaking for 
environment enhancement purposes.

Social – Using this tool provides an alternative to land acquisition that meets the needs both of the 
landowner and the local government. This could include limited development or no development on land 
subject to coastal hazards, but not necessarily restriction of the whole parcel. This tool offers flexibility 
without a change in ownership or subdivision.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation measures include approval by the local government of the easement or other land use 
restriction and may include the services of a lawyer, appraiser and legal surveyor. Challenges may include 
securing an agreement with the land owner as to the nature, value and funding of the restriction.

Advantages

Disadvantages

Annual compensation or a lump sum payment may be 
required to secure the easement or statutory right of  
way process or servitude.

The easement or other restriction can be limited to a 
particular part of a site, a particular purpose or a specific 
time period. 
The owner is able to retain ownership of the property  
and may be able to use areas not at risk. 
The cost for a covenant or statutory right-of-way is 
typically much less than fee simple acquisition.
A covenant may be used in conjunction with other tools 
such as subdivision, building or land use regulation. 
A conservation easement may be considered a charitable 
gift by the Canada Revenue Agency.
A covenant may be negotiated as part of the 
development approval process with no direct cost to  
the local government.

4. Land Trusts

Tool Description
A land trust is a non-profit private organization created for the purpose of environmental conservation or 
other similar purpose. While there are many land trust organizations in Canada, their general objective is  
to acquire ecologically significant, often threatened, land through purchase, donation, covenant or lease. 

Land trusts consist of nationally or provincially based organizations, typically non-profit societies with the 
ability to offer tax deductible charitable receipts. National organizations include Ducks Unlimited Canada 
and the Nature Conservancy of Canada. Provincial organizations include the Nature Conservancy of British 

55

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
