Advantages

Disadvantages

Many forms of hard structural protection can be 
engineered to provide a reasonably high level of 
dependability, if adequately maintained.
Hard structural protection can provide protection for 
high value development or natural areas and maintain or 
increase property values. 
A seawall may be available for use as a recreation corridor. 
The Stanley Park seawall in Vancouver is an example of an 
outstanding success with major recreation and economic 
spin-off benefits.

Structural measures to protect against erosion in one 
place can increase erosion elsewhere. This situation may 
occur where incoming waves approach the shoreline at 
an angle causing sediment to move along the shoreline 
until blocked by a groyne.
A groyne offers limited protection against extreme events 
and may negatively impact adjacent riparian areas. 
A seawall or floodwall reflects more wave energy, which 
may cause localized erosion at the toe and require a deep 
foundation.
Seawalls and other hard protection structures are 
expensive to construct and maintain, can be unsightly 
and restrict shore access.

5. Wet Floodproofing

Tool Description
Wet floodproofing consists of measures which allow water to enter and exit a structure with minimal 
damage. Wet floodproofing involves the use of flood resistant materials, the elevation of electrical and 
mechanical services and the use of openings for drainage. This tool is distinguished from dry floodproofing 
which aims to make a building watertight or impermeable to an expected flood.

Application
Wet floodproofing has limited applicability and is not commonly used. It may be used for existing 
developments with small land parcels built where infrastructure is slightly below the established Flood 
Construction Level. A commercial storefront abutting a sidewalk that is at an elevation subject to flooding 
has few alternatives if the building has no setback from the property line. Wet floodproofing may be a 
viable alternative to elevating an existing residential property on a small lot above the floodplain.

Wet floodproofing may be used where the area subject to flooding is not used for habitable purposes, these 
may include vehicle parking areas and areas used for the storage of goods not damageable by floodwaters.

Figure 8 - Wet floodproofing design101 with window openings which allow for passage of flood waters  
(Drawing: the Arlington Group Planning + Architecture Inc.).

101 

(Arlington Group Planning + Architecture Inc. 2001)

(Photo: Don Jardine)

71

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
