and benefits are estimated. This guidebook divides adaptation technologies into: (1) capital goods 
such as dikes or seawalls and (2) technologies focusing on information, capacity building, institutional 
arrangements and policy and strategy development. The contents of this guidebook is very informative, 
with applications from around the world, but particularly from Great Britain, the Netherlands and 
the United States. The document focuses specifically on protection of the coastline against increased 
flooding, inundation and erosion. 

Maharaj, R. Coastal Engineering Design of a Rip-Rap Revetment System for Shoreline Protection. SOPAC 

 

Preliminary Report No.124, Yaren District, Republic of Nauru: South Pacific Applied Geoscience 
Commission, 2000. Available at: http://ict.sopac.org/VirLib/LR0124.pdf
This report presents preliminary results and design guidelines for a coastal protection system for a 
section of an eroding coastline, in Yaren District, Republic of Nauru. These guidelines were drafted and 
prepared following a request from the office of the President, Republic of Nauru (RON), to SOPAC, to 
assess an appropriate protection system for a chronically eroding coast in Yaren District. Yaren District is 
located in the southwest part of Nauru and is the site of the capital of Nauru.

Nicholls, Robert J., and Abiy S. Kebede. R6.1: The Implications on the U.K. of the Impacts of Climate Change 

 

and Sea-level Rise on Critical Coastal Infrastructure Overseas, 2010 to 2100. Report submitted to Foresight, 
Government Office for Science, United Kingdom: Government for Science, U.K. Government, 2010. 
Available at: http://www.bis.gov.uk/assets/foresight/docs/international-dimensions/11-1022-
implications-on-uk-climate-change-sea-level-rise.pdf
This study considers the indirect effects of international climate change on the United Kingdom. Using 
a synthesis of the existing scientific literature and policy-related documents, the study explores the 
physical environment and associated critical infrastructure in the coastal sector worldwide; the potential 
changes to coastal environments and the potential demand for new infrastructure; societal impacts 
and potential implications of sea level rise on infrastructure elsewhere in the world, and the current 
and predicted potential threats and opportunities of these on the U.K.’s citizens, government, and 
businesses. The report also discusses the potential implications on the U.K.’s future adaptation policy.

RSPB, Environment Agency, Natural England and Defra. Coastal Futures - Humber Community Project. 

 

November 2, 2010. Available at: http://www.coastalfutures.org.uk/humber.html.
The Humber Community Project was established to support communities dealing with coastal change 
and sea level rise. The project website (www.coastalfutures.org.uk) provides materials outlining 
strategies and approaches, as well as a number of case study profiles. Project reports include one on 
lessons and best practices for community engagement, and an economic assessment of managed 
realignment as an option for adapting to sea level rise.

State of New South Wales - Department of Planning. New South Wales (NSW) Coastal Planning Guideline: 

 

Adapting to Sea Level Rise. NSW, Australia: State of NSW, 2010. Available at:  
http://www.planning.nsw.gov.au/adapting-to-sea-level-rise
This document was prepared to provide guidance on how sea level rise is to be considered in land 
use planning and development assessment in coastal NSW. The aim of this guideline is to promote 
ecologically sustainable development and in particular to encourage a precautionary approach to land 
use planning in light of potential sea level rise impacts in coastal areas. This guideline therefore adopts a 
risk-based approach to planning and development assessment in coastal areas.

140


