Prince Edward Island
POPULATION 140,204 (2011 CENSUS)

The Province of P.E.I. has an ocean-influenced coastline of approximately 3,200 km. The coastline is deeply 
indented by tidal inlets, estuaries and salt marsh and generally alternates between headlands of steep 
sandstone bluffs and extensive sandy beaches. The north shore of the Island, facing the Gulf of St Lawrence, 
features extensive sand-dune formations.42 The coast of P.E.I. has been identified as one of the areas most 
sensitive to sea level rise in the entire country. Factors contributing to this sensitivity include soft sandstone 
bedrock, a sandy and dynamic shore zone which is sediment starved in places, low terrain behind the shore 
with significant flooding potential and documented high rates of shoreline retreat.43

Given P.E.I.’s size and shape – the island is only 224 km long and between 6 km and 64 km wide – a 
significant proportion of the population lives on or near the coast.

Parts of the North Shore of P.E.I. are rated highly sensitive because this coast is exposed to the open Gulf 
of St. Lawrence, with potential wave-generating fetches44 of several hundred kilometres. Decreased sea-
ice cover in winter may increase the amount of open water fetch, creating larger waves superimposed on 
storm surges.45 Although Charlottetown Harbour is largely protected from the Northumberland Strait and 
the Gulf of St. Lawrence, relative sea level is rising and storm-surge events are increasingly common. 

The provincial government has a major role in land use planning in P.E.I., managing about 90% of the land 
area in the province. The 31 municipal governments, which practise comprehensive land use planning, 
have jurisdiction over the remaining 10% of the province’s land area. For the most part, municipal land use 
plans are more restrictive than provincial ones, although in the case of coastal area development, some 
municipalities are actually less restrictive than provided for in provincial legislation. 

Relative sea level estimates for northwest and southwest P.E.I. to year 2100 anticipate a rise of 1.0 to 1.08 m 
± 0.48 m. Estimates for the Charlottetown region predict relative sea level rise of 1.06 m ± 0.48 m.46
Newfoundland and Labrador
POPULATION 514,536 (2011 CENSUS)

Newfoundland and Labrador has almost 29,000 km of coastline.47 The province is divided into the 
mainland territory of Labrador and the southern Island of Newfoundland. The northern coastal region 
of Labrador is ruggedly mountainous with deep fjords and few settlements. The southern coastal region 
of Labrador has a rugged barren foreshore and light to moderate settlement. In Newfoundland, the 
west coast is well-forested coastal plains with several fjord-like bays, the largest of which are the Bay of 
Islands and Bonne Bay. There are almost continuous settlements in the bays and coves along this coast. 
The northeast coast, with its numerous bays, islands and headlands fronts on the Atlantic Ocean from 
the Great Northern Peninsula to the Avalon Peninsula. The shoreline has innumerable bays, coves, islands 
and fjords – it is also an area blocked on an annual basis by arctic drift ice throughout the winter and 
early spring. Settlements have developed along the shores of most bays and on some off-shore islands. 
The south coast has  features typical of a submerged shoreline; namely offshore islands, spits, tombolos48 
and bay-mouth bars (barachoix).49

(Historica-Dominion Institute 2012)
(Shaw, et al. 1998)

42 
43 
44  Fetch refers to the length of water over which wind has blown and is a key factor in creating storm surges.
45 
46 
47 
48  A narrow strip of sand that links one island to another or to the mainland.
49 

(Shaw, et al. 1998)
(Richards and Daigle 2011)
(Newfoundland & Labrador Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture 2011)

(Historica-Dominion Institute 2012)

18


