West Vancouver, B.C. Seawall

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – In B.C., the cost of a foreshore lease is set by the Province. The assessed or market value of a 
lease may be set at a percentage of the land value, for example 8% annually. Nominal rent tenure applies 
if the lease qualifies under the Community and Institutional Land Use Policy of the Ministry of Forests, 
Lands, and Natural Resource Operations. This policy applies to eligible public sector organizations, local 
governments, First Nations and community organizations.

Environmental – A foreshore lease allows the management of the foreshore to be treated as more of a 
complete system rather than stopping at the traditional jurisdictional boundary of the high tide mark 
or natural boundary. This can facilitate implementation of innovative soft armoring approaches such 
as habitat enhancement of intertidal areas, beach nourishment or the creation of wetlands. In B.C. the 
holder of a foreshore tenure is responsible for clean-up of any contamination that occurs within the 
tenure boundaries.

Social – Local governance tenure over the foreshore can allow for partnerships with riparian owners and 
local community groups to provide protection for upland areas or intertidal habitats. This can help foster 
a sense of ownership and responsibility at the community level for adaptation along the coast. Increased 
recreational use may provide an additional indirect benefit. 

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
In British Columbia, foreshore leases have typically been used for marine facilities associated with upland 
development. One challenge will be to refocus this tool as part of a sea level rise adaptation strategy. 
In addition, it must be recognized that this tool will have limited suitability due to environmental, 
bathymetric and other constraints.

The District of West Vancouver provides an excellent model for foreshore management. The District has 
worked in co-operation with upland owners and has not detrimentally affected fish habitat. In addition, 
foreshore leases do not affect any federally controlled waterways such as shipping channels for the Port 
of Vancouver or BC Ferries routes.

59

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
