Singh, Keith, Bradley B. Walters, and Jeff Ollerhead. “Climate Change, Sea-Level Rise and the Case for Salt 

 

Marsh Restoration in the Bay of Fundy, Canada.” Environments, 2007: 71-84. Available at:  
http://www.environmentsjournal.ca/index.php/ejis/article/view/14267
This paper explores the feasibility of using coastal salt marsh restoration as a tool to adapt to sea level 
rise and mitigate climate change – using the Bay of Fundy as a case study. In particular it explores the 
ability of marshes to self-adapt to changes in sea level, their function as a buffer of coastal processes, 
their cost-effectiveness relative to traditional, static, man-made defences, and their ability to accumulate 
carbon. The paper investigates the possibility of using these attributes of salt marshes to increase the 
protective capacity of a coastline by increasing the amount of salt marsh through restoration projects. 

Stanton, Elizabeth A., Marion Davis, and Amanda Fencl. Costing Climate Impacts and Adaptation  A Canadian 

Study on Coastal Zones. a Report Commissioned by the National Round Table on the Environment and 
the Economy, Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI), 2010. Available at:  
http://www.sei-international.org/mediamanager/documents/Publications/Climate-mitigation-
adaptation/Economics_of_climate_policy/sei-canada-coastal-zones-june-2010.pdf
This report identifies sea level rise and larger, more frequent, storm surges as the two great threats to 
Canada’s coastal zones. The potential impacts of these two threats are destruction of property, coastal 
erosion, the salinization of aquifers and permanent flooding of low-lying areas. While studies to date 
have shown that one third of the Canadian coastline has a moderate or high level of sensitivity to sea 
level rise, little research exists quantifying the likely economic impacts. This study begins to fill that gap, 
combining a physical model of sea level rise and storm surge flooding with socio-economic analysis and 
a review of existing research policies related to climate impacts and adaptation. 

Estimates in the study exclude: 
•  damage to public infrastructure (such as roads, railways, ports, and public buildings); 
•  damage to non-residential private property and infrastructure (stores, factories, hotels, marinas);
•  business losses due to sea level rise and storm surges (reduced tourism revenue, the cost of an 

extended shutdown); 
relocation costs for people whose homes are destroyed (beyond the cost of replacing the dwelling);

• 
•  damage due to the salinization of fresh water; damages from erosion; and ecosystem effects. 
The report offers several policy recommendations regarding the improved accuracy of sea level rise 
studies, and the implementation of adaptation measures similar to those quantified in the report.

 

 

 

Stewart, P., R. Rutherford, H. Levy, and J. Jackson. Guide to Land Use Planning in Coastal Areas of the Maritime 
Provinces. Canadian Technical Report of the Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences No. 2443, Dartmouth, Nova 
Scotia: Oceans and Environment Branch, Maritime Regions, Department of Fisheries and Oceans and 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography, 2003. Available at: http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Library/316491.pdf
This guide to land use planning in coastal areas has been prepared to provide information that will assist 
in coastal land use planning, with a particular focus on the Maritime provinces. The report is divided 
into a series of overviews and fact sheets that cover key land use planning and related topics, including 
coastal environments and maritime ecosystems, legislative frameworks for planning, and engineering 
aspects of coastal structures.

 

Tatebe, Kristi, Alison Shaw, and Stephen R.J. Sheppard. Technical Report on Local Climate Change Visioning for 
Delta: Findings and Recommendations. Report prepared for the Corporation of Delta, Vancouver, Canada: 
The Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning (CALP) at UBC, 2010. Available at:  
http://www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/Delta-Technical-Report_V1-0.pdf

131


