Quebec

 

Ministry of Sustainable Development (MDDEP). Le Québec et les changements climatiques, plan d’action 2006 - 
2012: un défi pour l’avenir. (Quebec and climate change action plan 2006 - 2012: a challenge for the future). 
Quebec, QC: Government of Quebec, 2008. Available at:  
http://www.mddep.gouv.qc.ca/changements/plan_action/index-mesures.htm 
This provincial government climate change action plan lays out high level mitigation and adaptation 
objectives. Section 2.3 of this document is entitled «LES ACTIONS VISANT L’ADAPTATION DU QUÉBEC 
AUX CHANGEMENTS CLIMATIQUES» (Actions related to Quebec’s adaptation to climate change). In 
sub point 2.3.2, measure 23 of the plan includes conducting more detailed research into the impact 
of climate change on coastal zones in order to develop plans for better protecting sensitive ecological 
zones as well as infrastructure.

Ministry of Sustainable Development (MDDEP). Stratégie gouvernementale d’adaptation aux changements 
climatiques 2013-2020, Un effort collectif pour renforcer la résilience de la société québécoise. (Government 
strategy for adapting to climate change 2013-2020, a collective effort to reinforce Quebec’s resiliency.) 
Document de consultation (consultation document), Quebec, QC: Quebec Government, 2012. Available 
at: http://www.mddefp.gouv.qc.ca/changements/plan_action/pacc2020.pdf
This consultation document lays out the proposed government priorities related to adapting to climate 
change for 2013 - 2020. Section 3, dealing specifically with adaptation tools, outlines: the need for solid 
research in order to prioritise issues; increasing awareness on these issues; analysing the vulnerability of 
communities and ecosystems; communicating the data to the impacted communities; developing and 
implementing appropriate technologies; and, adapting legal instruments and governance structures 
according to adaptation needs. 

 

Ouranos. Élaborer un plan d’action aux changements climatiques - Guide destiné au milieu municipal 

 

québécois. (Creating action plans for dealing with climate change - A guide for Quebec municipalities). 
Quebec, QC: Quebec Government (MDDEP, MAMROT), 2010. Available at:  
http://www.fcm.ca/Documents/tools/PCP/elaborer_un_plan_d_adaptation_aux_changement_
climatiques_FR.pdf
This guide, developed by the Ouranos Consortium in collaboration with the Quebec government, 
proposes a five step methodology, geared toward municipalities, for developing climate change 
adaptation plans: 1. Evaluation of climate change impact; 2. Defining the potential consequences and 
analysis of vulnerability; 3. Risk assessment; 4. Identifying and prioritising risk management strategies 
for known risks; 5. Develop and implement an action plan. Each of the steps is broken down to offer 
suggestions on how to achieve the objectives in the Quebec municipal context. The guide aims to 
create awareness among municipal officials, while offering tools to take concrete steps toward creating 
tailor-made adaptation plans.

Quebec Government. Évaluation du risque d’érosion du littoral de la Côte-Nord du Saint-Laurent pour la 

 

période de 1996 - 2003 (Coastal erosion risk assessment for the North Coast region of the St. Lawrence, from 
1996 - 2003). Quebec Government, 2006. Available at:  
http://www.crecotenord.qc.ca/index2.php?option=com_docman&task=doc_view&gid=468&Itemid=77
This report outlines findings of a collaborative five year assessment of coastal erosion in coastal regions 
of northern Quebec. New erosion maps were produced, demonstrating that dramatic erosion has been 
taking place - on average between 60cm and one metre per year - but that erosion is not occurring at 
a consistent rate and depends on coastal characteristics. On average, data indicates that set back levels 
throughout the region should be between 60 and 160 metres.

133


