Advantages

Disadvantages

Dunes can be used to provide an effective defence 
against coastal flooding and erosion by maintaining wide 
sandy beaches, which dissipate wave energy, and can 
serve as a store of sediment, which can be accessed in 
order to satisfy erosional forces. 
Dune protection can meet multiple objectives, including 
environmental enhancement and protection, public and 
recreational access, and hazard reduction. 
Dunes can be created in a sensitive manner by taking into 
account the environment in which they are placed. Dunes 
and the vegetation of dunes can provide an important 
environmental benefit by creating or increasing valuable 
coastal habitat for species at risk. 

Dunes, especially artificial dunes, can be perceived as a 
barrier to beach access, and a dune creation proposal 
may run into community opposition. While providing 
protection from erosion, dunes may conflict with 
residential or tourism purposes where the concern is 
maintaining “sea views”. Dune development may be 
seen as an opportunity to encourage additional coastal 
development at risk from sea level rise.
Dunes are not static like hard forms of protection. They 
are dynamic and constantly evolving, and therefore 
require careful long-term management.
Dunes as an sea level rise adaptation tool have limited 
applicability since sandy shorelines and suitable material 
are not present in many areas. As well, the bathymetry 
near the shoreline may not be suitable for the use of this 
tool. Dunes may require a large footprint, which may have 
significant cost implications.

3. Beach Nourishment

Tool Description
Beach nourishment refers to the addition of sand or other similar beach sediment material to satisfy the 
erosional forces of natural wave action and prevent shoreline erosion. As waves run up on a beach, they 
lose energy and are dissipated; the more beach (or similar surface), the more energy is dissipated. By 
adding a sediment supply, the beach is maintained at a width that provides storm protection and acts as a 
buffer. The cross-sectional shape of a beach affects its ability to dissipate wave energy: a wide and shallow 
beach will attenuate wave energy more effectively than a steep and narrow beach. 

Beach nourishment reduces the detrimental effects of coastal erosion by providing additional sediment 
to satisfy the natural forces of erosion. Beach nourishment will not stop erosion; however, it will provide 
a sacrificial element against coastal erosion, rather than a hard barrier. Beach nourishment will likely be 
required on an ongoing basis as long as the forces of erosion are present.108 

Application
Beach nourishment can use sediment material dredged from the ocean, or material barged, trucked, 
moved by heavy equipment or by a conveyor belt from a land-based source. The rate of erosion needs to 
be monitored on a regular basis, typically by a cross-sectional analysis. If the available beach material drops 
below to a critical level, re-nourishment will be required to avoid further erosion and damage to coastal 
infrastructure. A sediment budget is used to describe the measurement of migrating and eroding sediment 
in a manner similar to the measurement of river bed aggradation. 

Because of annual sand erosion from the dunes and beaches in the area, a beach nourishment program has 
been in place at Parlee Beach (near Shediac, N.B.) since 2009. It is expected that this will become an annual 
program with a portion of the park entrance fee ($3) used to help pay for the program.

108 

(Linham and Nicholls 2010)

77

Non-Structural Tools (Soft Armouring)
