deemed to have notice if the legal instrument is registered on the certificate of title of the property in the 
applicable provincial land registry. It remains on the land and is automatically transferred from one owner 
to another if the land is sold. 

Enabling Legislation
In common law jurisdictions in Canada (every province but Quebec), easements and covenants are authorized 
by either common law or statute. In Quebec, the Civil Code of Quebec makes provision for servitudes.90

In B.C., an easement, statutory right-of-way and/or covenant may be registered as a charge on the title 
of land under Division 4 (S.218-223) of the Land Title Act. These tools can have broad applications in 
addressing coastal hazards. For example a covenant can include provisions restricting the use of land 
or provisions limiting or preventing building on the land, or preventing its subdivision. The Act specifies 
that such a covenant may be of a negative or positive nature and may include a provision that land be 
protected, preserved, conserved, maintained, enhanced, restored or kept in its natural or existing state  
in accordance with the covenant and to the extent provided in the covenant. 

In Quebec the Natural Heritage Conservation Act allows the registration of a nature reserve agreement 
to be registered against a land title. More specifically, the purpose of this Act is to contribute to the 
objective of safeguarding the character, diversity and integrity of Quebec’s natural heritage through 
measures intended to protect its biological diversity and the life-sustaining elements of natural settings. 
The Act is intended to facilitate the establishment of a network of protected areas representative of 
biodiversity by introducing protection measures for natural settings that complete existing measures, 
including the assigning of protection status to certain areas under the responsibility of other 
government departments or bodies.

In New Brunswick, under the Conservation Easements Act, a municipality or any agency of a municipality 
may hold a conservation easement for a variety of reasons such as: the protection, enhancement or 
restoration of natural ecosystems; the conservation or protection of soil, air, land or water; the protection  
or use of land for outdoor recreation; or the use of land for public education.

Nova Scotia follows the 2001 Conservation Easement Act which enables a conservation easement to be 
entered into between an owner and an eligible body for the purpose of protecting, restoring or enhancing 
land that: contains natural ecosystems or constitutes the habitat of rare, threatened or endangered plant 
or animal species; provides a haven for concentrations of birds and animals; provides opportunities 
for scientific or educational programs in aspects of the natural environment; or is representative of the 
ecosystems, landforms or landscapes of the province.

The Natural Areas Protection Act of P.E.I. is intended to preserve natural areas. Under this Act, a private 
landowner may impose a restrictive covenant on his or her land by entering into an agreement with a 
covenant holder. Such a restrictive covenant may be positive or negative in nature and prohibit specific uses 
of the land. “Natural areas” are defined by the Act and include parcels of land that: provide haven for seasonal 
concentrations of birds and animals; or provide opportunities for scientific and educational programs in 
aspects of the natural environment.

Newfoundland and Labrador has no specific conservation easement legislation. However, the Historic 
Resources Act authorizes covenants or easements for the protection of historic resources. The Act’s definition of 
“historic resources” is broad enough to cover some lands with conservation values.91 The Act defines “historic 
resources” as a work of nature or of humans that is primarily of value for its archaeological, prehistoric, historic, 
cultural, natural, scientific or aesthetic interest, including an archaeological, prehistoric, historic or natural site, 
structure or object.

90 
91 

(Atkins, Hillyer and Kwasniak 2004)
(Atkins, Hillyer and Kwasniak 2004)

54

Land Use Change or Restriction Tools
