4. Emergency Planning and Preparedness

Tool Description
Emergency planning and preparedness measures are undertaken in advance of a disaster. Coastal flooding 
may result in property damage, damage to or destruction of property contents, economic losses due to 
severed transportation links and other damaged infrastructure. It may also result in loss of land due to 
erosion, business disruption in the affected area, population/community displacement, health and safety 
hazards and even death. Effective emergency planning and preparedness reduces the damage caused by 
such events. 

Post-disaster management refers to measures undertaken during and after a disaster and are discussed 
separately following the discussion of adaptation tools.

Application
Emergency planning and preparedness measures may be undertaken in all coastal areas at risk of coastal 
hazards, irrespective of the other adaptation tools implemented. 

Between 1970 and 2013, the federal government administered the Joint Emergency Preparedness Program 
(JEPP) to support disaster preparedness through funds provided to provincial and territorial governments. 
This program provided financial assistance of up to 75% of a specific project to a maximum of $3,000,000, 
and focused specifically on increasing local government emergency response capability.

In B.C., under the Emergency Program Act, local authorities have primary responsibility for responding to 
emergencies and must have an emergency plan in place to address potential flood events and maintain 
public safety. The Province provides support to local authorities depending on the magnitude of the event.

Local authorities:
•  must prepare a local Emergency Plan;
•  must establish and maintain an Emergency Management Organization;
•  may cause the plan to be implemented;
•  may declare a state of local emergency; and
•  may do all acts and implement all procedures that it considers necessary to prevent, respond to or 

alleviate the effects of an emergency or disaster.

The emergency management of floods consists of several phases. This tool covers the first phase – 
emergency planning and preparedness for a flood. Later phases concern flood response and recovery/
disaster financial assistance. These later phases are critically important but are not considered part of the 
Primer toolkit.

In 1999, to assist local and diking authorities to prepare a flood response plan, the B.C. Water Management 
Branch and the Provincial Emergency Program (PEP) published the Flood Planning and Response Guide 
for British Columbia.79 This document includes sections on flood prevention, flood damage prevention, the 
preparation and implementation of a flood response plan and post flood management.

79  The Guide also provides assistance for preparation of a Flood Response Plan. More detail is available at  

http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/fhm-2012/flood_emg_response.html. 

39

Planning Tools
