HIGH WATER MARK means that part of the ocean shore to which the waves normally reach when the tide 

is at its highest point. It is often marked by a debris or wrack line along the shore. The term strandline 
may also be used. 

INSPECTOR OF DIKES (IOD)* is an official of the B.C. Ministry of Environment as defined under the Dike 

Maintenance Act RSBC 1996, chapter 95.

LONGSHORE DRIFT means the movement of beach-grade sediments along a coast parallel to the 

shoreline. It is caused by waves obliquely hitting the shoreline.

MITIGATION means a human intervention to reduce the occurrence or impact of an activity or to enhance 

the ability to cope with those impacts.

NATURAL BOUNDARY means the visible high water mark of any lake, river, stream or other body of 

water where the presence and action of the water are so common and usual and so long continued in 
all ordinary years as to mark upon the soil of the bed of the lake, river, stream or other body of water 
a character distinct from that of the banks thereof, in respect to vegetation, as well as in respect to 
the nature of the soil itself. For coastal areas, the Natural Boundary shall include the natural limit of 
permanent terrestrial vegetation. In addition, the Natural Boundary includes the best estimate of the 
edge of dormant or old side channels and marsh areas.*

PRECIPITATION refers to rain, snow, and hail that fall from the atmosphere.
PUMP STATION is a flood protection structure used to discharge water across a dike to a body of water 
when floodboxes are closed by a high tide or high river elevation. A pump station is generally built in 
conjunction with floodboxes as a combined structure. 

RESILIENCE means the capacity to anticipate, prepare for, respond to, and recover from the effects of sea 

level rise with minimum damage to social well-being, the economy and the environment. 

REVETMENT is a sloping structure designed as a cover or facing to absorb the energy of incoming water 

and protect existing shoreline uses as a defence against erosion.

RIPARIAN RIGHTS refer to common law rights that occur to property ownership along the shore of the 

ocean, a river or lake. They typically include access to and from the water, limited rights to use the water 
in its natural state, and protection of the property from erosion.

RIPRAP is an engineered layer of graded broken rock or other heavy material, which serves as the primary 

protection against shear stress or Erosion from flowing water. Riprap protects shorelines and shoreline 
structures by absorbing and deflecting the energy of waves before they reach the areas to be protected.

RISK means the likelihood of a negative event occurring (e.g., flooding due to sea level rise) combined with 

the magnitude of the potential consequences. 

SALT MARSH is a coastal wetland on the edge of a shoreline or estuary where fresh water mixes with 

sea water. A salt marsh is the result of interaction between living organisms and natural forces of wind, 
currents, storms, tides and salt.

SAND DUNE is a ridge of sand created by the wind. Naturally occurring sand dunes represent a store of 
sediment just landward of normal high tides. Artificial sand dunes and dune rehabilitation represent a 
form of soft armouring engineered to mimic the functioning of natural dunes and reduce coastal erosion.

SETBACK is a horizontal distance which a building or landfill must be set back from a Natural Boundary  

or other reference line to maintain a Floodway and allow for potential land Erosion.

SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA refers to the land area covered by a base flood on National Flood 

Insurance Programs maps in the U.S.A. A base flood means a flood with a 1% chance of being equalled or 
exceeded in any given year. A base flood is also known as the 100-year flood and is the national standard 
used by the National Flood Insurance Program and all federal agencies for the purposes of requiring the 
purchase of flood insurance and regulating new development.

100


