Application
Coastal hazard mapping may be used to identify areas at risk due to the adverse effects of sea level rise, 
direct new development away from these high risk areas and manage development in areas where the risk 
is minimal or can be mitigated. Coastal hazard mapping complements and strengthens other adaptation 
options and increases stakeholder awareness of areas at risk. As such, this tool may be applied to all coastal 
areas at risk of coastal hazards, irrespective of the other adaptation tools implemented. 

In 1975 the federal government of Canada initiated the Flood Damage Reduction Program. Under this 
program, mapping of floodplain regions was supported through a 50/50 cost shared basis with provinces. 
Through this program over 700 communities in six provinces undertook flood hazard mapping – of which a 
majority were in Quebec. At a minimum, maps were required to identify areas subject to 1 in 100 year flood 
events. B.C. adopted a design flood standard of 1 in 200 years, except on the Fraser River, where the 1948 
flood of record was used. Atlantic Canada and Quebec adopted a flood standard of 1 in 100 years. Mapping 
under this program was completed by 2000.

Since 2000, coastal hazard mapping has progressed sporadically across the country. As part of the Atlantic 
Regional Adaptation Collaborative, digital elevation mapping was completed for some coastal areas of 
Nova Scotia, including the Chignecto Isthmus, where an evaluation of flood risk to infrastructure was 
undertaken. 

The Halifax Regional Municipality in collaboration with Natural Resources Canada has conducted flood 
hazard mapping, including extreme event data. The results are reported in Halifax Harbour Extreme Water 
Levels in the Context of Climate Change, Scenarios for a 100-year Planning Horizon Geological Survey of 
Canada. This report includes an understanding of present and future sea level rise, vertical land motion, 
extreme water levels (combined tide and surge), harbour seiche and wave run-up.

The Province of New Brunswick maintains a coastal erosion database, which presents long-term coastline 
and shoreline migration rates. This data is generated through photogrammetric studies (air photos 
analyses) conducted by N.B. Department of Natural Resources and collaborators (universities, colleges, 
NGOs, consultants, etc.). This data is used to determine appropriate setbacks when new developments are 
being assessed in coastal areas. 

In B.C. current federal-provincial flood management programs do not cover updates to hazard mapping or 
hydraulic analysis, although both have been included as secondary components in some projects. 

In Prince Edward Island a 30 cm rise has been observed at the Charlottetown tide gauge since 1900. 
Climate change scenarios suggest that a sea level rise of 100 cm can be anticipated by 2100 with storm 
surges likely to become more frequent and more intense. To identify vulnerable infrastructure and guide 
land use planning, hazard mapping has been undertaken across the province.

34

Planning Tools
