 

 

This report was developed as part of the Australian Government’s support for adaptation to climate 
change and aims to help to address the need to prepare Australian governments, vulnerable industries, 
communities and ecosystems to manage the unavoidable consequences of climate change. This 
report forms part of a suite of tools being developed to assist local governments in identifying and 
implementing climate change adaptation actions. In particular, this report complements Climate 
Change Impacts & Risk Management – A Guide for Business and Government, released in 2006.
The adaptation actions that have been identified during this study are those that provide a net 
economic, social or environmental benefit no matter what level of climate change occurs.

Entec U.K. Limited; Risk Management Solutions; and Risk & Policy Analysts. Coastal Flood Risk – Thinking For 

 

Tomorrow, Acting Today. Summary Report, Association of British Insurers, 2006. Available at:  
http://www.abi.org.uk/Publications/ABI_Publications_Coastal_Flood_Risk__Thinking_for_Tomorrow_
Acting_Today_fa6.aspx
This report was published by the insurance industry, and assesses the impacts of sea level rise on flood 
risk for the United Kingdom. Integrating data from various sources, this review considers what the 
impacts of a catastrophic storm (such as that experienced on the east coast of England in 1953) would 
be in today’s context and then with an additional 0.4 m of sea level rise factored in. The analysis is 
illustrated through the use of five case studies. According to their modeling, a single major storm event 
could give rise to costs of between £7.5 billion and £16 billion with a sea level rise of 0.4 m, and without 
any further development in affected areas. Investment in improved flood defences could reduce this 
financial cost by between £3.7 billion and £6.8 billion.

Hallegate, Stéphane. SR17: The Economic Growth Impact of Sea-Level Rise. Migration and Global 

 

Environmental Change - Commissioned as part of the U.K. Government’s Foresight Project, U.K. 
Government Office for Science, 2011. Available at: www.bis.gov.uk
This report looks beyond the direct economic implications of sea level rise on the built environment 
to consider the broader economic impacts of sea level rise on the economic system as a whole. The 
paper proposes a framework within which to discuss the economic growth impact of sea level rise and 
summarises current debates on the measures of economic growth. It also reviews the mechanisms 
through which sea level rise can affect economic growth, namely the loss of land (including natural 
capital), the loss of infrastructure and physical capital, the additional cost from extreme events and 
coastal floods (loss of social capital) and the increased expenditure for coastal protection. 

Institution of Civil Engineers (ICE). “Facing up to Sea Level Rise: Retreat? Defend? Attack? The future of our 

 

estuarine cities.” Building Futures Series, 2010. Available at: www.buildingfutures.org.uk/projects
This publication was produced as a “think piece” to provoke consideration of the implications of rising 
sea levels on urban areas of the U.K. It graphically documents the results of a design charrette structured 
around three future scenarios for the cities of Kingston-Upon-Hull and Portsmouth. The report asks 
what a strategy of retreat, defense, or attack would look like from an infrastructure and architectural 
perspective for the two coastal cities. The publication serves to visualize the potential implications 
of these three different strategies over the next 100 years as well as outlining key messages and 
considerations for government, planners, architects, engineers, urban designers and the public. 

Linham, Matthew M., and Robert J. Nicholls. Technologies for Climate Change Adaptation – Coastal Erosion 

and Flooding. TNA Guidebook Series, New Delhi, India: Magnum Custom Publishing, 2010. Available at:  
http://www.unep.org/climatechange/adaptation/InformationMaterials/Publications/Publication/
tabid/6712/Default.aspx?ID=6189
This publication profiles thirteen major adaptation technologies that reduce impacts of coastal 
erosion and flooding due to climate change. For each technology, a definition is provided, as well as 
a description of how the technology is used; advantages and disadvantages are assessed, and costs 

 

139


