Of particular interest is a policy calling on local planning authorities to “reduce risk from coastal change 
by avoiding inappropriate development in vulnerable areas or adding to the impacts of physical changes 
on the coast.” Local planning authorities are called on to identify as a Coastal Change Management Area 
any area likely to be affected by physical changes on the coast and make clear what development will be 
appropriate in such areas and in what circumstances, as well as to make provision for the relocation of 
development and infrastructure where this is needed. Another policy sets out recommended contingency 
allowances for net sea level rise that increase from 4.0 mm/year at present, to 8.5 mm/year after 2025, to 
12.0 mm/year after 2055 and to 15.0 mm/year after 2085 for London, East England and Southeast England.  

The Potential Role of Insurance in Adaptation
There are several reasons why insurance may receive increasing attention in the future. One is that the areas 
at risk of coastal flooding and subsequent damages are anticipated to increase exponentially over time. The 
current cost of flood damage to private property is largely met by the provincial government and, for major 
events, the federal government through Disaster Relief assistance. The expectation of guaranteed disaster 
relief also reduces the incentive to take precautions in the way of flood-proofing or hazard avoidance 
measures.121 Senior governments are aware of the rising risk and cost implications they will increasingly 
have to absorb under current provisions. 

Second, the current approach involves a considerable degree of moral hazard. This refers to the tendency 
to take undue risks because the costs are not borne by the party taking the risk. If an area is subject to 
flood hazard, the property owner will suffer inconvenience in the event of a flood but little economic risk. 
The current deductible is nominal and there is no economic incentive for a property owner to undertake 
proactive preventative action. Local governments have a wide array of tools to address new development. 
Except in the limited cases of improvement areas in rural areas, any off-site structural protection will likely 
be funded through the general tax base of a local government in association with senior governments. 

Third, the nature of flood risk due to sea level rise varies considerably from one area to another. Little of that 
risk is borne by property owners in the areas at risk. 

Flood insurance can address all of these concerns to some degree, because it will transfer some of the 
risk away from senior governments and onto private property owners through insurance premiums. 
With variable premiums, flood insurance provides an incentive for a private property owner to undertake 
proactive action to reduce on-site risk. Flood insurance also provides an incentive for an avoid strategy by 
encouraging development in areas not at risk from coastal flooding and penalizing development in areas  
at risk (without including land use policy and Official Community Planning considerations). 

From the case studies discussed above, two conditions are essential to the success of flood insurance. One 
is that the use of flood insurance must have broad application to properties at risk, whether it follows the 
U.S.A. or the U.K. model. Second, the utility and success of flood insurance is much higher if it complements 
other forms of risk reduction undertaken by property owners and local governments. 

121 

(National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy 2011)

89


