Evaluation and Governance Considerations 
Economic – Developing hazard maps requires a commitment of both technical resources and funding.  
This may include resources for:
•  Engineering expertise in flood risk modelling; 
•  Topographic surveys (LiDAR or remote sensing) to provide information on land elevation, which will 

feed back into the flood risk model;

•  Costs of collecting extreme event data such as water levels, wave heights, etc. where this information  

is available;

•  Cost of employing a Geographic Information System (GIS) specialist; and
•  Cost of adding a coastal hazard layer or updating hazard information. 

The economic impacts of the maps themselves depends on a wide variety of factors, including how they 
are presented and distributed as well as how they are applied to planning and outreach activities. 

Environmental – Coastal hazard mapping may incorporate environmental data such as coastal habitats  
at risk or sensitive ecosystems and enable better environmental protection for areas at risk.

Social – Hazard maps identify housing, roads, underground services, and community resources subject 
to coastal hazards, allowing for more informed planning and emergency management decisions. Hazard 
maps also enable public education and action, however, if a community is unaware of the benefits of 
coastal hazard mapping, they may prefer to see public money spent on more tangible flood and erosion 
protection measures.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Coastal hazard maps have a wide variety of applications. GIS based mapping enables the detailed 
calculation of land areas at risk, property values and building values as well as the identification of strategic 
assets. These economic calculations can also provide the basis for better understanding the social and 
environmental considerations affecting vulnerable areas. 

Maps have long been used to support planning and development. In order for coastal hazard maps to 
effectively reduce future coastal hazard risk and facilitate sustainable development, the consideration of 
hazard maps must be integrated into planning procedures and periodically updated.

The required expertise and modelling capacity may not be locally available, especially in smaller local 
governments. In addition, coastal hazards often cross jurisdictional boundaries. To pool limited resources 
and address trans-boundary impacts, work at a regional scale – with support from various levels of 
government – is often the most effective approach to hazard mapping. 

35

Planning Tools
