Social – Objectives and policies will need to complement other planning measures designed to manage 
residential growth and other forms of development, recreation and open space needs, community facilities 
and other infrastructure needs. 

The successful implementation of new objectives and policies often depends on a strong public education 
and consultation process as they are developed.

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Challenges include the time and resources required for public consultation and education. In a regional 
goal-setting process such as a regional growth strategy, a mediation or arbitration process among the 
different municipal governments may be required in order to achieve agreement. 

In implementing policies and objectives, it is important to differentiate binding and non-binding measures. 
For example, the City of Vancouver increased Flood Construction Levels by an additional 1.0 m in January 
2012 as a recommended but non-binding measure to address increased risk due to sea level rise. This is 
expected to be followed by a mandatory requirement following further review and technical study. 

Advantages

Disadvantages

Research and policy development in adapting to sea level 
rise may be time consuming and require a commitment 
of staff and financial resources. 
The addition of policies to address sea level rise may add 
controversy, particularly ‘Avoid’ or ’ Retreat’ strategies.

There is an established history of setting objectives and 
policies through a co-ordinated and comprehensive 
approach to land use planning and growth management 
in response to coastal hazards.
The planning process provides opportunities for public 
involvement and education. 
The degree to which objectives are met and policies 
implemented can be measured and monitored over time.

2. Coastal Hazard Mapping

Tool Description
Coastal hazard maps identify areas susceptible to coastal hazards and the effects of sea level 
rise. Mapping provides the technical basis for land use planning in coastal areas and enables the 
development of floodplain bylaws. 

The mapping of coastal areas at risk of flooding or erosion is a vital tool for land use planning. Projected 
future sea levels can then be superimposed on a topographic map of coastal hazards to identify new areas 
subject to hazards. 

A recent report commissioned by the B.C. government identified four steps to develop coastal floodplain 
maps. These were: 
•  Acquisition of detailed floodplain topography
•  An engineering analysis of water level components and associated flood construction levels
•  Preparation of floodplain maps indicating the areas subject to flood hazards and the magnitude of  

these hazards, and 

•  The preparation of a brief documenting the process.

32

Planning Tools
