3. Development Permit

Tool Description
A Development Permit is a form of land use regulation distinctive to B.C. It is identified separately because 
it combines policy objectives and guidelines with site specific regulation. A Development Permit can 
regulate development for a variety of purposes, two of which are applicable to sea level rise:
•  protection of the natural environment, its ecosystems and biological diversity; and 
•  protection of development from hazardous conditions.

In the former case, a Development Permit Area (DPA) may specify areas of land that must remain free of 
development, except in accordance with any conditions contained in the permit, or require specified 
natural features or areas to be preserved, protected, restored or enhanced in accordance with the permit. 
In the latter case, a DPA may specify areas of land that may be subject to flooding, mud flows, or torrents of 
debris, and specify the guidelines under which the objectives will be addressed. In each case, the purpose 
of the Development Permit is for the specified objectives to be met prior to a development proceeding. 

Application
This tool is used to identify areas where special conditions apply. The objectives of the Development Permit 
must be established and guidance given for addressing the objectives. While this tool is specific to B.C. 
legislation, there are other similar processes in Atlantic Canada. For example, Halifax Regional Municipality 
is managing waterfront development in Halifax Harbour by development agreements in which proponents 
must account for sea level rise.

Enabling Legislation
In B.C., a local government can establish Development Permit Areas under Section 919.1 of the Local 
Government Act. A DPA and guidelines can be included in an Official Community Plan or a zoning bylaw. 
Where a DPA has been designated by bylaw, no subdivision, building construction or alteration, or 
alteration of land can proceed unless a Development Permit has first been issued by the local government. 
In order to address the hazardous conditions specified in the DPA, the local government may require that 
the applicant provide a report certified by a professional engineer. When a local government has issued a 
Development Permit, it must file a notice in the Land Title Office that the land is subject to the conditions 
specified in the Development Permit. If an OCP designates areas as requiring a Development Permit, this 
must be issued prior to the subdivision of land within the area and the construction of, addition to or 
alteration of a building or other structure.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – The creation of Development Permit Areas and the granting or refusal of applications with 
respect to these areas involves an additional step in the development and permitting process. The cost 
of the independent professional and the cost of meeting the Development Permit conditions can also be 
considerable. The onus is on the applicant to demonstrate that land that might otherwise not be developed 
can be done so safely.

Environmental – A DPA is one of the few tools available to a local government where the primary focus can 
be on protection of the natural environment and biodiversity. Examples could include sand dunes, coastal 
bluffs, and beaches.

Social – The establishment of a Development Permit Area in an OCP or zoning bylaw requires a public 
hearing.

46

Regulatory Tools
