 

This report synthesizes the most policy-relevant climate science published since the close-off of material 
for the last IPCC report. The report effectively serves as an interim evaluation of the evolving science 
midway through an IPCC cycle – IPCC AR5 is due for completion in 2013.
Each section begins with a set of key points that summarises the main findings. 

 
  With respect to sea level rise in particular, the report states current sea level rise has been 

underestimated: Satellites show recent global average sea level rise (3.4 mm/yr over the past 15 years) 
to be ~80% above past IPCC predictions. This acceleration in sea level rise is consistent with significant 
contribution from melting of glaciers, ice caps, and the Greenland and West-Antarctic ice-sheets. The 
report also states revised sea level predictions indicate that: By 2100, global sea level is likely to rise at 
least twice as much as projected by Working Group 1 of the IPCC AR4. For unmitigated emissions it may 
well exceed 1 meter. The upper limit has been estimated as ~ 2 meters sea level rise by 2100. Sea level 
will continue to rise for centuries after global temperatures have been stabilized, and several meters of 
sea level rise must be expected over the next few centuries.

Boateng, Isaac. Spatial Planning in Coastal Regions: Facing the Impact of Climate Change. Publication of FIG 

 

Commission 8 Working Group 8.4 – Urban Planning in Coastal Region, Copenhagen, Denmark:  
International Federation of Surveyors (FIG), 2010. Avaiable at:  
http://www.fig.net/pub/figpub/pub55/figpub55.pdf
This report was commissioned in 2007 by the International Federation of Surveyors to investigate 
emerging coastal habitat issues connected to rising sea levels as a result of climate change and its 
influence on planning in coastal regions. Two objectives were established: to identify the impacts of 
rising sea levels on coastal habitats and to develop planning policy and implementation guidelines to 
assist in achieving sustainable coastal adaptation. 

Case studies from twelve separate countries were covered under six headings:

Impacts of climate change

• 
•  Coastal vulnerability
•  Measuring sea level rise and monitoring its impacts
•  Valuation of coastal resources and coastal adaptation
•  Policy development process for coastal adaptation
•  Challenges of moving coastlines
The study concludes that the impacts of climate change are already affecting many coastal regionals 
around the world. These impacts are likely to intensify over the next century. The need therefore is to plan 
for adaptation now to reduce some of the future negative effects of climate change in the coastal zone. 

 

Catovsky, S, et al. Adapting to Climate Change in the U.K.: Measuring Progress. United Kingdom: Adaptation 

Sub-Committee, 2011. Available at: www.cakex.org.

  While many jurisdictions are still in earlier stages of developing climate change action plans, in the U.K. 
such plans have been implemented, legislation has been enacted, and work is now proceeding into the 
stage of monitoring and evaluating implementation. This report is the second in a series that defines 
measures for evaluating progress on reducing vulnerability to climate change, and provides a review 
of progress to date. Despite some evidence of progress, the report concludes that land use planning 
decisions in areas with flood risk (coastal, river and surface water) may be increasing overall vulnerability, 
and chosen methods of flood defence (mainly structural) may bind communities and landowners to 
rising costs in the future. 

Delta Committee. Working Together with Water. Findings of the Deltacomissie, Netherlands: Deltacommissie, 

2008. Available at: http://www.deltacommissie.com/doc/deltareport_full.pdf

137


