Over 90% of the population is located in coastal communities, including the capital of St. John’s which is 
home to just over a third of total population.50 Although, sea level rise has been documented throughout 
the province,51 most of the coastline of Newfoundland and Labrador is of moderate to low sensitivity to 
sea level change. In many areas of the province, the presence of relatively steep-sloping bedrock-exposed 
coastlines means sea level rise will have little impact. Notable exceptions to this include the northwest 
coast of the Burin Peninsula and St. George’s Bay as well as specific communities such as Placentia.52 With 
ongoing relative sea level rise, storm surge activity is likely to have a progressively stronger impact on 
higher areas of the shoreline. Areas at greatest risk are sand dominated beaches, coastal dune complexes, 
tidal flats, estuaries and salt marshes.53 

In the Northern Strategic Plan released in 2007, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador 
recognized the need for a targeted action plan to address climate change in Northern Labrador. In the 2011 
Climate Change Action Plan “Charting Our Course”, the provincial government committed to preparing a 
dedicated strategy on climate change adaptation for Northern Labrador.54 The plan highlights a number 
of climate change adaptation strategies for the province including integrating adaptation considerations 
into public and private sector decision-making, and considering climate change implications in the site 
selection and design of provincial government buildings and infrastructure. 

In June of 2011, the Government of Newfoundland and Labrador released a Coastal and Oceans 
Management Strategy and Policy Framework for public discussion. The need for a provincial coastal 
land use plan was stated, taking into account the principles of sustainable development, climate change 
adaptation, hazard prediction and preparedness, and economic development.55 This document identifies 
that to be proactive in addressing coastal and ocean issues, the Government of Newfoundland and 
Labrador must take a leadership role and engage in meaningful integrated coastal and ocean management 
processes. A key existing provision noted in the document is to maintain a 15 metre shoreline reservation 
or buffer between the shoreline and the boundary of current land titles issued by the Department of 
Environment and Conservation. 

Available data on recent sea level change indicates relative sea level is currently rising across much of 
the Island of Newfoundland, is stable or rising in northern Newfoundland and southern Labrador, and is 
falling in much of central and northern Labrador. For the east coast of Labrador, sea level is estimated to 
rise by 0.80 m to the year 2099. However, for those areas with the greatest concentration of the provincial 
population, the Avalon Peninsula and the west coast, a potential sea level rise of 0.80 to 1.0+ m by 2099 
is anticipated.56

(Government of Newfoundland and Labrador n.d.)
(Catto 2010)
(Batterson and Liverman 2010)
(Catto 2010)

50 
51 
52 
53 
54  Northern Labrador includes the Nunatsiavut Government, a 72,500 km2 area where limited self-rule was established for the Labrador 

Innu following a 2005 treaty between the Labrador Inuit Association, the Government of Canada, and the Government of Newfoundland 
and Labrador.
(Newfoundland & Labrador Department of Fisheries and Aquaculture 2011)
(Batterson and Liverman 2010)

55 
56 

19


