of flooding. Flood management measures include many of the tools documented in this report. Applicable 
tools include zoning, subdivision, scour protection, structural elevation, wet floodproofing, easements, land 
trust agreements and land acquisition. Mapping plays a multipurpose role. Flood Rate Insurance Maps are 
used to identify communities at risk (i.e., areas subject to a 100 year flood), set insurance premiums and 
regulate development in floodplains. In the 30 years since the inception of the National Flood Insurance 
Program, buildings constructed to federal standards have sustained 77% lower losses than buildings 
without such protection.

Flood insurance premiums vary according to several factors, including the deductible chosen by the 
homeowner, the amount of protection provided, either structural elevation (dry floodproofing) or wet flood 
proofing, the date of construction and the potential and probability of a hazard. Low elevation properties 
located near the ocean are considered high risk due to storm surge flooding and hurricane risks. The cost 
for the maximum available building (USD$250,000) and contents (USD$100,000) insurance in a coastal 
high risk zone is up to USD$6,410 annually. This compares to similar coverage of USD$1,717 per year in a 
moderate to low risk area and as low as USD$365 per year in a preferred risk (i.e., low) area.

In 2011, under the National Flood Insurance Program, 5.5 million flood insurance policies were written, 
USD$3.4 billion collected in premiums and USD$1.43 billion paid out in flood claims. Expenditures for flood 
hazard mapping and risk analysis exceeded USD$97.7 million.115 In addition to managing the National Flood 
Insurance Program, FEMA has a broad mandate to lead and support the nation in a risk-based comprehensive 
emergency management system of preparedness, protection, response, recovery and mitigation. In an 
attempt to reduce a deficit of over $25 billion in the National Flood Insurance Program, the Biggert-Waters Flood 
Insurance Reform and Modernization Act of 2012 mandated that some subsidies be phased out, resulting in a 
large rate increase for some property owners.  The resulting backlash led to a proposed four year delay in its 
implementation.

Germany
Private insurance companies in Germany have offered insurance for natural hazards as a supplement to 
building and contents insurance since 1991.116 This supplemental policy is optional for property owners 
and covers losses due to flooding. However, storm surge is an uninsurable risk and is excluded from 
supplemental policies. The market penetration for building insurance is approximately 90%, as banks 
require this as a condition for obtaining loans; market penetration for supplemental hazard insurance is 
much lower (26% in 2010).

Germany does not have a national system of flood hazard mapping. As a result, the German insurance 
industry developed an online risk assessment tool called ZURS Geo. This geo-based data system uses 
property addresses to identify the risk of flooding in any geographical area and offers a risk-based insurance 
premium. This tool uses a four zone system, with the lowest risk being less than a 1 in 200 year event and the 
highest being more than a 1 in 10 year event. 

Following a major flooding of the Elbe River in 2002, the most expensive in German history, a widespread 
evaluation of the state of flood insurance took place. Most private sector losses were not covered by private 
insurance. This led to the consideration of mandatory natural hazard insurance. The compulsory insurance 
option was rejected, largely due to a major concern that buyers would experience premium shock due to 
much higher reinsurance requirements. Other options were pursued, including 2004 legislation passed by 
the German Parliament prohibiting development on flood prone land. As a result, it has been estimated 
that 10% of the land area cannot feasibly be insured, although only 1.5% of the buildings are uninsurable. 
The German model has been criticized for lacking incentives to strengthen private loss mitigation and 
insurance companies for doing little to encourage precautionary measures. 

115 
116 

(U.S. Department of Homeland Security; and FEMA 2012)
(Sandink, et al. 2010)

87


