 

For each of these issues, the strategy establishes goals, objectives and actions. In many cases the same 
actions and objectives support several goals, and involve several government entities. The focus of the 
strategy is integrated management of Nova Scotia’s coasts. The goal identified with respect to sea level 
rise and storm events is: “people and property are safe from coastal hazards.” A number of objectives and 
actions are identified with respect to this goal in the draft strategy.

Richards, William, and Real Daigle. “Scenarios and Guidance for Adaptation to Climate Change and Sea-
Level Rise: N.S. and P.E.I. Municipalities.” commissioned by the Atlantic Climate Adaptation Solutions 
Association (Solutions d’adaptation aux changements climatiques pour l’Atlantique), 2011. Available at: 
http://atlanticadaptation.ca/sites/discoveryspace.upei.ca.acasa/files/ACASA%20Scenarios%20and%20
Guidance%20for%20Adaptation%20NS%20and%20PEI_1.pdf
This report contains climate change and sea level rise scenarios for 22 municipalities in Nova Scotia 
and Prince Edward Island. For the climate projections in this report, the authors extracted and then 
combined projections for the A1B and A2 scenarios. Estimates of global sea level rise values were 
extracted directly from Rahmstorf (2007). Estimates of extreme total sea levels and associated levels  
of risk for this report were extracted from published results (Bernier, 2005).

 

Rodshaw Environmental Consulting Incorporated and CCAF A041 Project Team. Coastal Impacts 

of Climate Change and Sea-Level Rise on Prince Edward Island. Climate Change Action Fund 
project CCAF A041 - Synthesis Report, Dartmouth, N.S.: Government of Canada, 2001. Avaiable 
at: http://www.coastalchange.ca/download_files/external_reports/Shaw_%282001%29_
CoastalImpactsofClimateChangeandSLRonPEI.pdf
The goals of this project were to assess the physical and socio-economic impacts of climate change and 
accelerated sea level rise on the coast of P.E.I. particularly in relation to:
•  anticipated increase in the frequency and extent of storm surge flooding in Charlottetown;
•  anticipated decrease in sea ice, increase in wave energy, and probable increase in rates of shore 

erosion, as well as increased risk of flooding of the North Shore of P.E.I.

The project also considers feasible and effective adaptation measures that might be adopted on P.E.I. to 
minimize the impacts of these changes. 

 

 

Sandink, Dan, Paul Kovacs, Greg Oulahen, and Glenn McGillivray. Making Flood Insurable for Canadian 

 

 

Homeowners. A Discussion Paper, Toronto: Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction & Swiss Reinsurance 
Company Ltd, 2010. Available at: http://www.iclr.org/images/Making_Flood_Insurable_for_Canada.pdf
The study provides documentation on flood management in Canada with a focus on British Columbia, 
Ontario, Quebec and Alberta. Floods are the most frequently occurring natural hazard in Canada, 
nearly five times as frequent as wildfires, the next most common disaster. Current flood damage 
remittance measures for homeowners in Canada through government relief and the limited scope 
of insurance are compared to various international approaches. An overview of flood insurance in 
the U.S.A, France, Germany and the United Kingdom is provided. Key distinctions between private vs. 
public and optional vs. bundled insurance (e.g., flood insurance linked with other forms of insurance 
or with a mortgage) are made. 
The report concludes that flood insurance could and should play a significant role in providing post-
flood financial assistance to homeowners in Canada. The United Kingdom system is preferred as the 
most adaptable to Canada. This model features a high penetration rate based on bundled, private 
insurance through an active partnership between private insurers and government. 

130


