Revetments are covers or facings which provide erosion resistance to a sloped surface. They can be 
concrete, timber, armour rock (riprap), gabions and other materials. The terms seawalls and revetments  
can, on occasion, be used interchangeably.

Floodwalls are vertical structural barriers, typically constructed of concrete, and designed for use in 
confined areas over short distances to prevent flooding. 

Storm Surge and Tidal Barriers consist of hard engineered protection with movable or fixed barriers/gates 
which are closed to prevent flooding when extreme water levels are forecast. 

Application
Groynes are typically used to impede the drift of sediment along a beach. Their effectiveness depends 
upon a supply of sand and the existence of longshore sediment transport. They are often constructed  
as a series of structures and may be used in combination with beach nourishment.

Breakwaters are used to protect marinas, ports, harbours and other shoreline infrastructure from storm 
surges and wave action.

Seawalls are most often used to dissipate wave energy, as well as flooding and erosion in constrained 
coastal areas. This may occur where the land drops off sharply on the seaward side or where the cost of land 
acquisition for a dike is prohibitive. A seawall provides a firm boundary between the land and the sea and 
provides protection up to the design height of the seawall. Seawalls are typically in place where available 
space is constrained due to physical or cost factors. 

Floodwalls are typically used in locations where space is limited and where land uses and values are very 
high. Floodwalls are used where the use of a dike or other lesser cost structure is precluded, due to conflicts 
with buildings and other land uses. 

Storm Surge Barriers are constructed across river estuaries and are equipped with gates that can be closed 
in the event of a storm surge.100 They are most commonly used to protect tidal inlets and estuaries. Their 
primary function is to prevent coastal flooding, but they can shorten the length of defences behind the 
barrier. Water is discharged through or pumped over the barrier depending on the applicable conditions. 

NW Arm Sea wall at 
Fleming Park under 
construction June 2012, 
Halifax, NS

100  A more detailed discussion of these features can be found in (Linham and Nicholls 2010)

69

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
