Application
Sea level rise has been identified as a risk in the academic literature for at least two decades. The design of sea 
level rise risk-management strategies relies on sea level rise projections, which are constantly being revised 
based on new data and research. Risks due to sea level rise have increased in recent years due to various 
aspects of climate change, including the more rapid melting of glaciers, higher water and atmospheric 
temperature readings around the globe and more intense storm activity. As noted previously, considerable 
regional variation in sea level rise will take place. 

With sea level rise, increased protection measures will be required just to maintain the same level of 
protection (i.e., 1:100 years or 1:200 years) that has been historically provided. When the Canadian Flood 
Damage Reduction Program was created in 1975, minimum federal standards with respect to acceptable 
flood risk were set at a 1 in 100 year flood. Should a higher level of protection be called for, additional 
measures will be required. Whether the standard of protection remains the same or is increased, other 
approaches to risk management may be required. These may include tools such as land acquisition, land 
trust, covenant or easement and soft armouring to reduce impact. 

Enabling Legislation
A risk assessment does not require specific enabling legislation. It can occur in the preparation of an Official 
Community Plan or other planning process as authorized by provincial legislation. Risk management may 
also be undertaken as part of an emergency planning and preparedness initiative. For example, In Québec, 
the 2001 Loi sur la sécurité civile (Law on civil security), Chapter IV, Section III obliges municipal officials to 
publicly communicate all known major risks and develop regulations for risk management.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Risk management involves a rigorous process of comparing and selecting the most 
appropriate risk reduction measures. It can also include an analysis of the cost of “doing nothing.” A cost-
benefit analysis – used to determine how well, or how poorly, a planned action will turn out – can assist 
the risk management process. A cost benefit analysis is most commonly undertaken where the costs and 
benefits can be quantified in financial terms, to enable comparability. It relies on the addition of positive 
factors and the subtraction of negative ones to determine a net result.

37

Planning Tools
