Funding Programs in Other Countries

New Jersey Shore Protection Program
The State of New Jersey provides an excellent example of innovative funding. The New Jersey 
Department of Environmental Protection has a Shore Protection Fund which dedicates USD$25 
million annually “to protect existing development and infrastructure from storm surges, sea level rise 
and shoreline migration through dune creation and maintenance, beach nourishment projects, and 
construction and repair of shore protection structures.” The monies for this fund are generated from a 
realty transfer fee imposed on the recording of deeds transferring real property, calculated based on 
the amount paid in the deed.

Western Australia Coastal Protection Policy and Grant Program
Western Australia’s Department of Transport provides up to 50% of the cost of planning, investigation, 
design and construction of emergency coastal protection works, public coastal protection works, 
necessary data collection and the maintenance of marine structures for permanent coastal protection.
Once structures are built, the local coastal managers have ownership of the structures and are 
responsible for ongoing repair and maintenance.

England – Flood and Coastal Resilience Partnership Funding
The United Kingdom allocates £2.1 billion of partnership funding annually for flood and coastal 
erosion risk management projects in England. Funding levels are related to the number of households 
protected, the damages being prevented and any other benefits. The United Kingdom Environment 
Agency, local authorities and internal drainage boards carry out the flood and coastal risk management 
schemes using the grant funding allocated. The schemes approved are intended to reduce the risk of 
flooding from rivers, seas, groundwater and surface water, and to reduce the risks from coastal erosion.

Netherlands – Coastal Flood Risk Management
In the Netherlands all funding for strengthening flood defences or nourishment comes from the national 
government, and from 2000-2006 averaged €550 million per year. This amount includes funding from 
water boards, which fund maintenance costs via water board taxes. In the Netherlands, a storm surge 
warning system has been developed for exposed areas, as forecasting times for coastal flooding from 
storm surges tend to be shorter than for river flooding. Dunes and dikes protect parts of the Netherlands 
situated below sea level. 
The design of these flood defence structures are related to extreme storm surge levels. For instance, in 
the provinces of Noord-Holland and Zuid-Holland, the structures are designed to withstand the effects 
of a storm with a probability of occurrence once in 10,000 years, which corresponds to a storm surge 
level of 5 m+ Dutch Ordinance Level (NAP). The Dutch government has also made a policy decision to 
maintain the coastline at its 1990 position. In the National Spatial Strategy of 2004, the Netherlands 
guarantee safety against flooding and the preservation of the spatial quality of the coastal zone.

96


