Appendix A – Glossary

ADAPTATION means an adjustment in natural or human systems to a new or changing environment that 
exploits beneficial opportunities or moderates negative effects. With respect to sea level rise, adaptation 
refers to action taken to prepare for its occurrence. 

ADAPTATION PLANNING refers to the process of how a community identifies ways in which it may be 

impacted by climate change, and how it develops a plan to address the negative consequences.

APPROVING OFFICER* is a person appointed under the B.C. Land Title Act with responsibility for the 

approval of subdivision plans. This involves a municipal engineer or planner for a municipality or the 
Nisga’a Lisims Government under the Nisga’a Treaty, or a Ministry of Transportation employee for a rural 
area within a regional district.

ARMOURING usually refers to a hard engineering approach to shoreline protection such as a dike, seawall 

or riprap. Soft armouring refers to shoreline protection measures without the use of concrete, rocks or 
other rigid barriers. 

BANK PROTECTION refers to the treatment of slopes of Dikes and stream banks, lakes and other water 
bodies by the placement of riprap or other forms of protection to prevent Erosion by surface runoff, 
stream flows and/or wave action.

BATHYMETRY is the study of the underwater depth of the ocean floor or other water body. A bathymetric 

map measures the ocean floor and is the underwater equivalent of a topographic map.

BEACH NOURISHMENT refers to the addition of sand or gravel to a shoreline to offset the forces of erosion. 

To be effective, beach nourishment is typically required on an ongoing basis.

CHART DATUM is the plane of vertical reference to which all charted depths and drying heights (i.e., 

vertical distance of the seabed exposed by the tide) are related. Chart Datum is generally a tidal datum 
and represents the least depth of water found in any place under “normal” meteorological conditions. 
It forms a plane so low that the water level will seldom fall below it and may also be referred to as the 
lowest astronomical tide and lowest low water. 

CLIMATE CHANGE refers to the process by which the average weather becomes different over time. 

Climate has changed due to natural forces over the course of history (e.g., volcanoes, ocean currents) but 
human activity (e.g., industry, transportation) is now considered the cause of rapid and severe climate 
change. These changes include sea level rise, more intense and more frequent extreme weather events 
(e.g., storms, hurricanes, storm surge) and in Atlantic Canada, warmer and wetter summers and winters. 

CLIMATE refers to the “average” weather over a long period of time. Aspects of climate include 

temperature, precipitation, wind speed and direction, sunshine, fog and frequency of extreme events. 

COASTAL EROSION is the wearing away or reduction of coastal land resulting primarily from wave action 

along the shore. Coastal erosion causes the shoreline to move further inland. 

COASTAL HAZARDS are naturally occurring events that can pose a threat to the health or life of people, 

property and/or the environment in coastal areas. Types of coastal hazards include storm surges, coastal 
flooding and erosion.

COASTAL SqUEEZE refers to the effect of shoreline retreat located between rising sea levels and hard 

structural protection such as dikes. Coastal habitats that are unable to migrate landward are squeezed 
between the rising sea and hard defences. This reduces the adaptive capability and the extent of 
intertidal and sub-tidal habitats including saltwater marshes.

DATUM refers to any numerical or geometrical quantity or set of such quantities that may serve as a 

reference or base for other quantities. A horizontal datum forms the basis for computations of horizontal 
control surveys in which the curvature of the Earth is considered. A vertical datum refers to elevations. 

98


