Québec’s policy for the protection of riverbeds, shorelines, coastlines and floodplains sets uniform setbacks 
based on grade and requires that a permit be obtained for new construction near shorelines. The policy also 
bans all construction directly on the coastline. Regional County Municipalities (RCMs) were encouraged to 
integrate measures for coastal protection, as outlined in the policy, within their regional master plans  
(Schema d’aménagement). As of 2012 all but seven of the 86 RCMs had adopted measures.71

New Brunswick’s Coastal Areas Protection Policy establishes setbacks for permanent structures. This policy, 
which came into force in 2002, divided coastal areas into three sensitivity zones: 
•  Zone A – the areas closest to the water (known as the coastal lands core area) including dunes, beaches, 

wetlands, dikelands and tidal flats;

•  Zone B – a 30 m area landward of Zone A designed to limit activity and provide a development buffer, and 
•  Zone C – the areas beyond Zone B that form a transition from coastal to inland areas. 

This policy is enforced through provincial environmental impact assessment legislation. Provincial legislation 
also provides municipalities with the ability to incorporate these policies into their own requirements.

New Brunswick also has Watercourse and Wetland Alteration Regulations, which limit activities that take 
place within or close to a watercourse or wetland. A permit is required before certain activities can take 
place within 30 metres of a watercourse.

Prince Edward Island has adopted shoreline setback regulations for subdivision and development under 
the Provincial Planning Act. The province uses setbacks based on historical data, but is currently updating 
setbacks using with aerial photos of coastlines. Under the Environmental Protection Act, P.E.I. also requires 
that a watercourse, wetland and buffer zone activity permit be obtained for any temporary or permanent 
change made to or near a watercourse or wetland. A permit is required for all such alterations made within  
15 metres (49.2 feet) of any watercourse (including a coastal water body) or wetland boundary. 

In Newfoundland and Labrador, the 1990 Urban and Rural Planning Act makes provision for regional and 
municipal planning including the setting of plan objectives and policies. There are 281 municipalities in 
the province of Newfoundland and Labrador and about half of these have municipal plans; however many 
are outdated. The Department of Environment has a “Policy for Development in Shore Water Zones”. This 
policy establishes criteria for issuing permits under the Water Resources Act, for all development activities in 
and affecting shore water zones. In marine situations, the high water level of a water body must allow for 
maximum waves, wind setup, storm surge and ultimate mean sea levels under global climatic forecasts for 
a 1:100 year design. 

Evaluation and Governance Considerations 
Economic – Economic considerations include the cost of developing and setting objectives and policies 
and the cost of implementing them. The cost to undertake the process is easily measurable while the cost 
of implementation is much more difficult to assess. 

There are also economic costs if no objectives and policies are set. Economic obligations associated with  
development in hazardous areas may increase (e.g., development in areas at risk of coastal hazards  
with no protection measures). 

Environmental – Development restrictions in environmentally sensitive areas and areas subject to coastal 
hazards have long been addressed through municipal planning objectives and policies. Incorporating 
adaptation to sea level rise into these objectives and policies is a logical next step. 

71 

(Martel 2012)

31

Planning Tools
