Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Economic considerations include the cost of installing or retrofitting flood-resistant materials, 
and constructing or retrofitting electrical and other services damageable by floodwaters at a higher 
elevation. Adequately sized openings must be provided to equalize hydrostatic pressure. Owners must be 
willing to experience a temporary loss of use of areas subject to flooding and must ensure damageable 
goods are not located in areas subject to flooding.

Environmental – Environmental implications of this tool are minimal.

Social – Wet flood proofing may reduce the risk of flooding to people and buildings. Post-flood recovery 
time may be rapid compared to flooding of buildings without flood resistant materials. 

Implementation Measures and Challenges 
Implementation involves the use of flood-resistant materials, as well as the strategic placement and 
use of building openings and the electrical, mechanical, heating and ventilation equipment. A detailed 
list of flood-resistant materials and their application has been published by the US Federal Emergency 
Management Agency based on destructive testing by the US Army Corps of Engineers. Challenges include 
the cost of implementation and the limited circumstances in which wet floodproofing is applicable for 
long-term adaptation to Sea Level Rise.

Advantages

Disadvantages

Can reduce the time and cost of cleanup after a flood.
Wet floodproofing can be less costly than other retrofits 
as no additional land is required and the appearance of 
the building is minimally affected.
Allowing water to enter and exit a building may be a  
cost-effective alternative to dry floodproofing.
A wide range of water resistant materials can be used at  
a reasonable cost.

Wet floodproofing has limited applicability and appeal  
for sea level rise.
Clean-up is still required post-flood.
A residential building will be uninhabitable during  
a flood; other accommodation has to be provided. 
Goods may be damaged by floodwaters if they cannot  
be moved to higher ground. 

72

Structural Tools (Flood Protection Works)
