Although not all local governments in British Columbia have chosen to enforce the provincial 
code, technically, the code applies throughout the province. In addition, through powers provided 
under section 910 of the Local Government’s Act municipalities may introduce certain construction 
requirements in a floodplains.

The City of Vancouver is unique among municipalities in B.C. It has its own enabling provincial legislation 
called the Vancouver Charter. Under this charter, Vancouver has developed a building bylaw which is 
based on the B.C. Building Code, with local amendments. This bylaw regulates buildings on lands subject to 
flooding by establishing minimum flood construction levels (FCLs), specifying construction materials, and 
service equipment installation, and allowing for covenants on a property title which acknowledge the risk 
of flood damage.

The B.C. Community Charter provides an alternative way that building restrictions may be imposed to 
address flood hazards. Under section 56 of this Act, a municipal building inspector may withhold the 
issuance of a building permit until satisfied the land can be safely used and can require a geotechnical 
report by a qualified professional if construction is proposed on land likely to be subject to hazards such  
as flooding or erosion.

A building permit can be refused until the owner agrees to a covenant on the property title stating that the 
land will only be used in the manner certified in the report. Regional districts have similar authorities under 
section 695 of the Local Government Act.

In Quebec, adaptation to sea level rise is currently not addressed in provincial regulations governing the 
authority of local governments to deal with zoning bylaws, home-owner building permits or subdivisions. 
The province develops planning strategies, then Regional County Municipalities (RCMs) are responsible for 
integrating the strategies in their Schémas d’aménagement (regional plans), and the municipalities within 
the RCMs then enact bylaws and regulations to implement the measures in the Schéma. The province 
develops policies and makes recommendations they hope the local authorities (cities) and regional 
authorities (RCMs) will adopt, however, there is no forced compliance from one level to the next. In some 
cases, depending on the type of construction, permits can be issued by regional or provincial authorities.

In Atlantic Canada there is a general provision under provincial planning legislation for the granting 
of building permits in non-incorporated areas. In Nova Scotia and New Brunswick, regional planning 
commissions can generate regional plans and bylaws. Most of the larger municipalities in all four Atlantic 
Provinces have the authority to prepare their own official plan and bylaws. Where official plans and bylaws 
exist, development officers or building inspectors issue permits. In some cases, there are provisions in place 
to restrict development in areas vulnerable to coastal hazards. In Prince Edward Island, the Planning Act, 
(Section 8), provides for the regulation of land use activities in non-incorporated areas. The Planning Act, 
Subdivision and Development Regulations, provides measures for setbacks in coastal areas of a minimum 
width of 60 feet (18.3 metres) or 60 times the annual erosion rate for the area (Section 16). In Newfoundland 
and Labrador, the Urban and Rural Planning Act empowers the formation of regional planning commissions 
in the province, and there are currently two commissions in place.

Evaluation and Governance Considerations
Economic – Building regulation as an adaptation tool has two primary purposes: the protection of property 
and public safety. The economic costs associated with the use of this tool are not easy to quantify due to 
the wide variety of circumstances that may apply. Local government review and processing costs and legal 
costs are likely to be modest to moderate. Similarly, the cost of implementing protective measures vary 
widely. In some cases a project may have to be abandoned if a qualified professional cannot certify that a 
building can be safely constructed for the intended use or that the cost for doing so would be excessive.

48

Regulatory Tools
