CHANGES IN CLIMATE ARE INCREASINGLY AFFECTING CANADA’S NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, 
ECONOMIC SECTORS AND THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS (CHAPTERS 3 TO 8).

The natural environment is inherently sensitive to climate. Shifts in the range of some species of birds, butterflies and trees in 
response to warming temperatures have been documented, as have changes in the timing of life-history events (such as earlier 
migration to breeding areas and earlier flowering of plants). Maple trees, for example, have experienced a significant northward 
shift since 1971 (see Case Study 1, Ch. 4).  Northward shifts have also been observed in ecosystems of the Bering Sea, with 
examples of southern assemblages displacing northern aquatic populations (Ch. 4).  

Declines in bird populations have also been documented, with 20 common North American bird species losing over 50% of 
their populations over the last 40 years (Ch. 7). Increased forest disturbance associated with insects, drought and forest fires  
have increased tree mortality in BC and the Prairies. Mortality rates have also risen in sockeye salmon, in response to higher  
water temperatures in the Fraser River (Ch. 7), while salmon production rates have declined (Ch. 4). 

In addition to impacts on the natural environment, changing climate is affecting many of Canada’s economic sectors as well 
as human health. This includes impacts on sectors with obvious climate sensitivities such as forestry, agriculture, fisheries, 
hydroelectricity, transportation, tourism and insurance. A prime example is the mountain pine beetle outbreak in western 
Canada. Warmer winter temperatures in the region are one factor that has allowed beetle populations to expand  
to unprecedented sizes, leading to the largest and most severe outbreak on record (see Case Study 1, Ch. 3). As of 2012, about 
18.1 million hectares of forest were affected (Figure 4; Ch. 3). Health impacts include lengthening of the ragweed season 
(between 1995 and 2009, the season increased by more than 25 days in Saskatoon and Winnipeg (Ch. 7)) and spreading of  
Lyme disease vectors (ticks), which has resulted in the annual number of Canadian cases increasing from 30 to more than  
250 in recent years (Ch. 7). 

Northern Canada has experienced particularly rapid rates of warming over recent years (see Figure 1). Climate change impacts 
on livelihoods, culture, mental health and well-being have been reported by northern residents (Ch. 7). Safety concerns 
associated with less predictable ice conditions and marine storms are an issue, for example, as are the effects of reduced  
sea ice on traditional hunting activities (Ch. 4) and the impacts of permafrost thaw on infrastructure (Ch. 8). Winter roads in 
northern Canada have experienced reduced ice thickness and shortened operating seasons, which decreases their reliability  
and constrains the load volumes that can be safely transported. For example, the shortened road season in 2006 forced the 

FIGURE 4:  Map of Mountain Pine Beetle distribution, showing change for the 2002–2006 and 2007–2011 time 

periods and direction of change (Source: Natural Resources Canada, 2012c).

10       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation


