City of Calgary Water Supply Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment (Chapter 8, Case Study 1): In 2011, the City 
of Calgary, together with Engineers Canada, conducted a vulnerability risk assessment of its water supply infrastructure. The 
team worked together to determine which climatic conditions pose the greatest risks to the design, construction, operation 
and management of the water supply infrastructure, in order to enhance the resiliency and quality of the system.

British Columbia Sea Dyke Guidelines (Chapter 8, Case Study 2): The BC provincial government, the Association 
of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of British Columbia, and others worked with policymakers and planners to 
incorporate sea level rise into coastal floodplain mapping, sea dyke design and land use planning. Building on these 
outputs, a working group went on to develop a national Sea Level Rise Primer (www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/pdf/
SLR-Primer.pdf) to help other communities identify, evaluate and compare adaptation options, and showcase different 
types of tools for adaptation. 

Promoting adaptation by sharing information and knowledge through a virtual community of practice 
(Chapter 9, Case Study 4): The Climate Change Adaptation Community of Practice (CCACoP) is an interactive online 
portal that provides space for researchers, experts, policymakers and practitioners from across Canada to come together 
to ask questions, generate ideas, share knowledge and communicate with others working on climate change adaptation. 
It is a key information and knowledge-sharing network on climate change adaptation in Canada.

CONCLUSION 

Changes in the climate system and associated impacts on both natural and human systems are occurring in Canada. As 
a result, the need to adapt is increasingly recognized and acted upon by governments, industry and other organizations. 
Over the past 5 years, our understanding of the adaptation process has improved and examples of adaptation 
implementation have grown. We have seen broadened engagement on the issue, and changes being made to policies, 
plans and practices to increase resilience to climate change. Further adaptation is necessary to complement mitigation in 
helping to prevent and reduce future impacts, as well as to take advantage of potential opportunities. We now have the 
awareness and capacity to adapt in many cases; translating this to action will require continued collaborative efforts to 
reduce barriers, overcome challenges and enhance motivation to adapt. 

Synthesis     17


