BOX 2
EXAMPLES OF CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING COLLABORATION 

Collaboration to enhance adaptation decision-making (Chapter 9, Case Study 1): Canada’s federal, provincial and 
territorial governments have invested in collaborative programming as a cornerstone for advancing knowledge and action 
on adaptation, through past activities (e.g. the Canadian Climate Impacts and Adaptation Research Network [C-CIARN]) and 
ongoing initiatives. The most recent mechanism to enhance collaboration on adaptation across Canada is the Adaptation 
Platform which brings together governments, professional organizations, industry associations and financial sector 
representatives to address shared adaptation priorities.  

A Historical Example of Institutional Capacity for Adaptation in the Agricultural Sector – The Prairies (Chapter 
4, Case Study 3):  Local communities and the farm industry worked in collaboration with academic researchers and the 
provincial/federal governments to establish solutions to improve resiliency to drought conditions experienced in the 
early 1900s. Through this collaboration, new innovative farming methods were introduced and agricultural management 
was made more efficient. 

The Municipal Risk Assessment Tool (Chapter 5, Case Study 2): The Insurance Bureau of Canada brought together 
a team of experts including hydrologists, climate scientists, risk managers and infrastructure engineers to develop a 
tool (The Municipal Risk Assessment Tool – MRAT) that identifies risk zones for exposure to basement flooding at the 
neighbourhood level. 

Building a “Better than Building Code” Home (Chapter 5, Case Study 4): The Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction and The Co-operators General Insurance Company worked together to demonstrate the benefits of enhanced 
construction by building a demonstration home in West Point, Prince Edward Island. Designed to be more weather 
resilient, the demonstration home incorporated new technologies and practices to ensure the home’s ability to withstand 
extreme wind events.

A landscape approach to ecological restoration (Chapter 6, Case Study 4): Conservation partners from the public 
and private sectors supported efforts to plant over 4.5 million native trees and shrubs, and currently use restoration 
techniques to mimic features of old-growth Carolinian forests to help preserve biodiversity in the Long Point World 
Biosphere Reserve, which includes the Long Point National Wildlife Area along the north shore of Lake Erie (Ontario). 
This work is helping to create corridors and enhance ecosystem resilience and adaptive capacity throughout the 
Biosphere Reserve. 

Citizen-based Monitoring Programs (Chapter 6, Case Study 5): As part of The Reef Environmental Education 
Foundation’s (REEF) volunteer fish and invertebrate monitoring program, participants are trained to identify target species 
and implement a simple roving diver survey method. More than 3700 volunteer surveys have been carried out along the 
British Columbia coastline through this program, representing more than 2800 hours of underwater observations at more 
than 300 sites.

Manitoba Flood 2011: Impetus for a Provincial Approach to Psychosocial Adaptation to Natural Hazards 
(Chapter 7, Case Study 3): Many organizations, including Manitoba Health’s Office of Disaster Management,  
Emergency Social Services, Emergency Measures Organization, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, 
Manitoba Agriculture and Food Rural Initiatives, Manitoba Family and Rural Support Services, Water Stewardship and 
Conservation, and Aboriginal and Northern Affairs worked in collaboration to establish the Provincial Psychosocial 2011 
Flood Recovery Table in response to the 2011 flood in Manitoba. 

Box 2 continued on next page

16       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation


