• Provincial, territorial and local health authorities are gaining an increasing knowledge of climate change and health

vulnerabilities through assessments and targeted research, and some jurisdictions have begun mainstreaming climate
change considerations into existing health policies and programs. Efforts to increase public awareness about how to
reduce climate-related health risks are also evident.

• Adaptation tools and measures, such as heat alert and response systems, projections of vector-borne disease expansion

and greening urban environments can help protect Canadians from the effects of climate change being felt now, and
those from future impacts.

Water and Transportation Infrastructure (Chapter 8)

• Well-maintained infrastructure is more resilient to a changing climate. This is especially true with respect to gradual
changes in temperature and precipitation patterns. Key vulnerabilities are associated with the impacts of extreme
weather events, which can overwhelm the capacity of water infrastructure.

• Over the past five years, the work of the PIEVC (Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee) has been

an important driver of progress on understanding how to adapt Canada’s infrastructure to climate change. The broadly
applicable, risk-based assessment protocol developed by the PIEVC allows engineers and planners to view and address
climate change as one factor among many affecting system resiliency, and plan accordingly.

• Consideration of climate change as an element of adaptive asset management encourages consideration of climate
factors as part of ongoing system monitoring, and informs decisions regarding the most cost-effective approaches
for infrastructure design, operation and maintenance.

• Codes, standards and related instruments (CSRI) are recognized as a potentially important driver of infrastructure
adaptation, but there are few examples of CSRIs in Canada that considered historic changes or projected future
changes in climate when they were developed.  Further assessment of current and future climate-related risks to
infrastructure systems would help to inform appropriate adjustments to design codes and standards for addressing
future climate.

Adaptation: Linking Research and Practice (Chapter 9)

• Adaptation is being undertaken in Canada to achieve a range of goals, such as increasing capacity to adapt, improving

resilience to specific climate events (especially extremes), and enhancing ability to deal with different climate
conditions. Among sectors, those with a demonstrated high sensitivity and exposure to climate and weather are
generally most active in taking steps to understand, assess and manage vulnerability and risk related to climate change.

• Adaptation is not solely a local issue, although examples from the municipal level still appear to dominate. There are
examples of action by all levels of government, as well as community groups and industry, many of which represent
collaborative initiatives.

• Understanding of the barriers and challenges to adaptation has improved, with recognition that factors beyond the
basic determinants of adaptive capacity need to be addressed. As a result, understanding of how to overcome key
barriers and enable adaptation has improved.

• Adaptation implementation in Canada is still in its early stages. Planning and policy exercises, and efforts to build

capacity and raise awareness comprise much of the adaptation action documented, with relatively few documented
examples of implementation of specific changes to reduce vulnerability to future climate change, or take advantage
of potential opportunities.

• Several factors can help accelerate the transition between awareness and action, including leadership, targeted

awareness-raising and supportive strategies or policies. Experiencing extreme weather events, as well as observing
impacts of gradual changes (e.g. sea level rise) also stimulates adaptation.

Synthesis     5


