Extreme events were identified as key issues for all sectors 
discussed in this report. For example, events relating to 
water availability – both excesses and shortages – represent 
concerns for most economic sectors, as well as for 
biodiversity and human health. Flooding can overwhelm 
infrastructure, causing not only significant local impacts, but 
also leading to broader impacts by damaging transportation 
networks and compromising access and supply chains (Ch. 
8). Drought is also associated with many immediate and 
long-term economic and social impacts (Ch. 4). 

As an industry, farming relies upon the inter-annual 
predictability of seasonal weather as it facilitates 
crop selection and infrastructure investments (Ch. 4). 
Unpredictable conditions can cause unanticipated farm 
losses. For example, an unprecedented heat wave in Ontario 
in March 2012 caused fruit trees to blossom 5 weeks 
earlier than usual, and subsequent frosts in April destroyed 
approximately 80% of apple blossoms (Environment 
Canada, 2013). Total losses for tender fruits that year were 
estimated at $100 million (Environment Canada, 2013).

FIGURE 6:  Historical and projected number of hot days and warm 
nights for selected cities in Canada (Source: Casati and 
Yagouti, 2010).

ADAPTATION IS ACCEPTED AS A NECESSARY RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE. IT 
ENHANCES THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF CANADIANS TO CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS (CHAPTERS 3 TO 9). 

Across Canada, there is evidence of increasing awareness and acceptance of the need to adapt to climate change (Ch. 
9). Broadened engagement in adaptation is reflected across sectors, at all levels of government, in certain industries and 
companies, as well as in the academic literature (Figure 7) and the media. Discussions now tend to focus on determining where 
adaptive action is required and improving understanding of the process of adaptation – i.e. how adaptation can be addressed 
and where capacity to adapt needs to be enhanced.

This is especially evident for those sectors with greater 
exposure to weather and weather variability. Direct 
experience with changing conditions, such as shorter snow 
seasons for winter tourism (Ch. 5), shifting flow patterns 
for hydroelectricity generation (Ch. 3) and increasing 
health impacts from heat (Ch. 7), as well as extreme 
weather events (e.g. floods, droughts and wildfires) raises 
awareness of climate change and the severity of potential 
impacts. In the forest sector, for example, severe wildfires 
and pest outbreaks in British Columbia and Alberta have 
contributed to increased awareness of climate change 
adaptation, spurring industry and governments to begin 
to move towards adaptive management approaches 
that proactively address risks and opportunities, rather 
than depending on crisis management strategies (Ch. 3). 
Following the 2013 spring flood in Alberta, the provincial 
government introduced policies to help reduce losses 
from future flooding events, including new restrictions on 
redevelopment in floodways and flood fringes (Alberta 
Government, 2013).  

FIGURE 7:  Number of climate change adaptation articles by 

Canadian researchers by sector (2000–2012).

12       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation


