Progress on adaptation is evident, and the examples presented in this report are indicative of the type of actions that will 
become increasingly necessary as the climate continues to change.  However, more work is needed. All chapters in this 
report identify information needs and knowledge and data gaps, and many discuss barriers and challenges to adaptation, 
including limited resources, limited motivation and issues related to governance (Ch. 9). In addition, by analyzing the 
examples available, it is apparent that there are relatively few examples of concrete, on-the-ground adaptation measures 
being implemented specifically to reduce vulnerability to projected changes in climate. This indicates that, similar to other 
developed countries, adaptation in Canada is still in its early stages overall.  It is also recognized that the methodology of 
this assessment, with its focus on scientific literature, may result in an underestimation of the actual number of adaptation 
actions being undertaken in Canada. 

Planned adaptation takes time.  Adaptation often requires research, stakeholder engagement and adjustments to policies 
and regulations. For example, while a year-round road has been proposed to ensure access to northern mining sites 
to help address the declining reliability of ice-road networks (Ch. 8), this type of project cannot be undertaken without 
detailed planning, consultations and environmental impact studies. In the fisheries sector, fishers cannot simply adjust 
their harvests in response to shifting species assemblages – this requires governments to revise management plans and 
fishing permits (Ch. 4). 

There will also be cases where maintaining current activities is not feasible and/or cost-effective, requiring discussions 
to extend beyond consideration of incremental, no-regrets approaches to more transformative changes. The emerging 
concept of transformational change refers to larger-scale, more extensive adaptations that are new to a region or resource 
system (Ch. 9).  Transformational change may also challenge the status quo and thereby question perceptions of what is 
acceptable. Examples include relocating entire towns due to sea level rise; converting forest plots to parkland to reduce 
losses from forest fires; and designing flood-control infrastructure to fail safely (with minimal damage and losses), rather 
than withstand large-magnitude events. The need for transformational adaptation is likely to become more prevalent as 
the climate continues to change.

ADAPTATION CAN SOMETIMES TURN RISKS INTO OPPORTUNITIES, AND OPPORTUNITIES 
INTO BENEFITS (CHAPTERS 3 TO 9).  

While adaptation research and programming tend to focus on reducing vulnerability to negative impacts, some impacts of 
climate change could represent opportunities. Capturing these opportunities requires appropriate adaptation. 

This may be most evident in the tourism and agriculture sectors, which both stand to potentially benefit from longer 
summers. With effective adaptation (e.g. strategies to deal with potential water shortages), major warm-weather tourism 
markets in Canada could benefit from climate change, with the golf industry, for example, profiting from increased season 
length and demand (Ch. 5). Similarly, with higher summer temperatures, different types of crops may be able to be grown 
farther north (e.g. corn and soybeans in new areas in Quebec, canola in Prince George, BC, and spring seeded small grains 
in western Alberta and northeastern BC; Ch. 4). Producers would need to adapt their crop selections and timing (e.g. 
seeding earlier in order to decrease exposure to drier late summer conditions) to take advantage of these opportunities. In 
all cases, risks related to increased pests, heat waves and other extreme events will also need to be addressed. In the North, 
changing climate and ice conditions bring potential economic opportunities related to natural resource development and 
tourism (Ch. 3, 5, 6). However, in addition to presenting opportunities for employment and investment, such activities also 
bring environmental and cultural risks.  

Innovative ideas and approaches may help reduce losses associated with climate change, at least on a short-term basis. 
For example, faced with a surplus of blue stained wood from the Mountain Pine Beetle outbreak, the forest industry in BC 
began marketing the product for interior paneling and unique wood furniture, after completing studies to confirm the 
wood would perform to acceptable standards (Ch. 3). Also in BC, the city of Vancouver used the damage caused by the 
2006 windstorm in Stanley Park as an opportunity to increase public engagement in the park and replant a more wind-
resilient forest (Ch. 3).  Some tourism operators and recreation sites are considering promoting “last chance tourism”, where 
additional tourists are drawn to a park to see either changing landscapes or certain features (e.g. glaciers or certain wildlife 
species) before they decline or disappear (Ch. 5, 7).

14       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation


