BOX 1
KEY FINDINGS FROM THE CHAPTERS

Natural Resources (Forestry, Energy and Mining, Chapter 3)

• Climate change will exacerbate existing climate risks related to the planning and management of natural resources.

These risks relate to impacts and natural hazards associated with climate extremes (e.g. heat, cold, precipitation)
and to gradual changes, such as permafrost degradation, sea level rise, and plant species migration.  Climate
change will also present new opportunities for the natural resource sectors, particularly in relation to northern
economic development.

• Consideration of multiple stressors is critical to understanding adaptation in the natural resource sectors.  Climate
change itself is rarely identified as a priority concern, with industry focused on other immediate stressors, such as
economic drivers. Opportunities exist to integrate consideration of climate change into current planning processes.

• Environmental assessment, risk disclosure, and sustainable forest management reporting are examples of processes
that can help advance adaptation actions.  These processes allow governments, investors and the public to evaluate
industry understanding of changing climate risks and influence the steps taken to address those risks.

• While awareness of climate change impacts and implementation of adaptation actions is most evident in

sectors where there is a clear and direct relationship between climate and resource supply, notably forestry and
hydroelectricity, the application of adaptive management approaches to address climate change impacts is seen
across all natural resource sectors.

Food Production (Chapter 4)

• The impacts of climate change differ significantly between agriculture, fisheries, and non-commercial food supply,

but common challenges include increased losses from invasive pests and diseases, and risks to transportation
systems upon which the sectors rely.

• The net medium-term outlook is for a likely modest increase in agricultural food production. Longer and warmer

growing seasons would allow higher-value warmer-weather crops to be grown further north (where soil
conditions permit), lengthen outdoor feeding seasons for livestock, and allow the maple syrup industry to expand
northward. However, there will likely be new pests and diseases, as well as more severe outbreaks of current ones,
and challenges associated with extreme weather events and the reduced predictability of inter-annual weather
variability that could negatively affect production.

• Northern and remote communities are likely to see great changes in their environment – some will ease food

security concerns, while others could exacerbate already decreasing country food stocks and difficulties in
delivering supplies into isolated areas.

• Canada is expected to remain a net exporter of aquatic foods at the aggregate level, with total biomass of

production from wild, capture fisheries in Canada expected to increase due to climate-induced shifts in fish
distributions. Regional impacts from invading species, physical habitat changes and societal responses to shifts
in availability and access to aquatic food resources will gradually determine future patterns of use and overall
economic implications.

• Aquaculture has a greater scope for adaptation to climate change than other fisheries, making it less vulnerable and

better positioned to take advantage of opportunities than capture fisheries, and subsistence fisheries in particular.

Box 1 continued on next page

Synthesis     3


