FIGURE 2:  Patterns of change in annual total precipitation over the period 1950–2010. Upward (green) and downward (purple) 

pointing triangles indicate positive and negative trends, respectively. Filled triangles correspond to trends significant at 
the 5% level (Source: Mekis and Vincent, 2011b). Inset: Annual total precipitation anomalies (expressed in % change from 
the 1961–1990 average) for Canada, 1950–2010 (Source: Mekis and Vincent, 2011a; Environment Canada, 2011).

Over the same time period (1950–2010), Canada as a whole has become wetter, with increasing annual average precipitation 
trends in many parts of the country and for the nation as a whole (Figure 2). Trends in annual precipitation have been less 
uniform across the Canadian landmass than those of annual air temperature. While significant changes in extreme precipitation 
have been observed in some areas of the country, no consistent pattern is evident for the country as a whole.

There have also been observed trends in other climate indicators in Canada (see Table 1). The Arctic has seen rapid declines in sea 
ice extent, both in summer and winter (Figure 3). In addition, snowfall has decreased across southern Canada, while snow cover 
is melting earlier in spring, and glaciers in western Canada and the Arctic are shrinking.

At the global scale, sea level over the past century has risen in 
response to warmer ocean temperatures (thermal expansion) 
and to the melting of glaciers, ice caps and ice sheets. Regional 
patterns of sea level rise along Canadian coastlines are strongly 
influenced by vertical land motion, with sea level rising rapidly 
at some sites where the land is subsiding, and falling in others 
where the land is rising (see Table 1). 

Further changes in climate are inevitable. On average, warmer 
temperatures and more rainfall are expected for the country as a 
whole, with increases in extreme heat and heavy rainfall events, 
and declines in snow and ice cover.  Sea level along many of our 
coastlines will continue to rise, and warmer waters and ocean 
acidification are expected to become increasingly evident in 
most Canadian ocean waters over the next century. An overview 
of projected changes in some key climate indicators for Canada is 
provided in Table 22. 

FIGURE 3:  Trends in Arctic sea ice extent over the period 1979–

2012 shown as time series of the percentage difference 
in ice extent in March and September relative to the 
mean values for the period 1979–2000. Both trends are 
statistically significant (Source: Perovich et al., 2012).

2    While the changes presented in Table 2 are based on climate change projections commonly used up to 2012, they are broadly consistent with results using newer projections (such as 

those used in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report).

8       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation


