SUMMARY 

Over the past 5 years, our understanding of climate change impacts and adaptation in Canada has increased both as a result 
of new research and through practical experience.  Key conclusions arising from this update to the 2008 assessment report  
‘From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate’ include:

1. Canada’s climate is changing, with observed changes in air temperature, precipitation, snow and ice cover and other

indicators. Further changes in climate are inevitable.

2. Changes in climate are increasingly affecting Canada’s natural environment, economic sectors and the health of Canadians.
Extreme weather events are a key concern for Canada and there is growing confidence that some types of extreme events
3.
will increase in frequency and/or intensity as the climate continues to warm.

4. Adaptation is accepted as a necessary response to climate change, complementing global measures to reduce greenhouse

gas emissions. Adaptation enhances the social and economic resilience of Canadians to climate change impacts.

5. Adaptation is occurring with increasing frequency and enhanced engagement.  Continued action will help to build capacity,

address information needs and overcome challenges.

6. Adaptation can sometimes turn risks into opportunities, and opportunities into benefits.
7. Collaboration and adaptive management are approaches that governments and industry are increasingly pursuing to

advance adaptation.

INTRODUCTION

The climate is changing – in Canada and throughout the world. Globally, international assessments continue to identify rising  
air and ocean temperatures, shifting precipitation patterns, shrinking glaciers, declining snow cover and sea ice extent, rising  
sea level and changes in extreme events (IPCC, 2013). While rates of change vary from one indicator to another, the directions  
of change are consistent with climate warming, and climate models project that many of the observed trends will continue  
over the coming decades and beyond. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs; mitigation) is necessary to lessen the 
magnitude and rate of climate change, but additional impacts are unavoidable, even with aggressive global mitigation efforts, 
due to inertia in the climate system. Therefore, we also need to adapt – make adjustments in our activities and decisions in  
order to reduce risks, moderate harm or take advantage of new opportunities. All levels of government, researchers, the private 
sector and non-government organizations now view adaptation as an essential complement to mitigation.

In 2008, the Government of Canada released a national-scale science assessment of climate change impacts and adaptation 
(From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate). That assessment used a regional approach to discuss current and 
future climate change impacts and vulnerabilities in Canada, as well as adaptation options. It built upon the findings of Canada’s 
first national-scale assessment (The Canada Country Study, 1998) and drew conclusions from all available relevant literature.

This report – Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation – is an update to the 2008 assessment. 
It focuses on new information and knowledge, assessing advances made in understanding climate change impacts and 
adaptation from a sectoral perspective, based primarily on literature published up to the end of 2012. This synthesis draws from 
the individual chapters of the report, which include an overview of Canada’s changing climate (Ch. 2), thematic chapters focused 
on sectors (Ch. 3 to 8) and the concluding chapter on adaptation research and practice (Ch. 9). The key findings of chapters 3 
to 9 are summarized in Box 1. The rest of the synthesis is structured around high-level conclusions, supported by examples and 
insights from an integrative analysis across the report themes1.  

1    This Synthesis does not repeat the references provided in the underlying chapters, but rather directs the reader to individual chapters of the report where specific references can be 

found.  Occasional specific references are included when the source was not cited within another chapter or to provide additional context.

2       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation


