Industry (Chapter 5)

•

Industrial activity is sensitive to variations in weather and in extreme events, with considerable differences in the types
and extent of impacts on production, operations, and revenue among and within sectors.

• Changes in industry practices have been predominantly reactive, responding to variation in the weather or extreme
events, rather than proactive anticipation of future climate change. Examples of adaptation tend to be isolated rather
than representative of a clear trend within the sector.

• Adaptive actions implemented by industry vary by sector, and may be under-reported for strategic reasons.  Relative

to other sectors, tourism and insurance show the most promise in using adaptive actions to take advantage of
potential opportunities.

• There is little published research about indirect impacts of climate change on industry, such as changes associated

with consumer demand, supply chains, real estate or other assets, adaptation by other sectors, legal liability or
government regulation.

• Barriers towards effective adaptation include limited information on local impacts to businesses, uncertainties about

the costs and benefits of different adaptive actions, and limited market demand for the implementation of adaptation.

Biodiversity and Protected Areas (Chapter 6) 

• Climate-related shifts in species distributions have already been documented for plants and animals in Canada.  In
many locations, differential range shifts among species are likely to result in novel ecosystems that have different
species assemblages, structural attributes, and ecological functions than existing ones.

• For some species, the current and projected rates of environmental change exceed their natural ability to adapt,

increasing stress and threatening biodiversity.  As a result, climate change is magnifying the importance of managing
ecosystems in a manner that enhances resilience and preserves biodiversity.

• Protected areas, including parks, wildlife reserves and marine protected areas will play an important role in the
conservation of biodiversity by providing “refuge” or migration corridors for native species, helping to maintain
genetic diversity.

• Many Canadian jurisdictions are expanding their parks and protected area systems as part of their overall management

plans and climate change adaptation strategies. Associated research, monitoring, citizen science, public awareness,
and visitor experience programs build understanding, engage the public and help them contribute to meaningful
participatory decision-making.

• Ecological restoration can strengthen resilience to climate change. Integration of climate change adaptation strategies

into restoration decision-making in Canada, as elsewhere, is complex.

Human Health (Chapter 7)

• Stronger evidence has emerged since 2008 of the wide range of health risks to Canadians posed by a changing

climate.  For example, climate-sensitive diseases (e.g. Lyme disease) and vectors are moving northward into Canada
and will likely continue to expand their range. In addition, new research suggests climate change will exacerbate
air pollution issues in some parts of Canada, although further reductions in air contaminant emissions could offset
climate-related changes to ground-level ozone and particulate matter concentrations.

• A range of climate-related natural hazards continues to impact communities, presenting increasing risks to future

health. Recent flood and wildfire events have severely impacted communities through destruction of infrastructure
and displacement of populations.

• Many adaptation activities are being taken from local to national levels to help Canadians prepare for the health

impacts of climate change. Adaptation planning considers the underlying causes of health vulnerability, which differ
across urban, rural, coastal and northern communities.

Box 1 continued on next page

4       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation


