Policies, regulations and guidelines are mechanisms that governments can use to raise awareness and encourage or 
require adaptive action. The City of Vancouver, for example, reviewed its flood-proofing policies and now encourages 
applicants with projects in identified flood hazard areas to plan for 1 metre of sea level rise (Ch. 8). For the private sector, 
factors that enhance awareness include reporting requirements for material risk, and the drive to stay competitive and 
meet trade demands. Financial disclosure of climate change risks shows promise as a tool to promote climate change 
adaptation within industry (Ch. 3, 5).

ADAPTATION IS OCCURRING WITH INCREASING FREQUENCY AND ENHANCED 
ENGAGEMENT.  CONTINUED ACTION WILL HELP TO BUILD CAPACITY, ADDRESS 
INFORMATION NEEDS AND OVERCOME CHALLENGES (CHAPTERS 3 TO 9).  

Since publication of the 2008 assessment there has been a significant increase in the number of adaptation activities in 
Canada, primarily with respect to planning (including strategies, frameworks, and guidance documents) and initiatives 
aimed at enhancing adaptive capacity (Table 3).  From the breadth and scope of these examples, it is evident that there 
are many different approaches to adaptation. However, adaptation actions have been mostly incremental in nature, 
building on existing initiatives, assuming a continuation of current climate trends, and focused on no-regrets actions 
that are beneficial regardless of future climate. In many cases, action on adaptation was spurred by observed impacts 
or experience with extreme weather events.

Adaptation Activities
Provincial governments in BC, Alberta and Quebec are modifying seed transfer guidelines for 
reforestation to take shifting climate envelopes into account
A hydroelectric corporation is integrating climate change considerations in demand forecasts, 
informing rate adjustments and procurement plans
The mining industry is applying techniques to protect northern infrastructure from permafrost 
warming (e.g. deeper pile foundations, adjustable foundations)
The federal government is revising taxation schemes to help producers manage weather-related risk 
(e.g. allowing income to be deferred)
Industry associations in BC are developing a tourism action plan to respond to mountain pine  
beetle damage
Insurers are adjusting property insurance coverage (e.g. no longer offering sewer back up insurance in 
communities with recurring losses)
Subsidy programs have been adopted by a number of municipalities to encourage the installation 
of backwater valves that can help to reduce flood damage from an increase in the frequency and 
intensity of rainfall events
The Manitoba government is protecting winter habitat for the Qamanirjuaq barren-ground caribou 
herd in the transition zone between boreal and tundra ecosystems
The federal government is developing tools to guide public health managers on vector-borne disease 
surveillance and control methods
Communities across the country are developing heat alert and response systems to protect health 
from extreme heat events
A risk assessment of three coastal roads in Nova Scotia led to recommendations that include 
engineered shoreline protection and relocation of selected roads further inland
Cambridge and Milton, ON are performing economic assessments of the implications of climate 
change for drainage infrastructure design

TABLE 3:   Examples of adaptation activities from different sectors.

Sector
Forestry (Ch. 3)

Energy (Ch. 3)

Mining (Ch. 3)

Agriculture (Ch. 4)

Tourism (Ch. 5)

Insurance (Ch. 5)

Residential Housing (Ch. 5)

Biodiversity and Protected 
Areas (Ch. 6)
Health (Ch. 7)

Health (Ch. 7)

Infrastructure (Ch. 8)

Infrastructure (Ch. 8)

Synthesis     13


