Diavik Diamond Mine to spend an extra $11.25 million to fly in fuel (Ch. 3). Northern communities also depend upon the winter 
road network for the supply of affordable food, medicines and other goods.   

Together, these observed impacts illustrate that climate change is happening now, with impacts being felt across the country. While 
climate is one of several contributing factors in most cases, these examples provide an indication of the types of impacts that we can 
expect to see more of as the climate continues to change. 

EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS ARE A KEY CONCERN FOR CANADA (CHAPTERS 3 TO 8) AND 
THERE IS GROWING CONFIDENCE THAT SOME TYPES OF EXTREME EVENTS WILL INCREASE  
IN FREQUENCY AND/OR INTENSITY AS THE CLIMATE CONTINUES TO WARM (CHAPTER 2).

Losses from severe weather have been rising across the country. Extreme events, including storms (wind, ice and snow), flooding 
and heat waves have had significant economic (Figure 5) and health and safety impacts on Canadians. In 2011, the Canadian 
insurance industry paid out a record $1.7 billion for property damage associated with weather events, such as flooding, wind and 
wildfires. This record will be broken in 2013, as the insured losses from flooding damage in Southern Alberta (June) and Toronto 
(July) are finalized (IBC, 2013a; IBC, 2013b).  While factors other than climate also contributed to the rising payout trend (e.g. 
increased exposure of property, increasing wealth and aging infrastructure), these losses, along with the many possible health 
impacts (Ch. 7) demonstrate that Canadians are vulnerable to extreme weather events. 

There is growing confidence that some types of extreme events will increase in frequency and/or intensity due to climate 
change (Ch. 2). For example, at the global scale, warm days and nights are virtually certain4 to increase in frequency and 
magnitude and heat waves are very likely4 to increase in duration, frequency and/or intensity. Heavy precipitation events and 
extreme sea levels are also projected to occur more frequently. In Canada, studies have suggested that droughts, especially in the 
southern Prairies, heavy precipitation events, with associated increased risk of flooding (Ch. 2), forest fires (Ch. 3), storms (Ch. 5) 
and hot days and warm nights (Figure 6; Ch. 7) would increase in frequency and/or intensity in a warmer climate.

FIGURE 5:  Examples of insured losses from extreme weather events in Canada (Sources: IBC, 2008, 2011b, 2013a, b; McBean, 2012).

4   The IPCC denotes likelihood with the following scale: Virtually certain- 99-100% probability; Very likely- 90-100% probability;  Likely- 66-100% probability; About as likely as not- 

33 to 66% probability; Unlikely- 0-33% probability; Very unlikely- 0-10% probability; Exceptionally unlikely- 0-1% probability.

Synthesis     11


