decrease in southern interior valleys and increase 
at higher elevations and latitudes, with a more 
substantial decrease for spruce. Figure 4 shows 
how the climate envelope suitable for spruce is 
expected to change over the next 70 years, and 
Figure 5 shows the same for Douglas-fir trees. 

Natural tree migration may no longer occur fast 
enough to keep the landscape forested. Tree 
species can naturally migrate at about 100 m 
per year—but would need to migrate several 
thousand metres per year in order to keep pace 
with expected climate change.

On a more positive note, trees currently growing 
at the northern edge of their distribution, such as 
Garry oaks, arbutus or coast redwood, may thrive 
as more regions and new sites may become 
suitable for these species. Another potentially 
positive effect of climate change (for trees) is that 
with more carbon in the atmosphere, tree growth 
rates may increase in some areas as long as other 
supporting factors, such as soil moisture, remain 
available. Also, a lengthened growing season 
in higher latitudes and elevations is leading to 
increased tree growth rates and accelerated 
maturation processes—both positive for the rate 
of carbon sequestration. 

Mountain pine beetles are indigenous to pine 
forests in B.C., but population numbers were kept 
in check by periods of low temperatures. Another 
contributing factor to the mountain pine beetle 
epidemic is the abundance of hosts, like old 
pine, that are stressed by changes such as longer 
periods of drought. With warming winters and 

longer periods of drought, beetle populations 
have exploded and killed trees on more than 
16.3 million hectares in the province. Similar 
warming and variable winter conditions may also 
allow the Douglas-fir beetle and spruce beetle to 
flourish. Other insects such as spruce bud worm 
and tussock moth are also expected to become 
more prolific. The risk of outbreaks of western 
spruce budworm (which attacks Douglas-fir) 
and spruce bark beetle is projected to decrease 
in southern and central interior valleys as these 
trees become less prevalent, and increase in 
north-western B.C. In addition, tree diseases 
caused by fungi and bacteria are becoming more 
prevalent, and expected to get worse as trees 
already stressed by changes in local climate are 
more susceptible to pathogens.9

 
 
The 2006 windstorms in southern B.C. were the 
most destructive storm event for hydro and 
phone infrastructure in the Province’s history, 
with huge costs to industry and communities. 

Extreme events recorded by B.C.’s Provincial 
Emergency Program (PEP) from 2003–2005 cost 
an average of $86 million per year, compared to 
$10 million per year from 1999–2002.10

Climate Change and Your Community

11


