Impacts to Communities 

Figure 6: Wildfire

Extreme Weather Events 
Climate change is bringing more frequent 
extreme weather events that can occur earlier or 
later than ‘normal’, and last longer. This includes 
wind-, rain- and snow-storms, prolonged 
droughts, and heat waves. Extreme weather and 
related impacts such as landslides create major 
challenges for communities, including the cost of 
replacing damaged property and infrastructure. 

Floods and Drought
The impacts of climate change on water will 
vary by region. In watersheds with winter snow, 
warmer temperatures will speed up spring 
melt, increase spring flooding, and reduce the 
flow and availability of water in summer. In 
watersheds where precipitation falls mainly as 
rain, more intense winter rains will increase the 
risk of downstream flooding. For many interior 
watersheds, tree cover loss associated with 
climate change and the mountain pine beetle 
epidemic will increase runoff and flooding. 
More prolonged summer droughts will change 
community water supplies. Climate change and 
its impacts on water flow will also affect drinking 
water quality, municipal infrastructure, public 
safety, aquatic and riparian habitats, hydro 
generation and other water-related values, and 
exacerbate conflicts between water users. 

Wildfire 
In many regions of B.C., warmer temperatures 
in late spring and early fall, less summer 
precipitation, and more frequent periods of 

drought mean a longer fire season and increased 
risk of a catastrophic forest fire. In parts of the 
Interior that support large areas of beetle-killed 
trees, and in areas where past fire suppression 
has increased fuel loads, the risk is even higher.

The Insurance Bureau of Canada identified the 
2003 Kelowna firestorm as the single largest 
Canadian insurance loss for a wildfire at $250 
million. 11

Sea Level Rise 
Sea levels are expected to rise along many parts 
of the B.C. coast. Depending on location, sea 
level on some parts of the coast is expected 
to rise by up to one metre by the end of the 
century (others will experience a much lower 
increase).12  The effects of sea level rise will be 
compounded by greater storm surges and may 
cause significant erosion to coastal shorelines. 

Climate Change and Your Community

13


