The City of Victoria has an Integrated Pest 
Management Policy55  that is part the City’s 
environmental stewardship of all public lands 
and facilities. 

This will allow you to identify and prioritize 
risks. 

 Plan for the Worst

•	 Develop emergency response plans for 

responding to extreme weather events that 
may impact your urban forests. Potential 
threats include prolonged drought, 
windstorms, rain-or snowstorms, and for 
increased flooding, pests, or competition 
from invasive species. 

The process for developing an extreme weather 
plan could include the following:

•	

•	 Determine who should be involved 

(agencies, groups, government) and their 
financial and human resources;

•	 Hire a program coordinator to work with 
the many different groups and agencies 
involved;

•	 Have trained staff assess and inventory tree 

•	

•	

damage;
 Provide a list of arborists for each 
municipality to assist in damage assessment 
and clean-up efforts;
 Establish a toll-free number and staff to 
deal with public inquiries;

•	 Prepare press releases and extension notes;
•	 Prepare and deliver workshops for home 

and land owners on tree care before and 
after a major storm;

•	 Assign work crews to assist in the clean-up 
of parks, trails, roads, and waterways; and,
 Provide on-site advisory service for home 
and land owners.52

•	

•	 Prepare for higher incidences of pests and 

disease. More frost-free days, combined 
with earlier spring weather, will increase 
the over-wintering survivability of pests. 
Warm, moist conditions in spring and fall 
will enhance conditions for fungi, mildew 
and bacterial diseases of trees. Also prepare 
for threats from new invasive pests (such as 
Asian long-horned beetle, pine shoot beetle 
or emerald ash borer) and ornamental plant 
species such as Japanese knotweed, giant 
hogweed, and Himalayan balsam.53 
 Establish a process for early detection and 
treatment of pests and disease, as this can 
minimize or delay the most severe impacts. 
Managing infestations could involve 
massive removal of infected trees to contain 
the spread of disease. 

The Community Wildfire Protection Plan 
(CWPP) program assists communities in the 
development of plans that will assist them 
in improving fire prevention and protection 
measures in the interface areas. The CWPP will 
define risk areas for interface fires, identify 
measures necessary to mitigate those risks, 
and outline a plan of action to implement the 
measures.

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

34


