intensity crown fires).46  

•	 Maintain safe distances between trees and 

houses. 

•	 Avoid new ‘satellite’ subdivisions that 

project into forested areas, where 
possible. A more compact growth form for 
communities helps to maintain surrounding 
forested areas, and minimizes the amount 
of wildfire interface area. If necessary, 
follow FireSmart guidelines to treat the 
surrounding forested area in order to 
minimize the risk of a wildfire causing  
damage. The Ministry of Forests, Mines and 
Lands has information to guide the design 
of new subdivisions, and the planning 
and treatment of forests around homes in 
existing rural subdivisions or remote areas.47

•	 Engage a knowledgeable forester to assist 
your community with its wildfire interface 
risk management planning. (See also 
Section 4.)

Trees remove air pollutants by trapping 
particulate matter in their leaves, needles and 
bark. Better air quality reduces health care costs, 
and improves the quality of life for everyone, 
especially those with compromised health, 
such as asthmatics. Beware that trees can also 
give off aromatic compounds that can irritate 
some people at certain times of the year and 
contribute to ground-level ozone formation. 
There is considerable species variation in the 
emission of volatile organic compounds (VOCs), 
so consider this when selecting what tree 

The City of Prince George is examining ways 
in which trees can help to mitigate air quality 
problems. 

species to plant.

Figure 14: Evergreen plantings as a windbreak

Plant Trees to Improve Air Quality 

•	 Retain healthy large-stature trees. Large 
coniferous and broad-leafed trees with 
dense foliage collect the most particulate 
matter. 

•	 Plant additional trees in areas where air 

quality is a concern, for example along busy 
urban roads. 

•	 Consider long-lived and low-maintenance 

trees for these plantings. 

•	 Plant leafy shrubs in areas not suited to 

trees; these too will remove air particulates. 

•	 Provide ample water for urban trees and 

shrubs. This enhances their ability to 
remove pollutants in the atmosphere, 

Health and Air Quality

Air quality (smog) will likely worsen with climate 
change in some regions, especially in summer. 

Adapting Communities to Future Climates

27


