An International Tree Failure Database (ITFD) 
is a searchable database with information on 
tree failure from countries throughout the 
world. This information is gathered to help 
tree managers and researchers worldwide in 
uncovering tree failure patterns, allowing for 
better prediction of tree failures, the creation of 
appropriate standards for species selection and 
maintenance, and reduced impacts from tree 
failures.65 

•	

Community volunteers can be trained to 
help monitor trees in their neighbourhood. 
 Monitor and report on tree conditions. This 
is important as it provides feedback on how 
trees are responding to climatic changes, 
and which species are proving the best-
adapted. With the right training, volunteers 
can be asked to help with tree monitoring.  

Diversity and Resilience

Conservation of biodiversity in the landscape is 
a key strategy for coping with climate change. 
The term ‘ecosystem resilience’ refers to an 
ecosystem’s ability to adjust to and recover 
from changing circumstances such as climate 
change. The more complex and sizeable the 
natural areas that remain, the more likely species 
within a landscape will be able to adapt to 
change successfully. The more fragmented and 
simplified a landscape is, the less likely that 
successful adaptation will occur. 

Many urban landscapes are quite simplified—
such as a row of cherry trees along a downtown 
street. This makes them vulnerable to a single 
pest disease (e.g., bacterial canker) that could 
wipe out all of the trees. A more complex 
ecosystem with a variety of tree species and age 
classes will likely survive that pest infestation—
even if the cherry trees are affected. Resilience 
can be improved by conserving natural areas, 
increasing species diversity, providing ecosystem 
connectivity, careful species selection, and good 
planting/maintenance practices.

Ecosystem Resilience at a Landscape Scale

Urban forests are not isolated entities, but 
exist within a much larger regional landscape 
(ecosystem), sometimes intimately connected 
to the surrounding forests, woodlands and 
grasslands. It is helpful to think on a range 
of scales when developing strategies for 
adaptation.  
 
Agencies such as the Ministry of Forests, Mines 
and Lands are actively working to develop 
climate change adaptation strategies at larger 
(bioregional) scales. Recognizing the role of 
urban forests within the larger regional context, 
and working with other players in this field of 
research, can amplify efforts being made at a 
more local scale and provide greater access to 
resources and expertise

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

40


