supply dies, as rainwater running off 
new impervious surfaces (roof, driveway, 
sidewalks and roads) is channelled away 
into ‘stormwater management systems’. 
Often, with a little bit of thought, rainwater 
can be re-directed and dispersed back 
into the natural environments, while still 
managing the risk of extreme stormwater 
events. Be careful in engineering these 
rainwater interflows, as too much water can 
kill a tree just as readily as too little. 

Create Raingardens to Manage Overland Flow 
Raingardens are vegetated depressions designed 
to absorb precipitation, allowing the water to 
soak slowly into the ground. 

Direct rainwater into raingardens, allowing the 
water to soak into the ground. An additional 

benefit of this approach is that these natural 
systems filter out many pollutants, especially 
from small storm events which are the greatest 
source of pollutant loading. Trees in raingardens 
help to increase their natural function. 

Extreme Weather Events 

Use Root Systems to Create Slope Stability 
Intense rainstorms, runoff and flooding can 
erode soils, especially on steep slopes. Root 
systems of trees and large shrubs can be useful 
for stabilizing the soil and minimizing erosion. 

•	 Retain or restore vegetation on steep 

slopes. Species of trees and shrubs with 
extensive rooting systems, such as willow 
species, maple or Sitka alder, are good 
candidates. Native willow is particularly 
effective if a bioengineering approach is 

The City of Seattle’s Street Edge Alternatives Project (SEA Streets) was designed to provide drainage 
that mimics the natural landscape prior to development. Impervious surfaces were reduced to 11% 
less than a traditional street, surface detention was directed to swales, and over 100 evergreen 
trees and 1,100 shrubs were added to the street. This approach has reduced the total volume of 
stormwater leaving the street by 99%. 38 

A school in Qualicum Beach created a raingarden to capture stormwater runoff. Despite one of the 
heaviest recorded rainfalls immediately after its completion, the raingarden absorbed all the water 
inflow, allowing it to gradually soak into the soil.39  

Stormwater from a parking lot at the University of California Davis drains toward a wide, deep swale 
planted with London planetrees and filled with a mixture of 75% lava rock and 25% clay-loam soil. 
The swale provides a growing medium for trees and shrubs and a storage area for runoff, while the 
soil itself helps trap pollutants as the rainwater filters through it. The system is designed to capture 
97% of all rainfall events, as well as removing nutrients and heavy metals from the runoff.40

Adapting Communities to Future Climates

25


