The communities that take proactive steps to 
adapt to climate change will be better prepared 
for its impacts. The attention, time and money 
invested will produce valuable returns in terms 
of cost savings (e.g., related to energy, fire 
suppression or storm-clean up) and improved 
economic performance (e.g., through enhanced 
livability, business and staff recruitment, tourism, 
and property values). Done well, steps to adapt 
to climate change could protect human life 
and property, avoid or reduce future costs, and 
exploit new opportunities related to changes in 

“Integrating climate change adaptation 
into decision-making is an opportunity to 
enhance resilience and reduce the  
long-term costs and impacts of climate 
change.”  - Natural Resources Canada3

 
Mitigation refers to actions that reduce human-
caused greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions into 
the atmosphere. 

Adaptation refers to actions that better prepare 
communities and businesses for climate change 
and its impacts. Adaptation actions typically 
reduce risks and increase opportunities related 
to climate change. 

Sequestration refers to the removal of 
carbon from the atmosphere. Trees and other 
vegetation sequester carbon as they grow, 
storing it in their trunks, roots, branches, and 
leaves.

local climate—making lemonade from climate 
change lemons! 

Urban Forests and Climate Change 
Adaptation  

While there are many benefits to be derived 
from urban forests (see Planting our Future), 
this document focuses only on those related to 
climate change adaptation. Equally, there are 
many ways to adapt communities to climate 
change, but this document focuses only the 
‘tree-centric’ approaches (Figure 1). However, 
this guide is linked to much wider thinking 
about climate change adaptation, including 
broader impacts on land use, infrastructure, and 
utilities planning. 

Section 2 of this guide provides an overview 
of some of the impacts of climate change on 
communities and urban forests, such as more 
frequent heat waves and intense precipitation 
events. Section 3 outlines ways that urban 
forests can help to manage these impacts, for 
example by providing shade and detaining 
stormwater. Section 4 recognizes that urban 
forests themselves will be under stress from new 
climatic conditions and new pests and diseases, 
and looks at ways to manage urban forests so 
that they survive and thrive in future climates.
 

Introduction

3


