anticipated (see below). 

•	 Bioengineer vegetation to stabilize slopes 

and streambanks. Biodegradable mesh, 
crib walls (logs with holes for willow 
and dogwood cuttings) and herbaceous 
understory plants (such as wild ginger 
or wild strawberry) can be used to 
control erosion. Several methods for 
riparian restoration are provided in Soil 
Bioengineering Techniques for Riparian 
Restoration.42

Provide Protection from Strong Winds
In open areas, create windbreaks by 
placing rows of trees perpendicular to the 

•	

For more information on rainwater 
management at the watershed level, see 
Beyond the Guidebook 2010: Implementing a 
New Culture for Urban Watershed Protection 
and Restoration in British Columbia.41 

prevailing wind, about 8–15 m from the 
building. Design the windbreak to be longer 
than the building (see Figure 15) because 
wind speed increases at the edge of the 
windbreak. Dense evergreens that grow to 
about twice the building height are ideal. 
Place them far enough from the building so 
that they will not cause property damage if 
they blow down or block low-angle winter 
sun.  

Allow shrubs to form thick hedges, especially on 

north, west and east walls, to act as windbreaks.  

Wildfire 

Interface wildfires are a growing concern in 
many interior communities, especially those 
surrounded by forests affected by mountain pine 
beetle. 

Design Communities to Minimize Wildfire Risk 
•	 Choose ‘fire smart’ trees and landscaping.45  

In fire-prone areas, deciduous trees may 
be a better choice near buildings (as 
coniferous trees are more volatile and have 
the greatest potential to produce high-

The City of White Rock has revised its 
tree management bylaw to protect trees in 
Ecosystem Enhancement Areas (steep slope 
and ravine areas) “where the City has targeted 
areas of natural drainage and or sloped areas 
with a need to preserve or enhance the tree 
canopy to protect soils, minimize erosion and 
reduce greenhouse gases in conjunction with 
the Integrated Storm Water Protection and the 
Climate Action Plans.” 43

The District of Saanich has designated 
steep slope areas. If more than two trees or any 
stumps are to be removed from these slopes, 
a geotechnical engineer is required to provide 
a letter that confirms the removals will not 
destabilize the steep slope. 

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

26


