Climate change is not just about changes in 
temperature. The warming of the atmosphere 
leads to long-term changes in rain and snowfall 
patterns, wind and ocean currents, ice and snow 
accumulation, and other aspects of climate. It can 
increase the frequency of droughts, heat waves, 
heavy rainfall and snowfall, and other extreme 
weather events. These changes affect fisheries, 
forests and rangelands, and the jobs that 
depend on those resources. They increase the 
risk of damage to infrastructure from increased 
flooding, landslides, melting permafrost, and 
coastal storm surges, but also the risk of water 
shortages. Such impacts will increasingly 
challenge the capacity of government, business, 
and community leaders to protect public safety, 
manage natural resources, and promote social 
and economic sustainability.

Climate Change Adaption

Much emphasis has been placed on ways to 
mitigate climate change by reducing use of fossil 
fuels and cutting greenhouse gas emissions. 
This remains of great importance. However, even 
if all greenhouse gas emissions were to stop 
tomorrow, the excess greenhouse gases already 
in the atmosphere would continue to affect 
climate for the next 30–40 years. In addition to 
reducing emissions, communities need to adapt 
to climate change impacts—to prepare for a 
different future. ‘Business as usual’ is no longer an 
option. 

Adaptation to climate change means making 
adjustments to minimize adverse effects and 

maximize opportunities. It is sometimes also 
described as an ongoing process that involves: 

•	 Assessment to identify relevant climate 

changes and impacts, vulnerabilities, and 
priorities for action; 
Implementation of these plans; and 

•	
•	 Monitoring results and updating plan(s) as 

new information becomes available. 

Urban forests are an invaluable part of 
communities across British Columbia, yet they 
are often under-recognized and under-valued. 
For this reason, the Union of British Columbia 
Municipalities and Ministry of Community, Sport 
and Cultural Development prepared Planting 
our Future: A Tree Toolkit for Communities. 
The toolkit helps communities—small and 
large, rural and urban—to maximize the 
values from their urban forests and to address 
challenges that they are facing. This urban 
forest adaptation guide is a companion piece to 
Planting our Future. 

Planting our Future 
includes information 
on the values of 
urban forests, issues 
and challenges, and 
tools and strategies to 
achieve a healthy and 
sustainable urban forest. 
It is available from  
http://www.treesfortomorrow.gov.bc.ca/.

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

2


