For more information on regional implications 
for sea level see Projected Sea Level Changes 
for British Columbia in the 21st Century.13

100 cases of human illness and appears to be 
spreading from Vancouver Island to the Lower 
Mainland.16 

Health Impacts 
Climate change has health implications. 

Heat waves cause a variety of mild to severe 
symptoms linked with heat-related illnesses, 
including thirst, dizziness, confusion, weakness 
and fainting/collapsing.15  Smog (ground-level 
ozone) also worsens during heat waves, causing 
problems for people with heart or respiratory 
problems. Wildfires, which are more frequent 
with drought conditions, also create air quality 
problems and related health advisories. 

Network Rail in the UK is spending £750,000 
to identify safety threats related to sea level 
rise and increased storm surges. However, they 
estimate that it will save the industry over £1 
billion over the next 30 years by improving 
safety and preventing emergencies.14 

More intense rain and flooding can cause 
turbidity and water quality issues for drinking 
water supplies. 

New forest pests and diseases are able to 
migrate and survive with the warming climate. 
Cryptococcus gatti, a tropical fungus, first 
appeared in 1999 on the south east coast of 
Vancouver Island, likely due to changing climatic 
conditions. This fungus has caused more than 

Social and Economic Impacts 
There will be numerous social and economic 
impacts associated with climate change; 
however these are not discussed in this 
document. Forestry and forest product industries 
will be greatly affected by these changes, 
including dramatic fluctuations in timber 
supply, with high harvest levels following major 
insect epidemics to reduced supplies as those 
forests grow back under more drought-stressed 
conditions.

On the positive side, some communities are 
finding creative ways to use beetle-killed wood.
 
Impacts to Urban Forests

Climate change is already being noticed within 
urban forests. Tree species that were well suited 
to the climates in which they were planted—say 
20 or 50 years ago—can become ‘maladapted’ 
(no longer well suited)12 to changed temperature 

 
A study of street trees in the City of  
Victoria found that more than half of the 
Prunus (cherry and plum) species were 
in “fair to dead” condition, likely due to 
summer moisture deficit, and that projected 
drought conditions for 2050 and 2080 
would have a devastating effect on street 
trees.22

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

14


