loosens the aggregate and grinds down the 
pavement. One study found repaving could 
be deferred by 10 years on a well-shaded 
street and perhaps 25 years on a very 
heavily-shaded street, reducing repaving 
costs by 58% over a 30-year period. Larger 
trees provided greater benefits—shade 
from small trees reduced costs by only 
17%.29  

 
Create Comfortable Outdoor Spaces
Green spaces with a generous planting of trees 
can contribute to cooler, cleaner air.

•	 Plant large shade trees in public spaces. 
With hotter summers and concern about 
skin cancer, more people are seeking out 
shaded areas to sit or walk in. Clusters or 
groves of trees, preferably with multiple 
canopy layers, amplify these benefits. 

•	 Plan for successive plantings that produce 
a diversity of hardy species, age classes and 
growth rates, to ensure continuous canopy 
cover over time. 

Figure 9: Solar friendly trees for southern exposure

The City of Kelowna planted trees to provide 
shade in the Mission Recreation Park, especially 
in parking areas. Trees were selected to be heat 
and drought tolerant, and pest resistant. The 
trees have interpretive signs to educate the 
public about the species chosen. 

The District of Saanich has a Significant Trees 
bylaw that protects heritage trees. If a large 
shade tree is designated as a ‘significant tree’, 
the homeowner can apply for a grant to be 
reimbursed for up to 50% of the cost of tree 
work that is considered beneficial to the tree. 

Increase Shade over Pavement 
Large shade trees can reduce local ambient 
temperatures by 2–4°C. 

•	 Shade large areas of asphalt, such as 
parking lots. As noted above, this also 
reduces air pollution and provides a more 
pleasant environment for parking. Studies 
found that cars parked in parking lots with 
50% canopy cover emit 8% less pollution 
(from the evaporation of volatile organic 
compounds) than cars in parking lots with 
only 8% canopy cover.28

•	 Shade streets and sidewalks. Trees help to 

reduce street repaving costs as shading 
helps to increase the life span of asphalt. 
When asphalt paving becomes too hot, its 
oil binder volatizes and leaves the stone 
aggregate unprotected, so that vehicle use 

Adapting Communities to Future Climates

19


