•	

good site design (to allow harvesting of 
local rainwater interflows) and water-smart 
irrigation systems. Irrigation is most critical 
in first three years of establishment. At the 
same time, take care not to water native 
trees beyond this stage as it could reduce 
root depth penetration and make them 
more susceptible to blow down.
In areas with a cheap and plentiful water 
supply (e.g., groundwater), consider 
increasing summer watering programs. 
Community volunteers could be recruited 
to help. Be careful not to overwater species 
that grow deep taproots. Under conditions 
of over-watering, these species do not 
become wind firm and may be susceptible 
to blowing down.

For areas subject to more intense rain or flooding 
events: 

•	 Choose trees that can tolerate waterlogged 
soils for short periods of time. Select species 
that tend to dominate in seasonally wet 
sites. Examples of water-tolerant species 
include cottonwood, swamp cypress, many 
willows, red maple, and alder. 

For areas subject to high winds:

•	 Choose wind-firm, drought-tolerant species 

(as wind desiccates plants). Select species 
with attributes such as sound branch 
attachments, high wood strength and a 
well-distributed root system. Allow for deep 
growing soils.
 Retain open-grown trees that are adapted 

•	

to winter storm winds in areas of risk. 
Close-growing trees, once thinned, may 
be susceptible to blowing down as they 
will not have formed broad, secure rooting 
systems.
 Consider planting in larger groups where 
possible—trees are more wind firm as a 
group than isolated as individuals. 
 Avoid planting on ridge tops or leaving 
narrow remnant strips of natural forests on 
exposed ground.

•	

•	

Planting and Maintenance 

Proper planting and maintenance will give 
young trees the best chance of surviving 
and thriving. Guidelines for planting and 
maintenance are included in Planting our 
Future. From a climate adaptation perspective, 
the aim is to minimize stress on trees, so that 
they can respond better to the challenges 
associated with climate change. Key practices 
include the following.

Choose the Right Tree for the Right Place and 
Right Time

•	 Select species for the given site conditions 

•	

and future climates, as described above. 
 Choose healthy stock with well developed 
root systems. Avoid root-bound container 
grown stock.

•	 Ensure the planting site provides adequate 

space for tree root growth. In urban 
settings, use structural soils (see page 22).  

 

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

38


