damage to bark from mowing machines or 
weed-whackers, or damage to roots from 
building activities or utility maintenance. 
Create turf-free areas around the base of 
trees; invest in education and training of 
turf-maintenance staff; and place plastic 
tree guards around the base of young 
boulevard trees.

•	 For a variety of best management 

practices see the Compendium of Best 
Management Practices for Canadian 
Urban Forests.64

Monitor Urban Forest Conditions

•	 Routinely monitor trees for new pests 
and diseases. This can help to avoid or 
minimize problem insects. It can also avert 
a potentially catastrophic infestation from a 
foreign pest taking hold, such as the Asian 
long-horned beetle or European ash borer. 

Figure 21: Site preparation, Ucwalmicw Centre Society

Use Best Planting Practices 

•	 Plant in loam soils that are loose (not 

compacted) and deep enough to support 
healthy root development (at least 60–75 
cm).

•	 Stake the tree low enough on its stem to 

•	

ensure that the roots don’t move, while the 
upper portion of the tree can sway.
 Avoid adding organic amendments to the 
soil (<5% by weight or 20% by volume); 
instead top dress with about 10 cm of 
organic mulch. Do not mulch above root 
ball; mulch beyond this point instead, so as 
not to encourage fine root development up 
into the mulch layer. Irrigate deeply two–
three times per week during dry season 
(more if in a windy area).

Helpful resources in good planting and early 
tree care practice are found at the ISA website

•	

•	

 Avoid soil compaction, as this can 
considerably shorten the life of the tree. 
 Hire or train staff to become ISA Certified 
Arborists who are competent in all aspects 
of tree care. 

Use Best Maintenance Practices 

•	 Prune young trees to develop a sound 

‘architecture’ that can withstand snowfall, 
windstorms, etc. For tree pruning 
information see the International Society 
for Arboriculture website.63  

•	 Avoid unintended consequences—such as 

Adapting Urban Forest Management to Future Climates

39


