The climate projections shown in both figures 
are based on the assumption that global 
greenhouse gas emissions will continue to 
increase during the decades to come, and that 
climate will therefore change more rapidly than 
in the past. These maps represent only one of a 
range of possible futures for British Columbia; 
while scientists can tell us a lot about what is 
likely to happen, there is still uncertainty in these 
projections. 

One of the challenges of adaptation is to identify 
strategies that are robust across the full range of 
possible futures. 

Changes to Forested Ecosystems 

Future forests will be different from those of 

today. The climate ‘envelopes’ suitable for many 
tree species currently found in B.C. are moving 
north and to higher elevations. With even a 
1°C increase in mean annual temperature, 
ecosystems are expected to shift up to 150 km 
northwards and 300 m higher. These changes 
will have profound impacts not only on the 
trees, but on the associated plants, animals and 
ecosystem processes (e.g., pollination systems) 
that rely on B.C.’s forests. Many species of plants 
and animals will likely become endangered or 
perhaps even extinct.

B.C.’s conifer species in particular are expected 
to lose much of their climatically suitable 
habitat.8  A study of future forest ecosystems in 
B.C. predicts that in the 21st century, climatic 
suitability for spruce and Douglas-fir forests will 

Climate and Weather 

The weather varies from place to place, from year to year and even from decade to decade, subject to 
natural cycles such as the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO). For example, in 100 Mile House, an El Niño 
winter can mean winter temperatures 4–6°C warmer with 10–15% less precipitation, while a La Niña winter 
makes it 1–2°C cooler than average with 10–15% more precipitation.7  This is further complicated by a longer 
term natural cycle, the Pacific Decadal Oscillation, which can further affect annual and seasonal temperature 
and rainfall. 

Climate is measured based on long-term averages of weather in many different places and environments. 
Climate is always changing, even without human influence, as evidenced by past ice ages. However, 
emissions of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere are creating significant global climate warming that is 
superimposed on the ‘natural’ rate of change. Moreover this anthropogenic (or humanly-modified) warming, 
and the changes associated with it, is occurring very quickly. The long-term trend of global climate warming 
can be clearly seen, even though the weather will continue to vary from one place and time to another. 

Climate Change and Your Community

9


