The City of Grand Forks has a policy to replace 
every tree that is removed to maintain the tree 
canopy. Trees are selected from a list of native 
and climate-appropriate species.

be cautious of exotic tree and ornamental 
species (or their pests) that can become 
invasive in neighbouring forests. The black 
locust tree, for example, is an invasive 
species61 in parts of North America. A safer 
choice may be to use species that occur 
nearby (not from a different continent) and 
are currently at their northern or upper 
elevational limit.

Consider Current and Future Tree Stressors 
For areas subject to greater heat: 

•	 Plant heat tolerant trees in locations 

impacted by urban heat islands (e.g., in 
parking lots or town centres). 

•	 Create clustered plantings of trees and 
shrubs that will create their own micro-
climate, and cool the surface and soils 

beneath the canopy, allowing a variety of 
species to survive under harsher future 
climate conditions. 

•	 Where appropriate, use porous pavers 

instead of asphalt, as this will absorb less 
heat than black pavement. 

Plant pollution-resistant species. Hotter summers 
can create greater concentrations of ground-
level ozone, which leaves trees vulnerable to 
death and disease.  

For areas subject to greater drought:

•	 Select species habituated to drier sites 

•	

in the area or from further south. In 
general, native conifers will do better than 
deciduous species, because conifers limit 
photosynthesis during the dry season. 
 Consider water needs. Trees will be stressed 
(and survival rates reduced) in areas with 
long drought periods. Combine smart 
species selection (drought tolerant) with 
best planting practice, generous soil 
volumes, mulching (to retain soil moisture), 

In Toronto and Chicago, neighbourhood watering programs use volunteers to water trees in parks and 
neighbourhoods during drought periods.62
 
Village Tree Way in the Village of Pemberton has been planted with trees that need little watering, 
reducing maintenance costs. They also selected non-fruit bearing species that would not attract bears. 

San Francisco allows residents to convert a portion of the sidewalk into a landscaped area. Trees and plants 
with low water needs are encouraged. 

Adapting Urban Forest Management to Future Climates

37


