 
Communities such as Revelstoke, Kamloops, 
Maple Ridge and the regional districts of 
Nanaimo and Okanagan-Similkameen have 
already completed Wildfire Protection Plans. 

The Neskonlith Indian Band has created 
a fire break around the community, and is 
planting the fire break with pest-resistant firs to 
accelerate forest regeneration. 

•	 Develop an integrated pest management 
plan. For more information, see Planting 
our Future and the Integrated Pest and 
the Management Manual for Landscape 
Pests in British Columbia.54  

•	 Develop a community wildfire protection 

plan. For information on developing a plan 
see the Fuel Management website.56  Local 
governments can access funding available 
from the Union of B.C. Municipalities 
to help develop these plans; First Nations 
communities can receive assistance from 
Indian and Northern Affairs Canada 
and should contact the First Nations 

Emergency Services Society (FNESS) for 
information.

 
Address Priority Risks 

•	 With an arborist’s advice, selectively remove 

branches to make vulnerable trees more 
wind firm. If the only option is to remove 
the hazard tree, consider topping it at 
3–5m instead, or leave some large downed 
logs on the ground, as these will provide 
important wildlife habitat. At the same 
time, be strategic about leaving biomass 
which could act as forest fuels, increasing 
the risk of forest fires. 

•	 Remove sick or damaged trees to 

reduce risks from tree failure or spread 
of insects and disease. Ensure that staff 
are adequately trained and certified in 
Tree Risk Assessment and Integrated Pest 
Management. 

•	 Where there is a high risk of interface fires, 
follow the FireSmart guidelines  to reduce 
risk to property.  (See also page 27) 
 

During the windstorms of 2006–07, more than 10,000 trees in Vancouver’s Stanley Park blew down. Trees 
that were deemed a risk to visitors and park workers were removed. About 75% of trees and snags were 
retained, and about 80–120 tonnes per ha of fallen trees and stumps were left to provide wildlife habitat. 
Exposed trees at the edge of the blowdown area were made wind firm through careful thinning. 

The City of Edmonton has prepared an urban forest management plan, which includes a direction to 
address the risks from emerald ash borer and Dutch elm disease. Green ash and American elms make up 
approximately 46% and 32% of the City’s street trees, respectively.57 

Adapting Urban Forest Management to Future Climates

35


