Figure: 17: Maffeo-Sutton Park, City of Nanaimo

and more extreme. Average precipitation, 
temperature and growing degree days—all 
factors that affect tree establishment, growth 
and survival—will also change. Trees will likely 
be exposed to new pests and diseases as well 
as competition from new invasive species. As a 
result of the climate change already experienced 
during the last century, mature trees that were 
planted many years ago may already be showing 
signs of distress. For example, many cedars 
planted as hedges in Victoria and Vancouver 
are unable to survive drier summers without 
supplemental irrigation. Seedlings planted 
today not only need to grow well under present 

conditions but in climates 40–50 years from now. 
Adapting urban forests to climate change aims 
to reduce their vulnerability to adverse effects 
and to create treed environments that will thrive 
into the future. This involves: 

•	 Reducing urban forests’ exposure to risk; 

•	

and 
Increasing urban forests’ resiliency to 
disturbances. 

Figure 19 shows a diagram prepared as part of 
the City of Toronto’s urban forest adaptation 
study, and illustrates expected climate change 
impacts on the city’s urban forest and potential 
adaptation strategies. While it is unlikely that a 
small community would be able to implement all 
of these adaptation strategies, this diagram may 
help communities to generate ideas.

Risk Management 

Climate change is exposing urban forests to new 
vulnerabilities and risks. Many communities are 
all too aware of the increased risk of wildfire and 
insect damage associated with climate change. 
Other impacts—including drought, extreme 

i-Tree is a software suite from the USDA Forest Service that provides urban forestry analysis and benefits 
assessment tools. i-Tree tools include i-Tree Eco (formerly known as UFORE), which creates spatial mapping 
of the urban forest, and can generate a report on the value of its ecosystem services (e.g., air pollution 
removal). Other programs allow urban forest managers to determine where and what species to plant for 
maximum benefits, and to model the effects of planting programs in various parts of a community. Some 
of these applications are currently only available in the U.S., but should be available in Canada in the near 
future. 

Adapting Urban Forest Management to Future Climates

31


