deciduous trees, which are leafless during 
the rainy season, evergreen conifers 
continue to detain large amounts of 
rainwater throughout the year. Native or 
zonally-adapted conifers (like Douglas 
fir, most pines and many spruce species) 
are also well-adapted to cope with 
dry summers, as they do most of their 
photosynthesis in the moister shoulder 
seasons. 

are expensive to build and maintain) are built to 
compensate for the loss of natural infiltration. 
The cost has been calculated to be in excess of 
$100 billion nationally.36  

As well, even open ground in urbanized areas 
is commonly disturbed or compacted, limiting 
normal soil hydrologic functions. Tree roots 
that penetrate typically impermeable urban soil 
layers can increase rainwater infiltration rates. 

•	 On sites that are moist throughout 

•	 Plant more trees and shrubs! Root growth 

the growing season, consider planting 
anaerobically tolerant trees,34 [such as 
many poplar and willow species and some 
deciduous conifers, such as Swamp cypress 
or Dawn redwood, as they will take up and 
transpire large amounts of water. 

•	 Replace trees with sparse canopies. Trees 

need large, full canopies with healthy leaves 
to provide optimum shade and cooling 
through evapo-transpiration. 

The City of Kelowna has a “Neighbourwoods” 
program to fund tree planting on private 
property. In April 2010, residents bought 450 
trees at a discount ($30 per tree) to celebrate 
Earth Day.35  

Make it Easy for Water to Seep into the 
Ground 
As communities grow, trees are removed to 
make way for impervious surfaces such as 
parking lots, roads and buildings (see Figure 
10). Constructed stormwater facilities (which 

improves the both the hydrological and 
biological function of urban soils and 
increases rainwater infiltration rates. 

•	 Use mulches and native groundcovers, or 

permeable paving stones layered on a sand 
base, to keep the ground absorbent. 

•	 Have deep soils (at least 15 cm) for planting. 
Better yet, keep lawn size to a minimum and 
use native groundcovers where practical.

•	 Provide loose, uncompacted soils as these 
are important for healthy tree growth. Use 
of ‘structural soils’ or ‘soil cells’ are options 
to avoid soil compaction (Figure 11 and 
Figure 12). Structural soils are made up 
of a compacted matrix of angular stone, 
with uncompacted mineral soils in the 
spaces within. This meets the structural 
requirements for parking lots, roads and 
other paved surfaces while supporting 
tree root growth under the pavement. The 
deep rooting of trees in these soils helps 
to prevent heaving of sidewalks, curbs and 
gutters by tree roots. However, the amount 
of soil with a structural soil is only about 

Adapting Communities to Future Climates

23


