Fort Collins, USA’s Forestry Division justifies 
its large annual budget of almost one million 
dollars by calculating the economic benefit 
produced by their trees (net annual benefits 
total $1.17 million). Their “Save our Shade” 
program helps residents to protect existing trees 
and plant drought-resistant trees to address 
water shortages in their arid climate.30

Provide Shade for Buildings 
Large deciduous trees have particular value in 
cooling air and shading buildings in summer. 
Shade trees planted on the west and south sides 
of a home can reduce cooling needs (and costs) 
by 25–40% and reduce peak energy demand 
by up to 30%. Reducing energy use is also 
important for climate mitigation. 

•	 Plant trees on the west side of buildings for 

maximum shade benefit, as this reduces 
solar gain from the warm afternoon sun. 

•	 Plant solar-friendly trees to the south-east 
or south-west of buildings, i.e., trees that 
allow heat from the low winter sun to enter 
the building, while blocking high-angle 
summer rays (Figure 9). Solar-friendly trees 
have more diffuse canopies that allow light 
to penetrate while still providing shade. 
Good candidates may include some oaks, 
most ash species, black or honey locust, 
ginko, Lombardy poplar, Douglas-fir, or 
large pine species.

•	 Locate south-side shade trees about 3–7 m 

from the building. As the tree grows taller, 
prune the lower branches to allow more 
winter sun to reach the windows (if this 
will not weaken the tree structure). Avoid 
placing trees too close to the building 
foundation to avoid damage from roots or 
problems with branches against the roof or 
walls. 

•	 Plant deciduous trees on the east side of 

buildings to provide morning sun for heat 
in the winter, but shade in the summer.

•	 Shade air conditioning units, as this allows 

the unit to run more efficiently. 

•	 Ensure that trees are selected or placed so 

that they do not block solar installations 
(e.g., solar panels for hot water heating). 

Increased Precipitation 

Many B.C. communities will experience greater 
winter precipitation, including more intense 
rainstorms. Flooding is expected to become 
more frequent in some areas, with higher flood 
levels. 

Trees and shrubs can be part of a community’s 
rainwater management system, helping to 
manage or avoid stormwater flows in three ways. 
First, the tree canopy intercepts rainfall, directing 
some of it down the trunk and into the ground, 
and returning some to the air through evapo-
transpiration. (The amount of interception will 
depend on the tree species, shape, size, and leaf 
area density.) Second, the tree roots detain some 
of the rainwater in the ground (reducing peak 

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

20


