 
Evapo-transpiration is a term used to describe 
the evaporation and plant transpiration from 
the Earth’s land surface to the atmosphere. 
Evaporation accounts for the movement of 
water to the air from sources such as the soil 
and canopy interception. Transpiration accounts 
for the movement of water within a plant and 
the subsequent loss of water as vapour through 
stomata (pores) in its leaves.27 

will experience more heat waves. Strategically-
placed shade trees can dramatically reduce 
summer heat and UV radiation.

Reduce the Heat Island Effect 
Larger communities will feel a more pronounced 
‘heat island’ effect with built-up areas that are 
hotter than nearby rural areas. (A large city 
can be 1–3°C warmer than its surroundings, or 
as much as 12°C hotter in the evening.) Heat 
islands can increase summertime peak energy 
demand, air conditioning costs, air pollution 
and greenhouse gas emissions, and heat-related 
illness and mortality.

•	 Place groves of large-leaved trees and 

shrubs upwind of heat island areas. The 
evapo-transpiration from the vegetation 
will create cooler, moister air that blows 
into the ‘hot spots’.  

•	 Plant and maintain green roofs and green 
walls, which help to cool the air through 
evapo-transpiration of plants. 

Figure 8: Trees in a parking lot

is no ‘one-size-fits-all’ solution, and decisions 
must be based on local circumstance, impacts, 
vulnerabilities, political and socio-economic 
priorities, and good baseline information.26

Warmer Summers  

Climate change will mean longer, warmer 
summers for many B.C. communities, and some 

 
Selecting the ‘Right’ Species
This document makes reference to tree species 
that could be considered for specific purposes. 
However, the choice of the best species for the 
site (sometimes referred to as “right tree right 
place”) will vary depending on local climatic 
conditions (current and future), site conditions 
(e.g., slope, aspect, soils, available rooting space) 
and local preferences (e.g., low-maintenance 
variety, flowering). For more information on 
species selection, see page 37). 

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

18


