province. 

•	 Look at regions that currently have the 

•	

climate that your community is expecting 
by 2050. What species grow well there? 
This can provide guidance to the trees 
that might do well in your region in future. 
For many parts of B.C., this means looking 
south or to lower elevations. 
 Consider the use of non-native species, 
but do so with considerable care. The 
distinction between ‘native’ and ‘non-
native’ will become more blurred in the 
next decades as species distributions 
shift. Whether native or introduced, one 
important consideration is whether the 
species planted is climatically adapted. This 
may make species that are not native to 
the area the most resilient choice. However, 

Prince George has a program to reduce the 
forest fuel in the interface area to reduce risk of 
wildfire damage to the city.

Figure 20: Wildlife tree

The Ministry of Forests, Mines and 
Lands provides an online Tree Species 
Compendium59  that includes information on 
natural distribution, soil preferences, rooting 
systems, tolerances, and much more for a variety 
of native B.C. tree species. 

Evergreen Canada has a Native Plant 
database60  (including tree species) that 
includes information on preferred growing 
conditions. 

Species Selection  

Species selection is all about finding the right 
tree for the right place and time. Consider the 
specific needs and challenges of the planting 
site, as well as regional conditions and future 
climate impacts. Note that this document cannot 
provide species-specific guidance as the variety 
of ‘suitable’ species varies tremendously with 
climate, elevation, hydrology and soils across the 
province. Instead, it provides some principles 
that may help you to determine appropriate 
choices.  

Determine the Most Appropriate Species for 
your Location and Future Climate

•	 Consider what tree species do well on 

drier, less nutrient-rich sites within your 
area. Some species that prefer moist 
and nutrient-rich sites may have their 
geographic extent reduced as temperatures 
warm, particularly in the interior of the 

Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide

36


