•	 Use the information gathered in the survey 
and mapping of your urban forest to assess 
its age, species and condition. Are the age 
classes and genera of your forest diverse 
enough? How much of your urban forest is 
over-mature or, in other words, those trees 
that harbour diseases and insects, whose 
environmental/social value is diminishing 
(e.g. are rotten or are losing branches 
during storms), and whose maintenance 
costs are much higher than achievable? 
Also note the site conditions within which 
your trees are growing. Are they dry? 
Steeply sloped? Disturbed? Associated with 
watercourses or wetlands?

Figure 19: Risk evaluation matrix

winds and heavy precipitation events—will likely 
result in higher levels of tree death and structural 
failure (loss of branches or the entire tree). 

Get to Know your Urban Forests 

•	 You can’t manage what you can’t measure. 

Inventory and map your urban forests so 
that you can better manage the resource 
and any risks that may threaten it. Think 
carefully about how this information will be 
used when developing your data collection 
fields. Several web-based tools can provide 
assistance, such as the i-Tree tools described 
in Planting our Future.  A full mapping and 
assessment of the ecological health of a 
community brings many benefits including 
a good understanding of the condition of 
the urban forests. However, the investment 
of time and money may be beyond the 
means of smaller communities. In this case, 
a simple inventory of street and park trees 
and their associated environments may be 
a good place to start. Note that for many 
communities, much of the urban forest 
is on private land and this too should be 
considered. 

The City of Duncan and Cowichan Tribes 
developed an urban tree inventory, funded by 
a Green Streets Canada grant. The survey was 
conducted by one person on a bicycle. As well as 
being a low-cost method and environmentally-
friendly, this approach provided an opportunity 
for the surveyor to meet and talk to residents 
about what he was doing.51  

Identify Risk Factors 

•	

Identify the climatic changes anticipated for 
your region (see Section 2). Brainstorm with 
others to identify what this could mean for 
your urban forest.

•	 Assess where vulnerabilities may exist, and 
identify the probability of these occurring 
and the likely severity of impact (see Figure 
19).  

Adapting Urban Forest Management to Future Climates

33


