ChaPter 3
Climate Change SCienCe

•   there is high agreement and much evidence 
that with current climate change mitigation 
policies and related sustainable development 
practices, global gHg emissions will continue 
to grow over the next few decades.

•   observational evidence from all continents and 
most oceans shows that many natural systems 
are being affected by regional climate changes, 
particularly temperature increases.

the ipCC rates the likelihood of projected trends 
for the 21st century as follows:
•   Virtually certain (>99% likelihood) that decreases  

in frequency and magnitude of cold extremes 
will occur. 

•   1 in 20 year extreme daily temperature (exceeded  

once between 1981 and 2000) is likely (>66% 
likelihood) to become a 1 in 2 or 1 in 5 year event.

•   Very likely (>90% likelihood) that mean sea 
level rise will contribute to upward trends in 
extreme coastal high water levels in the future.

•   Likely that the frequency of heavy precipitation 

or the proportion of total rainfall from heavy 
events will increase.

•   1 in 20 year annual maximum daily precipitation 
amount is likely to become a 1 in 5 to 1 in 15 year  
event by the end of the century.

3.2  regional anD loCal Climate 

Change 

3.2.1 oVerView

the pacific Climate impacts Consortium (pCiC) 
at the University of Victoria completed a study 
of regional projections for all georgia Basin iCLei 
Adaptation initiative participants. Basic data from 
the study are included in this chapter with more 
detail available in the full report. A general study 
finding was that projected change by the 2050s 
appears modest while by the 2080s projected 
change describes a future climate that is almost 
unrecognizable in comparison to historical climate. 

Our ClimaTE iNCluDES natural year-to-year fluctua- 
tions such as el niño/La niña and decadal cycles  
such as the pacific decadal oscillation. Climate 
change is the trend information that remains once  
the fluctuations of these natural cycles is removed.  
Historical observations reveal the trends while global  
and regional climate models provide insight into 
anticipated future climate. 
Climate is expected to change both in terms of 
annual and seasonal averages and in the frequency,  
intensity, duration and timing of extreme events. 
in B.C, 2011 was 0.51°C warmer than 1951-1980  
average values, and was ranked the ninth warmest  
year since 1880, with nine of the ten warmest 
years on record occurring since year 2000.11  
in terms of extreme events, a 3-hour heavy rainfall 
event that occurred on average once every 25 years  
in the past is projected to occur five and a half 
times more frequently by 2050. 

3.1 gloBal Climate Change

the intergovernmental panel on Climate Change 
released its first Special report on Managing 
the risks of extreme events and disasters to 
Advance Climate Change Adaptation (SreX) on 
March 28th, 2012. the following are conclusions 
from the report. 
•   Warming of the climate system is unequivocal, 
as is now evident from observations of increases 
in global average air and ocean temperatures, 
widespread melting of snow and ice and rising 
global average sea level.

11 pacific Climate impacts Consortium and ipCC 

10


