ExECuTivE Summary

GlObal miTiGaTiON EffOrTS are underway to curb 
greenhouse gas emissions, but unless concerted 
action happens soon, further and more extreme 
changes may become unavoidable. Scientists 
project that Vancouver will experience increased 
annual precipitation and temperatures, with 
hotter, drier summers. More intense and frequent 
rain and wind storms are anticipated, and sea 
level rise will pose a significant challenge by 
mid-century. Adaptation refers to actions taken 
to respond to the impacts of climate change by 
taking advantage of opportunities, or reducing 
the associated risks.
there is significant overlap between climate 
change adaptation, mitigation and sustainability 
measures including those designed to improve 
greenspace, foster urban agriculture and facilitate  
improvements in buildings and urban infrastructure.  
Adaptation more explicitly engages a wider range  
of issues, particularly emergency management, 
health and the needs of vulnerable populations in 
a changing climate. Many existing City actions are 

already forwarding adaptation, and the focus of the 
Climate Change Adaptation Strategy is to build on  
these actions and propose new ‘no regret’ actions – 
those that benefit the community regardless of the 
extent of climate change we eventually experience.
Strategy development began last spring and loosely  
followed the iCLei “Changing Climate, Changing  
Communities” guide. the first step included working 
with the pacific Climate impacts Consortium at 
UVic to acquire a detailed understanding of  
anticipated changes to the regional climate. Using 
these climate projections, impacts to the City were  
identified through interviews with general managers  
and working group meetings. impacts were prior-
itized through a risk and vulnerability assessment, 
and adaptation actions were devised and evaluated  
through staff workshops. the Adaptation Steering  
Committee provided final review and comment 
on the Strategy. implementation of the Strategy 
will be the responsibility of department staff with 
coordination and support from the Sustainability 
group. 

the Strategy includes primary and supporting  
actions which are all detailed in a matrix in  
Appendix A, including accountability and priority. 
proposed actions were evaluated based on their 
effectiveness; overlap with sustainability and  
mitigation goals; cost-benefit ratio; and time horizon 
for anticipated impacts. they are prioritized into the 
categories of ‘must do’, ‘monitor’ and ‘investigate 
further’, with capital planning cycle integration 
for ‘must do’ items. 
primary adaptation actions focus on incorporating 
adaptation as a consideration or key driver into 
existing and planned projects. they include:
•   Completing a comprehensive integrated  

Stormwater Management plan and continuing 
with sewer separation;

•  Completing a coastal flood risk assessment;
•  Amending flood-proofing policies; 
•  Completing an urban forest management plan;
•   including climate change adaptation measures 

in the next Vancouver Building Bylaw update;

•  developing a back-up power policy; and
•  implementing water conservation actions.
the Strategy is a living document and will continue 
 to be revised and updated as climate change 
science and adaptation practice evolve. As this 
is the first Adaptation Strategy for Vancouver, 
many of the proposed actions focus on increasing  
our understanding of coming challenges and  
integrating climate change into planning, design 
and emergency management. 

1


