annual evaluation:
Climate programs staff in the Sustainability group 
will be responsible for evaluating the Strategy and 
staying current with climate science. Sustainability  
staff will also participate in regional and provincial  
adaptation forums and partner with external 
stakeholders to pool resources and ensure  
adaptation across sectors and jurisdictions. 
the annual review and subsequent progress  
report will include:
•   Summary of any observed changes in climate 

or impacts that occurred;

•  review of successful actions implemented;
•   review barriers and amend actions to enable 

successful implementation;

•   re-evaluation of timelines as information on 

impacts and funding is updated;

•   review of other planning programs or initiatives  
that provide a window of opportunity for climate 
adaptation actions or that may be impacted by 
climate change; and

•  identification of potential new funding options. 

5-year update: 
it is not the intent of the update process to develop  
a new plan. the update will be guided by the 
elements below:
•   the update process will be carried out by a 

Climate Change Adaptation team appointed  
by the deputy City Manager and coordinated  
by Sustainability group staff. At least one 
member of the original Strategy development 
team should be included.

•   the most recent regional information on climate  
science will be a key input to the planning process. 

•   A scan of impacts identified and prioritized 
in the original plan will be analysed for gaps 
arising from new climate science or observed 
impacts. new actions to mitigate these impacts 
will be detailed. 

•   existing action timelines will be reviewed to 
ensure thresholds have not been surpassed  
triggering an acceleration of action  
implementation.

•   All actions will be reviewed and revised to 
account for actions completed, dropped or 
changed and to account for changes in risk  
or to leverage new programs, policies or plans. 

•   inserting indicators to measure adaptation 

progress will be considered. 

•   the draft update will be reviewed by the  

appropriate departments prior to a final plan 
update being presented to Council for adoption. 

29


