CHApter 6
Plan imPlementation anD maintenanCe ProCeSS

urban forest management Plan: Long living,  
vigorous trees are necessary to pay back the  
cost of getting them to a size at which they 
start to provide significant benefits in terms of 
carbon uptake, infiltration, shade provision and 
water diversion. to grow successful trees in urban 
areas demands proper soil management, species 
selection, location and maintenance. Climate 
change intensifies the need for high standards of 
tree management and the incorporation of future 
climate considerations. 
Vancouver Building By-law update 2017: Working 
with the building and academic community to 
explore best methods for incorporating changing 
climate loads into the building code will support 
a more resilient building stock in the coming 
decades. 
Sewer Separation Strategy: Separating the storm  
and sanitary sewers will reduce the risk of combined 
sewer overflows and private side sewer back-ups. 
the existing approach of prioritizing high risk areas 
for early separation ensures resilience ahead of 
significant shifts in storm profiles. 
extreme hot weather Committee: the committee, 
in partnership with Vancouver Coastal Health 
developed a heat alert and Be Cool campaign  
in phase i of planning. phase ii of the project can 
be expanded to explore and implement many 
of the best practices and programs for heat that 
are being pursued by municipalities across north 
America.

6.1 imPlementation

ThE DEParTmENTS aND divisions identified as  
accountable for actions in the Strategy will be  
responsible for implementation. the Sustainability 
group will provide coordination among depart-
ments, deliver on specific actions and support 
departments in their implementation of actions. 
Where significant new actions are proposed,  
the need for an implementation plan and timeline 
will be evaluated. 

imPlementation through exiSting 
ProgramS anD Planning

the effectiveness of Strategy implementation  
is dependent on incorporation of outlined  
actions into existing plans, policies and programs. 
Key vehicles for adaptation incorporation are  
the following:
greenest City action Plan: Many of the actions 
promoted for sustainability of the City have 
co-benefits with climate change adaptation.  
Adaptation provides either an added driver, as 
with water conservation, or an added consideration 
as is the case with the tree planting strategies. 
integrated Stormwater management Plan:  
improved management of stormwater will ensure 
continued functioning of the sewer system under 
heavier storm conditions. Vancouver has significant 
opportunities to enhance innovative management  
approaches from impervious surface policies to 
street design. the integrated Stormwater Manage- 
ment plan will provide cross-departmental 
recommendations to take advantage of these 
opportunities. 

28

6.2  methoD anD SCheDule for  

uPDating the Plan 

our global and local understanding of climate 
change and its impacts, costs and potential 
actions continues to evolve. Modeled projections 
continue to become increasingly sophisticated  
and inputs change providing new ranges of  
anticipated temperature, precipitation etc.  
the City of Vancouver intends to review and  
evaluate the Strategy annually and to update it 
every five years from the date of initial Strategy 
adoption. this cycle may be accelerated to less 
than five years based on the following triggers:
•   A significant climate change impact is experi-

enced; and, or

•   Senior government action or policy triggers  
the need to respond (e.g. as with provincial  
Sea Level rise guidelines).


