AppendiX d
aDaPTaTiON ChallENGES aND rESPONSES

Knowledge about future climate – particularly local impacts of global climate change trends – is incomplete. given the timelines for planning and implementing 
change, and the understanding that being proactive will yield benefits and alleviate future costs, decision makers will have no option but to make policy and 
investment choices under uncertainty. the following are examples of some of the adaptation planning challenges and recognized options for responding to them.

Challenge
uncertainty: there are various sources of uncertainty in the information we rely on 
to plan for climate change including:

- the uncertainty introduced as models attempt to model natural processes

- unknown socio-economic changes that will influence our vulnerability through time.

- how future impacts will relate to each other and compound each other. 
Data availability: data inputs traditionally used for planning at the municipal scale 
may not be available

- gaps in knowledge at the scale of precise local impacts

- models work best with long-term trends over large areas.
timelines: decision ‘lifetimes’ interact with the nature and timing of the climate change 
variable to which the decision is sensitive. For example, a new building has a short 
lead-time in terms of design and permitting but long consequences meaning it will 
experience a significant degree of climate change. 
Choosing actions: When choosing between adaptation investments decision-makers 
face a bewildering array of potential adaptation measures, each with its own costs 
and benefits, often requiring phased implementation. traditional business case 
templates may not apply. 

tools/responses
low regret actions: Measures that provide benefits under current climate and a range 
of future climate change scenarios. Many of these low-regrets strategies produce 
co-benefits, in that they address other City goals such as mitigation, sustainability, 
human well-being etc.
robust decision making approaches: identify decisions that are robust across the 
range of future possibilities, even if they are not precisely optimal for any and may  
be more costly to implement. 
flexible Design: Build for conditions now or for the next few decades but ensure  
designs show cost effective modifications for future conditions. 
flexible decision pathways: identify a wide range of options suitable for different 
extents of change over timeframes. recognize that we may require an incremental 
approach for pragmatic reasons (interaction with existing infrastructure) with the 
opportunity to learn and re-orient as the future unfolds. 
nested decisions: incremental and short term decisions will need to be embedded 
within longer-term plans with key decision points or signposts identified for  
reappraisal over time.
adaptive management: Adaptation efforts benefit form an iterative or adaptive  
management approach due to the complexity, uncertainties and long time frame  
associated with climate change.
Scenario Planning: Combinations of structured decision-making with scenario planning 
for different future socio-economic and climate realities can prove useful for strategic 
decision-making.
Vulnerability and risk assessments: Assessments help prioritize impacts.
risk management approaches: traditional risk management approaches from the 
natural hazard field provide frameworks for action synthesis.

A recent global survey on urban adaptation challenges found the following trend.
“in general, cities throughout the world report that they are having difficulty obtaining financial resources, allocating staff time, communicating the nature  
of the program, generating interest among political officials and business, mainstreaming, and gaining the commitment of local elected officials and government 
departments. two additional global trends are that most cities believe their national governments have limited understanding of the challenges they are facing, 
and most have limited access to financial support from local, regional, national, and international sources.” 33

33 Carmin, JoAnn, nikhil nadkarni, and Christopher rhie. 2012. progress and Challenges in Urban Climate Adaptation planning: results of a global Survey. Cambridge, MA: Mit.

53


