2.3 VanCouVer ProCeSS

Figure 3 below outlines the main actions carried out in the adaptation  
planning process. 

sea level rise and voting to categorize actions from low hanging fruit to 
complex. in order to focus detail on appropriate actions, the working group 
evaluated all actions against a set of criteria (see section 2.5). iterations of 
review ensured departments were involved throughout the process. 

Milestone 1

Milestone 2

Milestone 3

Draft Plan

GM Interviews

Climate Science

ID existing
adaptations and
impacts (WG)

Risk and 
Vulnerability
Assessment

PCIC Climate
Science Project

Dept. Actions ID
Workshops

WG Action
Evaluation

Sr. Sta€ Vet
Draft Actions

figure 3: The City of vancouver’s adaptation Planning Process

in Milestone one, general managers from across the organization were inter-
viewed to introduce them to the planning effort and garner their initial feedback  
on impacts and department specific actions. research on anticipated changes  
to climate variables (rain, wind, temperature) was presented as a basis for 
impact identification by the gMs and subsequently by the working group. 
Milestone one also included a scan of existing policies, programs, plans and 
bylaws to identify existing adaptation actions and opportunities to include 
adaptation considerations.
Milestone two focused on the risk and vulnerability assessments which were 
completed by the working group (see section 2.4). Starting with over 80 
identified impacts, the assessments prioritized the list to just over twenty key  
impacts. in collaboration with iCLei and pCiC, the georgia Basin Adaptation 
initiative participants commissioned a study of regional climate science to 
support adaptation planning. 
identification and prioritization of adaptation actions dominated milestone 
three. departmental workshops focused on brainstorming actions to respond  
to, or minimize the risk imposed by impacts affecting the department. 
Workshops included a mapping exercise to identify assets vulnerable to 

2.4 Strategy DeVeloPment

the vulnerability and risk assessments were the primary tool used in Strategy  
development. the assessments focused this round of adaptation planning on  
those impacts that we are the most susceptible to, and that will have the 
greatest consequences. please refer to Appendix B for more detailed information  
from the vulnerability and risk assessment. 

2.4.1 VulneraBility aSSeSSment

Vulnerability refers to the susceptibility of a given service area to harm arising  
from climate change impacts. it is a function of a department’s sensitivity to 
climate change and its capacity to adapt to impacts with little to no cost or 
disruption. Medium and high vulnerability impacts are moved on to the risk 
assessment. 

Vulnerability = 

Sensitivity x adaptive Capacity 

Sensitivity
to conduct a sensitivity assessment, Vancouver’s Adaptation Working group 
looked at each identified impact and assessed how the functionality of the 
primary department would be affected if the impact were to occur. Vancouver  
decided to look at the sensitivity of the primary department between now 
and 2080. Sensitivity was ranked on a scale of 1 to 5. 
adaptive Capacity 
inherent to the analysis of adaptive capacity is the assumption that certain 
systems can accommodate changes in climate with minimal disruption or 
additional cost. those systems which cannot accommodate changes have  
a low adaptive capacity. 

7


