ensure that species selected and locations for planting targeted, maximize 
civic investment and ensure longevity. it will explicitly address climate 
change impacts to trees and greenspaces as well as ensuring we take full 
advantage of their potential to support City adaptation. 
A multi-department process led by arboriculture and park professionals is 
needed. the Forest Management plan should gather baseline data and provide 
direction on development of standards and guidelines that address: 
•   preparing for challenges facing our urban forest in the 21st century including  

a changing climate. 

•   increasing canopy cover citywide as a measure to help mitigate climate 

change. Map canopy coverage with land use, identify tree deficient areas 
and work to add tree space and appropriate soils management to remedy 
the deficit.

  •   Hot spot and vulnerable population mapping can be overlayed with  

canopy coverage to target certain areas for shade provision.

•   organizational changes that raise the profile of trees and facilitate improved 

integration of trees into urban design. 

•   Minimize the negative impacts of new or existing trees.
•   Soil management: volume and make-up (loss of heritage soils).
•   educate an expert team across departments to champion trees and  

provide oversight.

6.0  organiZational aDaPtiVe CaPaCity 

oBjeCtiVe 6.1: inCorPorate aDaPtation ConSiDerationS  
in City BuSineSS

Climate change is an overarching issue that poses an additional risk or benefit  
to the way we do business. Successful adaptation will require moving beyond 
this strategy to incorporation of climate change in risk management and 
project planning across departments. 
regular updates to climate science will be shared throughout the organization 
for consideration in design and planning. Mapping flood hazard, urban heat 
island effect, tree canopy, landslide risk areas etc. provides a powerful baseline  
of information. Seattle and toronto have both developed and applied software  
programs to support mainstreaming climate change that can be evaluated 
for potential use in Vancouver. Collaborating with municipalities and other 
partners regionally will ensure we support regional resilience and continued 
economic vibrancy. 
Supporting actions: 
•   Continue to collaborate regionally with First nations, Metro Vancouver 

and other municipalities.

•   investigate best practices in ‘mainstreaming’ adaptation. Consider both 

internal software programs and external communication/checklists.

•   develop an Urban Forest operations program (Maintenance standards 

•   Complete mapping to support climate change adaptation with co-benefits 

and budgets).

for other applications.

Supporting actions: 
•   promote public awareness of the critical role of urban forests in coping 

•   Complete a communication strategy, including community engagement, 

for Climate Change Adaptation, especially sea level rise. 

with climate change. 

 

•   Continue pest and invasive species monitoring programs with climate 

change as an added stressor. 

•   establish funding levels adequate enough to reinstitute systematic pruning. 
•   ensure species and location selection criteria in the gCAp planting strategy,  

landscape guidelines and in the replacement tree list in the protection of 
tree Bylaw reflect future climate projections and any Urban Heat island 
effect mapping.

27


