the Strategy is a living document and will continue to be revised and updated  
as climate change science and adaptation practice evolves. As this is the 
first Adaptation Strategy for Vancouver, many of the proposed actions focus 
on increasing our understanding of coming challenges and integrating climate 
change into planning, design and emergency management. Successive iterations  
of the Strategy will yield more detailed actions.
Many adaptation activities are already in place at the City driven by the need  
to manage observed climate changes, or to meet sustainability imperatives 
such as water conservation. this Strategy takes a “no regrets” approach to 
climate policy by identifying actions that build on these existing activities to 
improve community resiliency and generate benefits whether the extent of 
anticipated climate change materializes or not. 
the Strategy begins with an overview and context for adaptation in Vancouver  
including adaptation basics and Vancouver’s future climate (chapters one  
to three). Chapter four focuses on understanding the impacts and the cross- 
cutting issues they represent. Chapter five identifies the primary and supporting 
actions with a companion comprehensive action matrix located in Appendix A.  
A brief description of plan implementation and maintenance procedures 
conclude the plan. 

iNTrODuCTiON

ClimaTE ChaNGE iS clearly supported by both observed trends and peer reviewed 
scientific research. Some climate change is now inevitable and there is evidence 
the world over that changes are already taking place. global mitigation  
efforts are underway to curb greenhouse gas emissions, but unless concerted  
action happens soon, further and more extreme changes may become  
unavoidable. preparing for these changes –adapting to climate change –  
is a warranted and complementary strategy. the City of Vancouver is a  
recognized leader in climate change mitigation, and adding adaptation to our 
business will ensure that we can continue to meet City goals cost effectively 
over time. 
Scientists project that Vancouver will experience increased annual precipitation  
and temperatures, with hotter, drier summers. More intense and frequent 
rain and wind storms are anticipated and sea level rise will pose a significant 
challenge by mid-century. these changes mean an increasing risk of overland 
and coastal flooding, damage from storms and overheating during summer 
highs. Without action, these risks threaten a wide spectrum of City goals 
from economic prosperity to liveability.
Vancouver is joining a group of leading cities in europe, Australia and the United 
States that have developed and implemented climate change adaptation actions. 
Vancouver’s Adaptation Strategy is a priority action in both the greenest 
City plan and the Corporate Strategic Business plan. the City joined the 
iCLei Climate Change Adaptation initiative pilot in late 2010 along with a 
cohort of local and regional governments across Canada. participants work 
through iCLei’s five milestone methodology with the goal of developing and 
implementing a climate change adaptation strategy over two years.
this Adaptation Strategy focuses on understanding the climate impacts today 
and how they are expected to change in the coming century. it provides a 
framework for identifying and prioritizing vulnerabilities and risks and then 
exploring measures to reduce the risk imposed by climate impacts. it will 
guide development of policies and programs to build resiliency into everyday 
operations and short and long-term infrastructure investments. Accountability 
for the actions lies primarily with the City but also with external partners. 
We need to maintain or enhance the infrastructure, programs and services 
that make Vancouver one of the most liveable cities in the world, even as 
storms worsen and sea levels increase. 

2


