2.1.2 Primary aCtion: uPDate City flooD-Proofing PoliCieS  
inCluDing flooD ConStruCtion leVelS

3.0  inCreaSeD frequenCy anD  

intenSity of StormS anD weather extremeS

While numerous municipalities in the lower mainland maintain many kilometers 
of dikes, the City of Vancouver has relied on other tools such as flood  
construction levels (FCLs) and setbacks. City flood-proofing policies establish 
these elevations and setbacks by flood prone area. the last amendment  
to the policies in 2007 flagged the need for future updates to incorporate 
new sea level rise information. 
the BC Ministry of environment released new guidelines outlining incorporation  
of sea level rise into FCL calculations in May, 2011. the City encouraged an  
interim increase of 1m to existing FCLs while undertaking a study to apply  
guideline methodology to specific coastline types. Amending the flood-proofing 
policies will increase the flood resilience of new development and maintain 
the potential for a range of adaptation solutions in the future. increasing the 
awareness of builders and developers with respect to flood-proofing methods 
and considerations will be an important complement to policy amendment. 
Supporting actions:
•   Continue to coordinate with other regional municipalities and other levels 
of government to ensure a regional approach to coastal flood management. 
•   Leverage opportunities to evaluate strategic near-shore open space planning 

for inundation and containment areas and saltwater resilient plantings. 

•   initiate a flood-proofing awareness campaign among builders and developers.
•   Monitor low-lying storm sewer capacity and functionality and continue  

to add back-up power and storage tanks to existing stormwater pumps.
•   Monitor groundwater for increasing levels. Consider associated impacts  

in coastal development design. 

impacts: increased public safety and health risks; increased resources required  
to respond and recover following events. 
what this could mean: in addition to earthquakes, the top hazards identified 
by emergency manage-ment in 2009 are weather related events, namely 
wind storms, blizzards, freezing rain/ice storms and rainstorms. the 2006 
Vancouver windstorm cost the City approximately $10 million in forest resto-
ration, repairs, slope stabilization and planning. Following the August 2005 
rainstorm in toronto, the City spent over $40 million to bring the City’s  
infrastructure back into service. Storms can be bothersome to many in terms 
of service disruptions but can be lethal to vulnerable populations including 
the sick, elderly, young, homeless and low-income community members. 
enhancing resilience now will be cost effective in terms of damages avoided 
in the long term. 
Many of the actions in this chapter and the action matrix (Appendix A) help 
build resilience to extreme events. the following actions focus on safety and 
health risks to vulnerable populations and response and recovery capacity. 

oBjeCtiVe 3.2: inCreaSe VanCouVer’S CaPaCity to reSPonD 
to extreme weather eVentS anD reCoVer effeCtiVely

the City’s emergency management and response capacity will need to cater 
to more frequent, simultaneous and extreme disasters. this includes dealing 
with their cascading effects such as power outages and road closures. Many 
existing emergency management and response practices at the City can be 
expanded to cover extreme weather events. it will also be important to continue 
monitoring resources including staff, their training and equipment, and City 
contingency and insurance budgets to ensure they are evolving to meet new 
and possibly escalating needs. 

3.2.1 Primary aCtion: DeVeloP a PoliCy for BaCk-uP Power  
anD aSSeSS DePartmentS for  ShortfallS

A key cascading effect of stormy weather is power outages which may in turn  
cause health impacts and service/business disruption. At the peak of the 2006 
windstorm, BC Hydro reported that over 250,000 customers were without power. 

22


