Local governments have a duty of care to their 
citizens to ensure development decisions do not 
create the potential for unmanageable exposure 
to hazards. they also have a special responsibility 
to those members of society who are more  
vulnerable to impacts from climate change. 
to adapt to climate change, local governments 
will have to alter their traditional regulatory and 
design regimes to incorporate future projections 
into decision-making. Many north American cities 
are well on their way to doing this and Vancouver’s  
efforts start here.

1.3 aDaPtation DefinitionS:

adaptation: in human systems, adaptation is 
the process of adjustment to actual or expected 
climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm 
or exploit beneficial opportunities.5 Adaptation is 
a function of Vulnerability and risk. 
Vulnerability: is the degree to which a system is 
susceptible to, or unable to cope with a particular  
climate change impact. it is a function of the 
character, magnitude and rate of climate variation  
to which a system is exposed; its sensitivity and 
its adaptive capacity.6

Vulnerability =

 exposure x Sensitivity x adaptive Capacity

exposure and Sensitivity: are almost inseparable  
properties of a system (or community). A coastal   
community like Vancouver is exposed to sea level 
rise while an okanagan community may be ex-
posed to drought. Sensitivity is the degree to which  

the system is affected. At the municipal level, iCLei  
suggests assessing sensitivity by considering  
existing stresses that make a department sensitive  
and how much the performance or function of an  
area may be affected by a climate change impact. 
adaptive Capacity: is similar to, or closely related  
to, a host of other commonly used concepts,  
including adaptability, coping ability, management  
capacity, stability, flexibility and resilience. the 
determinants of adaptive capacity are the forces 
that influence the ability of the system to adapt 
such as managerial ability; access to financial, 
technological and information resources; infra-
structure; institutional environment; political  
influence; kinship networks, etc. Adaptive capacity  
is context-specific and varies from community  
to community and among social groups and  
individuals, and over time.7
Vulnerability assessment: the process to prioritize  
climate change risks focusing on where we 
are the most susceptible. Vulnerability is a key 
determinant of potential impacts and disasters. 
For example, a heat wave can have very different 
impacts on distinctive populations depending on 
their vulnerability. 
Climate Change risk: is a combined function of 
the probability of a hazard (an event with the 
potential to cause harm, e.g. floods, droughts) 
occurring and the magnitude or severity of its 
potential consequences (injury, damage, loss  
of habitat etc.). 8

risk = 

likelihood (probability) x Consequence

risk assessment: the process to prioritize 
climate change risks focusing on the potential 
consequences of an impact. 
Disaster risk management: improving the under-
standing of disaster risk; fostering disaster risk  
reduction and transfer; and promoting continuous  
improvement in disaster preparedness, response, 
and recovery practices, with the explicit purpose 
of increasing human security, well-being, quality 
of life, resilience, and sustainable development.9
resilience: resilience is the ability of a system 
and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, 
accommodate, or recover from the effects of a 
hazardous event in a timely and efficient manner, 
including ensuring the preservation, restoration, 
or improvement of its essential basic structures 
and functions.10

5 intergovernmental panel on Climate Change (ipCC), 2011.
6 ipCC, 2001
7  Smit, Barry and Johanna Wandel. 2006. Adaptation, adaptive capacity and vulnerability. global environmental Change 16. 282-292

8  Brooks, nick 2003. Vulnerability, risk and adaptation: A conceptual framework.  

tyndall Centre for Climate Change research. Working paper 38. 

9 ipCC, 2011              
10 ipCC, 2011

5


