CHApter 4
imPaCTS aND iSSuES

aNTiCiPaTED ChaNGES TO climate variables, as  
described in Chapter 3, will cause impacts felt 
across City departments. An example of a climate  
change impact is increased street flooding caused  
by increases in intensity and duration of rainfall.  
impacts share common overarching themes 
that are briefly discussed in this chapter to help 
decision-makers, working on these policy areas, 
identify climate risks and opportunities. 

4.1 imPaCtS

From Chapter 3, the most relevant climate change  
impacts Vancouver will experience are:
•   Flooding and/or inundation due to sea level rise;
•   overland flooding due to increased frequency 

and intensity of precipitation;

•   damage from increased frequency and intensity 

of wind and rain storms; and

•   Health impacts from more days of extreme 

warm temperatures and heat waves.

overall changes in climate trends such as warmer, 
drier summers and more extreme events will also 
cause impacts. See table 6 for all the prioritized 
impacts. 
Several Vancouver characteristics standout as 
significant vulnerabilities to climate change  
which in turn drive adaptation priorities. 
•   Lower income households; the homeless and 

those housed in poor quality housing are  
particularly vulnerable to climate change and 
natural hazards due to where they live within 
cities, the lack of reliable basic services, and their 
shortage of resources to deal with disruption. 

•   Low-lying coastal and Fraser-fronting areas  

include significant infrastructure, neighbourhoods, 
ecosystems and are central to Vancouver’s  
aesthetic and amenity-centred charm. 

table 6 summarizes the impacts that were prior- 
itized through the vulnerability and risk assessments. 
impacts are organized by the expected climate 
change (high level impact in the case of sea level  
rise). the general changes category includes 
impacts felt from a collection of the other climate 
changes. 

4.2 CroSS-Cutting iSSueS

the following discussion briefly touches on the 
issues common to many climate change impacts, 
highlighting focus areas for adaptation planning. 

4.2.1 infraStruCture

infrastructure assets provide a significant oppor- 
tunity for adaptation. they have long operational  
lifetimes, meaning they will be exposed to both 
current and future climate. infrastructure in Canada  
is relatively vulnerable to climate change as it  
is aging and over-used with population and 
development pressures increasing associated 
expectations for service. 
Weathering of infrastructure can occur via biological 
 (mould), chemical (corrosion), thermal (freeze-
thaw) or mechanical agents (wind-driven rain); 
all of which will be affected by climate change. 
damage to infrastructure from extreme weather 
 events tends to increase dramatically above  
critical thresholds. environment Canada reported  
that a 25% increase in peak wind gust can generate  
a 650% increase in building damage claims.18

Aside from direct changes to weather conditions, 
climate change will also affect patterns of supply 
and consumer demand. For example, higher 
summer temperatures may increase demand for 
transportation to beaches and mountains, while 
increased severe weather may affect supply 
chains and resources that infrastructure and  
repair companies rely on. 
Maladapted infrastructure will have indirect  
impacts in the way of asset management costs,  
insurance claims and negative effects on reputation. 
 A Vancouver rainstorm in 2010 resulted in 173 
filed claims with the City and a 2005 rainstorm 
in toronto ranks as the second largest insurance 
payout in Canadian history. An ontario-specific 
study predicted the following increases in insured 
losses due to rainfall related water damage: 13%, 
20% and 30% for the 2020s, 2050s and 2080s 
respectively.19 

14

18 Auld, Heather and Maciver, don. 2007. Changing Weather patterns, Uncertainty and infrastructure risks: emerging Adaptation requirements. environment Canada. 
19  Cheng et al. 2012. Climate Change and Heavy rainfall-related Water damage insurance Claims and Losses in ontario, Canada. Journal of Water resource 

and protection, 2012, 4, 49-62.


