energy and keep cities cooler, reducing CSos 
means less pathogens enter the waterways,  
and recycling stormwater contributes to water 
conservation goals. the City is mandated through 
the Liquid Waste Management plan to complete 
an integrated Stormwater Management plan (iSMp)  
for all watersheds in the City by the end of 2014. 
the Citywide, cross-departmental iSMp will address  
options for stormwater (rainfall) management on 
both public and private property. the iSMp will 
recommend changes to policy, design practices, 
standards and bylaws to facilitate implementation.

1.1.2 Primary aCtion: SeParate the Sanitary 
anD Stormwater SewerS (in ProgreSS)

Separating the sanitary and stormwater sewers  
substantially mitigates the risk of CSos and 
private property sewer back-ups. Separating the 
systems also provides more capacity in the storm 
sewer for handling anticipated increases in heavy 
rainfall volumes.
the City is legislated to complete system separation  
by 2050. Currently, high risk areas, or areas where  
residents have experienced more frequent sewer 
backups, are targeted for priority separation. 
Separation of private side connections is not 
mandated and will require a closer look to ensure 
the added resilience of separated pipes is not 
negated at the property line.
Supporting actions: 
•   explore options for increasing replacement of 
private side combined sewer connections with 
separated connections in advance of City-side 
separation. 

•   prepare runoff control guidelines for private 
property as required by Metro Vancouver in 
coming years. 

•   Add larger catch basins or increase number  

in critical locations.

•   evaluate and recommend opportunities for 
stormwater detention, infiltration or storage 
during park re-design and in new parks.

•   incorporate rainfall projections and new idF 

curves in sewer and street design.

•   increase public awareness of catch basin  

functionality and basement flooding mitigation. 

2.0 Sea leVel riSe 

impacts: increased flooding, storm surge damage,  
saltwater intrusion and erosion to the coastline. 
impacts to gravity drainage of low lying storm 
sewers and potential impacts to groundwater levels.
what this could mean: Climate change is imposing  
increasing threats along coasts, both from rising 
sea levels and increased intensity and frequency  
of storms. Based on present and expected increases  
in emissions in the near future, sea levels are  
expected to rise at accelerating rates into the 
next century. 
A local study used assessment values to estimate 
that $25 billion worth of real estate (not including 
City infrastructure) is at risk from sea level rise in 
Vancouver by the end of the century. industrial  
lands, historic areas and the public realm are 
affected disproportionately.31 the federal round 
table on the environment and the economy  
suggest the annual national costs of coastal 
flooding damage could be as high as $8 billion 
dollars in coming decades. 

31 Keenan, eileen and yan, Andrew. 2011. the Local effects of global Climate Change in the City of Vancouver: A Community toolkit and Atlas.

20


