ChaPter 2
methoDology

2.1 oVerView

iN 2008, iClEi Canada, with support from natural resources Canada, embarked  
on a pilot project that guided three Canadian municipalities (delta, BC; greater  
Sudbury, on and St. John’s, nL) through an American adaptation process  
developed by iCLei-USA and the University of Washington. the pilot project  
identified the needs of Canadian municipalities, the gaps in Canadian resources  
available to them and future steps for municipal adaptation planning. these 
lessons were integral in development of a Canadian-specific guidebook: iCLei  
Canada’s Changing Climate, Changing Communities: guide and Workbook 
for Municipal Climate Adaptation. 
As participants in the iCLei Adaptation initiative, Vancouver followed the 
five-milestone methodology outlined in the aforementioned guidebook.  
the purpose of the methodology is to convey a holistic, straightforward  
approach for municipalities to investigate climate change impacts and  
devise strategies for addressing these impacts. 
there are generally two recognized approaches to adaptation planning: 
impact assessment and vulnerability assessment. impact assessments 
are described as top down; working from the identification of anticipated 
impacts. Vulnerability assessments are bottom up; identifying areas where 
the community is sensitive and exposed to change. Both vulnerability and 
impact assessments can sit comfortably within a broad risk assessment 
framework –a systematic methodology to identify, assess, communicate  
and manage risks. the iCLei milestones follow a risk assessment format. 
the Five iCLei Milestones are: initiate, research, plan, implement and Monitor/ 
iterate. Figure 2 below outlines the main questions addressed in each milestone.  
note that this Strategy is a result of Milestones one to three. Milestones 4 
and 5 follow adoption of the Strategy. 

2.2 the aDaPtation team:

deputy City Manager, Sadhu Johnston, played an important role as Adaptation 
Champion. He helped solidify awareness and commitment to adaptation 
planning within the organization and communicated our work to external 
stakeholders and partners. City engineer, peter Judd, our executive sponsor,  
was also integral as an avid supporter of preparing for the impacts of climate  
change and ensuring resilient infrastructure over time. 
An inter-departmental working group on adaptation was established in 2008  
when initial investigation was completed. the group was re-convened in 2011 
to support work on the iCLei adaptation process. the Adaptation Working  
group completed many of the worksheets and tasks associated with the 
milestones and provided a link back to their respective departments. A sea  
level rise working group and adaptation steering committee were both  
established late in the planning process as the need arose. Many staff members  
were involved throughout the adaptation planning process from identifying 
impacts to prioritizing and reviewing actions. 

Milestone 1
What are 
anticipated

climate changes?

Milestone 2

What are 

major

impacts?

Milestone 3

Actions to
respond?

Milestone 4

Implement

Monitor / Iterate

figure 2: iClEi adaptation initiative milestones

6


