traditionally, risk has been dealt with through  
insurance. the insurance Bureau of Canada recently 
observed that the number and severity of storms 
is having a negative effect on the industry. they 
reported that, while historically most insurance 
claims were related to fire and theft, half of every 
dollar now paid out by insurance companies is for  
water damage related to extreme weather events.25  
insurance costs may rise and become difficult to 
obtain in risk areas or following repeat events. 
Community risks are business risks as they depend  
on local services and infrastructure to run their  
businesses. Businesses are already on the frontline  
of climate change with bottom lines increasingly 
at risk due to weather and climate phenomena. 
impacts to businesses from climate change can 
be categorized into physical and operational  
impacts such as decreased availability or increased  
price of critical materials; regulatory and legal 
risks such as new land use zoning or building 
changes; financing risks such as access to capital  
for businesses at high risk to climate change; 
market changes; and reputational risks.26 it will  
be imperative for businesses to demonstrate  
a commitment to adaptation, raise awareness 
and collaborate through new forms of public- 
private partnerships to tackle the most complex 
challenges of adaptation.27 

4.2.5 CoaStal Zone

thirty eight percent of the Canadian population lives  
within 20km of a coast or great lake shoreline.28 
Coastal areas are exceptionally vulnerable to sea 
level rise given that they are home to concentrated  
populations, economic centres and valuable eco-
systems. Coastal industry remains integral to the 
transportation and transfer of goods. 
A 2008 oeCd report ranked Vancouver 15th out 
of 136 large port cities in terms of the value of 
assets exposed to sea level rise.29 BtA Works, the 
research arm of a local architecture firm, found 
that industrial lands, historic areas and the public 
realm would be affected disproportionally in a 
5m sea level rise scenario. Conversion of these 
industrial lands to residential areas is likely to  
increase the consequences of a flood. the national  
round table on the environment and the economy  
predicted sea level rise to cause between $2.1 billion  
and $7.6 billion in damages by 2050 for BC  
(primarily Metro Vancouver) based on a sea level 
rise of 0.28m to 0.85m by 2100. they estimate 
that $25 billion worth of real estate (not including 

City infrastructure) would be heavily impacted with 
the cost of sufficient protective measures such as 
earth dikes or seawalls estimated to range from 
$255 million to $510 million (2011 dollars).
recognized adaptation responses to sea level rise  
can be grouped into four broad categories as 
follows:
•   Protect: protect the coastline through structural  

mechanisms such as dikes and seawalls.

•   accommodate: increase flood construction 
levels, add covenants for liability reduction  
and retrofit existing buildings.

•   Planned retreat: withdraw, relocate or abandon  

private or public assets due to coastal hazard.

•   avoid: identify future ‘no build’ zones or use land  
acquisition or restriction tools such as land trusts. 

the United Kingdom is a leader in coastal flood 
risk management. planning follows three broad 
steps: preliminary flood risk assessment; flood 
hazard mapping; and adoption of a flood risk 
management plan aimed at prevention, protection  
and preparedness. 

25  SFU Adaptation to Climate Change team. 2012. Briefing paper for  

decision Makers: Climate Change Adaptation and Water governance. 

18

26  Un environment programme. June, 2011. Adapting for a green economy: Companies, Communities and Climate Change. 
27  national round table on the environment and the economy. 2012. Facing the elements: Building Business resilience in a Changing Climate. 
28 Arlington group planning and Architecture inc. 2012. draft Sea Level rise primer.
29 oeCd. ranking of the world’s cities most exposed to coastal flooding today and in the future. 


