CHApter 1
aDaPtation in VanCouVer

1.1 mitigation anD aDaPtation

ClimaTE ChaNGE miTiGaTiON refers to the ongoing 
attempts to prevent significant climate change 
through the reductions of greenhouse gases in 
the atmosphere. the City of Vancouver has been 
a leader in mitigation for over a decade. in 1990, 
the Clouds of Change task force was created by 
Council to study issues related to atmospheric 
change. one of their recommendations was to 
study adaptive measures and begin planning long- 
term measure to adapt to possible consequences 
of climate change. 
in 2003, the Cool Vancouver task force connected  
government, industry, citizens and non-government  
organizations working toward the common goal of  
reducing greenhouse gas emissions in Vancouver. 
the greenest City Action team, charged with 
making Vancouver the greenest city in the world 
by 2020, was formed in 2009. the resulting 
greenest City plan, released in July, 2011, includes  
mitigation actions and an action directing  
development of an adaptation strategy under  
the Climate Leadership goal.

mitigation
prevent climate 

change

aDaPtation
respond to the 

impacts of climate 

change

figure 1: mitigation and adaptation to Climate Change

the City of Vancouver’s mitigation commitment 
is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the 
community by 33% below 2007 levels by 2020. 
the reduction pathways identified include energy 
efficient buildings, district energy, transportation 
and vehicle changes, reduced landfill waste and 
clean electricity. 
Adaptation refers to actions taken to respond to 
the impacts of climate change by taking advantage  
of opportunities or reducing the associated risks. 
examples of adaptation actions include modifi-
cations of coastal development to account for 
sea level rise, provision of heat refuges during 
heat waves, planting hardy or suitable plants and 
dealing with increases in beach erosion. 
Mitigation and adaptation are not mutually  
exclusive, with many actions contributing to both 
goals. examples include water conservation and 
effective building envelopes which reduce gHgs 
now, but also mitigate the effects of extended 
hotter, drier weather in the future. Sustainability 
goals in general, as detailed in the greenest City 
plan, have extensive overlap with adaptation and 
mitigation actions. integration of the Adaptation 
Strategy with greenest City plan actions was 
completed in development of this strategy. 

1.2  role of loCal goVernment  

in aDaPtation

it is widely recognized that adaptation is most 
effective at the regional and community scale. 
exposure to hazards, vulnerability, adaptive  
capacity and risk are all place-based in nature and  
many of the impacts anticipated from climate 
change will affect the services and infrastructure 
for which local governments have the primary  

responsibility. Local governments also have 
many of the tools necessary for adaptation such 
as planning, codes, standards and emergency 
response. 
Local governments also invest in capital projects 
and programs that are expected to serve the City 
over many decades. given current replacement 
rates, new buildings will account for an equal or 
greater fraction of building stock within climate 
change timeframes. the cost of no action, both 
from a future retrofit and public safety perspective,  
could be much higher than proactively planning 
infrastructure to be resilient to future climate. 
the cost to build a new house, bridge or trans-
mission line that is adapted to climate change for 
its lifecycle will only add 0% to 5% to construction  
costs which is significantly cheaper than restoring  
infrastructure post damage, retrofitting, rebuilding  
or an increased lifetime maintenance bill.1 economic  
value at risk from climate change was estimated  
at between 1% and 12% of gdp by 2030 for  
various global locations. the same study found 
that between 40% and 68% of these losses could 
be averted through adaptation measures for 
which economic benefits outweigh costs.2 the 
national round table on the environment and 
the economy completed a cost benefit analysis 
of implementing proactive adaptation actions 
versus dealing with the consequences when they 
occur. they concluded that adaptation was a 
cost effective way of dealing with many climate 
change impacts.3 According to a recent University  
of Waterloo research project, climate change 
adaptation is “simply good and smart business 
for Canada”. 4 

1 Climate Change Adaptation project, 2012. Climate Change Adaptation: A priorities plan for Canada.
2 economics of Climate Adaptation Working group, 2009. Shaping Climate-resilient development: a framework for decision-making. 
4

3  national round table on the environment and the economy. 2012.  

paying the price: the economic impacts of Climate Change for Canada. 

4 See footnote 1


