table 6: Summary of impacts

1.0 increase in intensity and frequency of heavy rain events
1.1

increased surface water flooding from ponding of rainfall in low lying areas or heavy rainfall overcoming 
the capacity of the drainage system.
increase in number of combined sewer overflows.

1.2
1.3
1.4
2.0 Sea level rise
2.1

increases in sewer back-ups in combined sewer areas due to high rainfall volume in sewer system.

increase in landslide risk affecting public infrastructure and private property.

increased flooding and storm surge damage along the coast and Fraser river as sea levels rise and storms 
are more frequent.
increased damage to coastline structures from storm surge, flooding and salt water intrusion.

2.2
2.3 reduced gravity drainage of existing drainage system as sea levels rise, resulting in more  

frequent flooding of low areas near storm sewer outfalls. 

2.4 increase in shoreline erosion affecting natural environments and public amenities such as parks, trails  

and access to the water.

3.0 increased frequency and intensity of storms and weather extremes
3.1

increased safety and health risks for vulnerable populations including water ingress, mould  
and loss of housing for poorly housed and health risks to the homeless.
increased public safety risk on streets due to damage to infrastructure and trees.

increased resources required to respond and clean-up during and following storm events.

3.2
3.3
3.4 natural disaster and related emergency management and response capacity may need to cater  
to more frequent, simultaneous and extreme disasters as well as the associated cascading effects.

increased health and safety risks to vulnerable populations during extreme heat events.

4.0 hotter, drier summers with more heat waves
4.1
4.2 Water supply shortages.
4.3 increasing vectors for disease and respiratory illness are expected health impacts from increasing temperatures.
5.0 general Changes
5.1

new and existing Buildings may be maladapted as the climate changes in terms of water ingress,  
wind, durability, rain on snow loads, increasing heat waves etc.
decrease in durability and lifecycle of infrastructure leading to increased maintenance and replacement 
requirements.
increase in impacts to urban forests, green spaces and trees from temperature extremes and wind storms 
resulting in increased maintenance and replacement costs.

5.2

5.3

15


