4.2.3 haBitat, ParkS anD greenSPaCe

4.2.4 eConomy

Climate change can be thought of as a pervasive economic shock that will 
potentially affect all sectors of the economy.22 Both goods movement and 
local business are likely to be affected by climate change and associated sea 
level rise with the potential to compromise Vancouver’s and the province’s 
economy. it is important to consider the economic advantages climate 
change may provide as well. Warmer summers may attract more tourists 
and longer growing seasons allow for new agriculture crops in the region. 
the national round table on the environment and the economy (nrtee) 
found that world-wide greenhouse gas emissions and subsequent climate 
change impacts could, in turn, have an economic impact on Canada of  
$5 billion annually by 2020 and between $21 and $43 billion annually by 2050.  
Specific to BC by the 2050s, timber supply impacts could range from $2 billion 
to $17 billion annually and flooding damages to coastal dwellings could cost 
between $1 billion to $8 billion per year. the report concluded that ignoring 
climate change now will cost us more in the long run and that adaptation is 
a cost-effective way to alleviate many of the impacts of climate change.23  
An international cost benefit study echoed the nrtee findings, reporting that 
between 40% and 68% of the loss in gdp expected to 2030 (under severe 
climate change scenarios) could be averted through adaptation measures 
for which economic benefits outweigh their costs.24

the preservation and expansion of trees and greenspaces in Vancouver 
contributes to both climate change mitigation and adaptation. Vegetation 
absorbs carbon, helps keep the city cooler in the summer and increases the 
amount of groundwater recharge, thereby lowering flood risk. 
Urban structures such as asphalt and buildings absorb more solar energy  
than grass and trees increasing the local temperature – a phenomenon known  
as the urban heat island effect. Vegetation in the downtown helps decrease this 
effect, providing a safer environment health wise and lowering the need for 
air conditioning. Models have shown areas like airports with a high proportion 
of pavement can be almost 9°C warmer than areas with heavy vegetation 
cover such as parks.
parks and greenspace can also play an important role in decreasing the impacts  
or occurrence of flooding from heavy rainfall or storm surge. parks can be 
used for detention and infiltration of stormwater or as containment areas  
for heavy storm surge. 
Beyond the number of trees and greenspaces in the City, the health of the 
urban ecosystems is paramount. Climate change is predicted to exacerbate 
undesirable agents of rapid change such as invasive pests or indigenous pests 
which are opportunistic to new environmental stress. Monitoring is essential 
to ward off major problems before they exceed our ability to control them. 
Habitats found within the urban landscapes are often characterized as 
habitat islands within a sea or buildings. Climate change will exacerbate the 
implications of habitat isolation necessitating a renewed effort to increase 
habitat connectivity. 
the Stanley park Management plan includes considerations for climate change  
such as ‘wind-proofing’, appropriate site selection/ planting practices, species 
selection and pest monitoring. these considerations will need to be applied 
to other urban greenspaces and trees including development landscape plans,  
street trees and trees on private property. 

20  World Bank. 2011. Climate Change, disaster risk and the Urban poor.                 21  Health Canada. 2011. Adapting to extreme Heat events
22  dobes, Leo. 2012. Adaptation to Climate Change: Formulating policy under Uncertainty. Centre for Climate economics and policy, the Australian national University. 
23  national round table on the environment and the economy. 2012. paying the price: the economic impacts of Climate Change for Canada.

24  economics of Climate Adaptation Working group, 2009. Shaping  
Climate-resilient development: a framework for decision-making.

17


