City infrastructure and facilities are often crucial during extreme event 
response such as community centres providing relief, fire halls, the works 
yards, traffic signals and some street lighting. other City facilities and  
infrastructure may require back-up power to maintain basic services  
(such as stormwater sewer pumps). 
one litre of generator diesel provides about 3 to 3.5 Kilowatt hours of power. 
to retain basic function in a community centre for one hour would therefore 
require 30 to 50L of fuel. increased severe weather may also affect fuel  
supply chains and resources that infrastructure and repair companies rely on. 
identifying where investment in back-up power is integral to public safety, 
storm response and recovery will build City resilience to extreme events.  
A comprehensive look at backup power for public buildings and infrastructure 
includes determining best methods of meeting the power needs and ensuring 
fuel supply during storms.
the following steps for policy development are recommended:
•   identify and prioritize buildings and infrastructure for back-up power over 

and above life safety requirements.

•   Compare the costs and benefits of mobile generators versus generators 

built into facilities.

•   plan for fuel supply and emergency fuel movement from both outside 

providers and city sources. 

Supporting actions:
•   Continue adding back-up power to key traffic signals
•   Complete planning for response to windstorms, rainstorms and flooding.
•   Activate plans and the eoC when events are forecast or occur. 
•   Consider continuity of supply of key response resources such as plywood. 
•   Support the events risk Assessment task Force in ensuring events in the 

City are safe and resilient to inclement weather. 

•   Broaden ‘team Vancouver emergency response’ volunteer urban search 
and rescue to aid with extreme event response such as park patrol during 
heat waves. 

oBjeCtiVe 3.1: reDuCe Safety anD health riSkS for the 
homeleSS anD low-inCome PoPulation Due to inClement 
weather

Added shelter capacity exists now in the form of extreme weather response 
shelters that operate when specific, provincially mandated criteria are met. 
these criteria and the associated funding need to be expanded to keep up 
with the increase in frequency and intensity of extreme weather. the local 
low-income population is generally more vulnerable to extreme weather 
given their housing conditions, limited mobility, and lack of insurance and 
savings. Health risks from mould and inclement weather are priorities within 
this section while heat related risks are detailed in section 4 below. 
Supporting actions:
•   engage with Metro Vancouver to request at the regional level that the 

extreme weather shelter criteria and funding be expanded. 

•   partner with VCH to initiate an education campaign on mould; how to 

identify and address it. 

•   ensure instances of mould are included in the new online rental database.

23


