AppendiX B
vulNErabiliTy aND riSk aSSESSmENT DETailS

the table below includes all impact statements that were assessed for vulnerability and risk. resulting priority impacts are those addressed directly in the Strategy.

table 9: all impact statements identified at the beginning of the planning process.

Climatic Change

increase in temperature

engineering - Water 

engineering - Water 
Fire and rescue Services 
parks and recreation 

Primary Service area
engineering - Water 

impact Statement
Water supply shortages felt in late summer due to a decreased spring snow pack and higher 
summer temps influencing greater draw downs and evaporation could result in increased 
costs for water and imperative conservation measures
Higher bacterial re-growth in water distribution system due to increased water temperatures 
could affect water quality and increase treatment costs
increased corrosion rate of water distribution system due to increased water temperatures
reduction in water supply in late summer may affect fire fighting capacity
increased maintenance, staffing and refurbishment costs associated with community facilities 
with air conditioning and outdoor pools, etc. due to an increase in user demand during 
warmer summer weather 
Community facilities without air conditioning or outdoor pools, etc. could see decline in 
users during summer daytimes resulting in loss of revenue
increased health and safety risks to vulnerable populations during extreme heat events
decrease in pavement durability and performance with hotter temperatures
decreased comfort spending time in the public realm where cover and shade are not available CSg - planning  
decrease in outdoor worker productivity as there are more frequent hot days
parks may require more capital spending on watering during warmer summers.  
Conservation measures will have to be considered
increased drought stress on green space plants and trees (including street trees) leading  
to increased watering costs and/or replacement
emergency staff and equipment may be inadequate to deal with previously uncommon 
emergencies (e.g. forest fire) 
Mechanical systems in Civic facilities may have shorter lifespan due to increased annual use
new and existing buildings may be maladapted as the climate changes in terms of water 
ingress, wind durability, rain on snow loads, etc. 
increasing impacts to aesthetics, public health and management costs associated with new 
or increasing spread of invasive species and animal and insect pests. e.g. More algal blooms, 
more mosquitoes in catch basins, etc.
increase in ozone-related health impacts as ozone increases with increasing temperature

VCH

parks and recreation 

CSg - social dev
engineering - Streets

engineering general
parks and recreation 

parks and recreation 

emergency Management

Facility design and Management
CBo and L&i

parks and recreation 

41


