CHApter 5
aCtionS

ThE aCTiON ChaPTEr is organized by anticipated  
climate change or direct impact (sea level rise).  
A suite of adaptation actions are identified for 
each section, ranging from low cost and easy 
to implement, to larger, more complex projects. 
response strategies identified as primary actions 
represent the key projects that will help the city 
adapt to climate change. Supporting actions 
represent application of an adaptation lens to 
existing actions or generally lower cost/smaller  
scope activities. Where there are no primary  
actions to address a climate change, only a  
suite of supporting actions are introduced. 
primary actions, supporting actions and more 
detailed actions are listed with accountability  
and timing information in a comprehensive  
Adaptation Action Matrix found in Appendix A. 
the matrix is organized by impacts under the 
same section headings as the chapter below. 
no-regret actions are the focus – those that 
build on existing plans and actions and provide 
community benefits regardless of the extent of 
climate change experienced. each objective is  
achieved through a combination of different  
actions which act together. these portfolios  
of actions generally include measures from  
the following four categories: 
•   modifying policies, plans, procedures, standards  

(e.g. by-laws, development plans, operating 
practices, codes); 

•  building new or upgrading infrastructure; 
•   improving community awareness and  

education; and

•   varying/diversifying existing actions (e.g. diver-
sifying energy supplies, diversifying plantings).

the actions in the Strategy largely focus on areas 
where the City can take independent action. to this 
end we completed an early scan of suggested 
adaptation actions to ascertain whether they  
fell within the City’s jurisdiction/responsibility or 
not. Some actions signal necessary collaboration 
with the regional and provincial governments, 
and it is recognized that local adaptation is 
reliant on close ties and joint actions with other 
levels of government, neighbours, the private 
sector and community groups. Staff will continue 
to collaborate on projects and push for regional 
coordination on adaptation issues. 

1.0  inCreaSe in intenSity anD  
frequenCy of heaVy rain 
eVentS

impacts: increased surface water flooding, sewer 
back-ups and combined sewer overflows due to 
heavy rainfall.
what this could mean: on September 19th, 2010 
Vancouver’s heavy rainfall resulted in 173 filed claims 
against the City and 23 other reports of flooding 
related incidents from citizens. the second most 
expensive national natural disaster was toronto’s 
2005 downpour with damages exceeding $500 
million.30 rainfall related water damage losses are 
expected to continue increasing (20% by 2050 
in eastern Canada) as is the volume of untreated 
wastewater entering waterbodies via combined 
sewer overflows (CSo). these climate change 
impacts have far-reaching social, environmental 
and economic implications. 

30 Kessler. 2011. Stormwater Strategies: Cities prepare Aging infrastructure for Climate Change. 

oBjeCtiVe 1.1: minimiZe rainfall  
relateD flooDing anD aSSoCiateD 
ConSequenCeS

the City will take advantage of the following  
opportunities to reduce rainfall related risks:
•   decreasing the proportion of stormwater entering  
the sewer infrastructure through application of 
stormwater management techniques.

•   increasing the capacity of the storm sewer 

through sewer separation.

•   Accounting for climate change in system design.

1.1.1 Primary aCtion: ComPlete anD  
imPlement a CitywiDe integrateD  
Stormwater management Plan 

Applying stormwater management techniques 
where possible can reduce peak discharges and 
generally reduce the flow loading on storm sewer 
infrastructure, thereby increasing resilience to heavier 
and more frequent storm events. Stormwater 
management approaches are categorized into:
•   planning and design approaches such as limits 

to impermeable surfaces;

•   runoff storage and conveyance such as using 

pocket parks for street runoff, re-routing  
stormwater to waterbodies, or non-potable 
water storage/use; and

•   infiltration and detention practices such as green  

roofs, street infiltration bulges or downspout 
rock pits.

Stormwater management techniques often include  
green infrastructure (bioswales, green roofs, rain  
barrels) which provide a host of co-benefits with  
other City goals. For example, green roofs reduce 

19


