•   explore the potential for cooling rooms in non-market housing
•   Continue to expand public access to drinking water (gCAp). 

oBjeCtiVe 5.1: inCreaSe reSilienCe of the Built enVironment  
to future Climate ConDitionS

5.0 oVerall ChangeS 

impacts: Maladapted buildings; decrease in durability and lifecycle of  
infrastructure; increase in impacts to urban forests, green spaces and trees; 
changing pests, vectors for disease and air quality.
what this could mean: the combination of more frequent extreme events 
and increases in annual temperature and precipitation will have impacts on 
both the built and natural environment. 
there is a significant opportunity to improve future  
resilience of infrastructure by incorporating climate change information 
into design today. environment Canada states that within the timeframe of 
climate change impacts being felt, new building will account for an equal or 
greater fraction of the building stock (assuming a 1-1.5% replacement rate). 
Buildings may be maladapted to hotter temperatures, susceptible to damage 
during extreme weather and encounter new durability challenges. the Urban 
Heat island effect (UHie) refers to urban areas being significantly warmer than  
their surrounding areas due to more heat retentive materials, surface heat  
radiation being blocked by buildings and lack of evapotranspiration (through  
lack of vegetation). the Urban heat island will worsen as temperatures 
climb. damage to buildings from extreme weather events tends to increase 
dramatically above critical threshold (e.g. 25% increase in peak wind gust 
can generate 650% increase in building claims). 
trees, parks and greenspaces provide innumerable co-benefits such as climate 
change mitigation through carbon uptake, shade provision, moderation of 
surface flooding, habitat and outdoor amenities. ensuring trees reach the size 
and vigour required to start providing these benefits is essential and may be 
challenged by added climate change stressors such as drought, higher peak 
winds and new pests and invasive species. 

5.1.1 Primary aCtion: Continue to inCluDe Climate Change  
aDaPtation meaSureS in the next VanCouVer BuilDing Bylaw 
(VBBl) uPDate anD exPlore aSSoCiateD Zoning ChangeS. 

the building bylaw includes climate related design loads based on historical 
observation as well as numerous measures to ensure weather resilience in 
our wet Vancouver climate. Looking ahead to heavier rain events, more wind 
and hotter summers will require consideration of new building measures to 
ensure continued resilience. 
Buildings may be maladapted to hotter temperatures, susceptible to damage 
during extreme weather and encounter new durability challenges. the Urban 
Heat island effect whereby highly urbanized areas experience higher tempera-
tures will exacerbate summer cooling loads. envelope integrity may also be 
adversely affected by increasing wind and rain loads and higher ambient 
moisture levels.
recent Canadian adaptation reports call for action by the Federal and provincial  
governments in collaboration with the insurance industry to research design 
practices that are cost effective and promote climate adaptation. Building 
durability and disaster resilience are suggested as themes for upcoming 
building code renewals. Ahead of national and provincial action, there are 
several opportunities to partner on adaptation incorporation in the next VBBL.  
the institute for Catastrophic Loss reduction has recently worked with ontario 
builders to recommend code modifications for a changing climate and are 
eager to repeat their process elsewhere. More data is required on localized 
parameters related to design loads such as wind uplift pressure. the pacific 
Climate impacts Consortium at the University of Victoria are eager to continue 
our existing collaboration. 
the following are adaptation measures to be evaluated and/or incorporated 
into the building bylaw:
•  Use of reflective surfaces
•   Buildings are better equipped to manage heat gain (passive guidelines)
•   development in fire interface areas (near parks and woodlands)

25


