development Permit Areas

Creating a DPA is a way to shape the development or redevelopment of a given area, and guide-
lines for the DPA (in the OCP or in a zoning bylaw) can include both broad prescriptions for 
land use as well as site specific requirements. Preparing for climate change impacts may mean 
updating existing DPAs to account for different levels of risk or changes to best practices, or in 
some cases developing new DPAs.

There is already well-established practice in BC with respect 
to using DPAs to manage land use in areas with defined haz-
ards, such as interface wildfires, or slope stability issues — and 
many examples to draw on. DPAs for wildfire hazards may also 
include requirements about landscaping and the siting, form, 
exterior design and finish of buildings. DPAs can also be used 
to  restrict  development  and  protect  and/or  restore  natural 
features and areas, and can be used to help protect key nat-
ural ecosystems in the face of climate change.

DPAs can offer local governments a more flexible approach to 
regulating development than zoning because guidelines can 
specify results and allow site-specific solutions. For example, a 
DPA can specify a certain level of onsite stormwater infiltration, while a zoning bylaw could only 
specify the site coverage allowed.

The  Local  Government  (Green  Communities)  Statutes  Amendment  Act  (2008)  created  the  op-
portunity  for  new  types  of  DPAs,  including  those  designed  to  promote  energy  and  water 
conservation.  Local  governments  can  employ  these  DPAs  to  help  make  their  communities 
more  resilient  to  climate  change  impacts  like  water  shortages  and  potential  disruptions  in 
centralized  energy  supply  due  to  heavy  seasonal  demand  or  extreme  weather  events.  Like 
DPAs  for  wildfire  hazards,  they  may  also  include  requirements  about  landscaping  and  the 
siting, form, exterior design and finish of buildings to further energy and water conservation 
and greenhouse gas reduction goals. For more information see http://toolkit.bc.ca/resource/
development-permit-areas-climate-action

DPAs can offer local 
governments a more 
flexible approach to 
regulating development 
than zoning because 
guidelines can specify 
results and allow site-
specific solutions.

CLOVER POINT, VICTORIA PHOTO 
COURTESy NRTPHOTOS/FLICKR

dEvELOPMENT PERMIT AREAs (dPAs)

Local Government Act, ss. 919.1-920

In an OCP a local government may designate areas within its jurisdiction where development 
permits are required before any subdivision, rezoning, construction or (in some cases) any 
disturbance of the land may occur, the reason the development permit is required, along with 
guidelines outlining the requirements for obtaining a development permit (which may be in the OCP 
or a zoning bylaw). The range of purposes that may be relied on for creating development permit 
areas is quite broad. Those of most interest with respect to climate change adaptation measures 
are likely protection of the natural environment, protection of the community from hazardous 
conditions, and establishing objectives to promote conservation of water and energy.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

35


