lAnd use scenARio 1: mAinstReAming climAte chAnge 
AdAPtAtion into lAnd use PlAnning

One way for a community to be more prepared for a changing climate is to “mainstream” climate 
change adaptation into key community planning documents such as the Official Community Plan 
(OCP). The OCP is a forward-looking document prepared by local governments that sets out over-
arching policies and objectives that apply to land use and development within their jurisdictions. 
Once the OCP has been adopted in a bylaw, all other bylaws must be consistent with the OCP, such 
as land use and zoning bylaws, for example. The OCP also creates development permit areas (DPAs) 
where specified guidelines for development must be followed. Local governments have the power 
to create DPAs to protect the natural environment, to protect the community from hazardous condi-
tions on land, and to establish objectives to promote conservation of water and energy.

Some  local  governments  that  have  developed  or  revised  their  OCPs  in  recent  times  have  begun 
to expand the timeline covered by the OCP beyond the five- or 10-year planning horizon that has 
previously been more typical. It is possible to consider timelines of 50–100 years. This recognizes 
that decisions about land use, for example, have long term impacts in a community and can benefit 
from a long term vision. This approach is very compatible with preparing for the impacts of climate 
change, which may also be gradual, but significant over the longer term. For example, it is important 
that planning protect the community in areas that may be subject to increased risks of flooding or 
sea level rise over the longer term as a result of climate change.

Using an OCP to help mainstream climate change adaptation into land use planning by a local gov-
ernment is more likely to be successful when climate change adaptation is fully integrated into the 
OCP, and the process and the product linked to different policy areas and objectives. It may be useful 
to discuss climate change adaptation in the opening section of the OCP, to indicate that it is a priority 
across all relevant policies and objectives contained in the OCP. A stand-alone section with climate 
change adaptation goals and policies can provide additional direction.

Source: District of Elkford

WILDFIRES

Elkford Impacts and Opportunities

82

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
