infrastructure  measures  (relying  on  natural  and  engineered  features  to  more  closely 
mimic the natural hydrologic cycle), offer greater flexibility in the face of uncertainty 
around future climate change projections as opposed to making changes to conven-
tional pipe and drain infrastructure.

identifying and evaluating adaptation options

After assessing risk and vulnerability, the next stage is to identify and evaluate com-
munity adaptation options, strategies, and actions. It should be emphasized that the 
scientific information about climate change in a region or local area will not in itself 
determine the action that needs to be taken. As with any matter within their jurisdiction, 
local governments will still need to consider the relevant information and make policy 
choices about the actions that are most appropriate for their communities.

This  guide  provides  many  practical  ideas  about  how  communities  can  increase  their 
resilience and manage risk related to climate change, and ways to deliver adaptation 
strategies. Local government case studies, sector-specific guides, and other resources 
identified in Appendix A are other good sources of adaptation ideas. Many commun-
ities,  once  they  understand  their  vulnerabilities,  can  identify  adaptation  options  and 
priorities through consultation and discussion in their communities.

Not  all  adaptation  options  are  equally  cost-effective  or  appealing. Vision,  values,  risk 
tolerance, priorities, resources, and other factors vary from one community to another, 
so  even  those  facing  similar  risks  and  opportunities  may  make  different  adaptation 
choices. Actions that address current issues at the same time as potential future climate 
change impacts are particularly effective. In some cases, science can help to inform deci-
sions about which adaptation options to select; for example an engineering study might 
provide solid information about the cost and effectiveness of several different engin-
eered solutions to urban flooding. In other cases, for example where there are difficult 
trade-offs  to  be  made,  significant  community  engagement  and  consultation  may  be 
required. Robust adaption strategies typically include a range of adaptation measures 
or actions to be implemented.

PRIORITIZING ACTIONS 
IN KIMBERLEy, BC

In 2008–2009 the City 
of Kimberley was a 
pilot community in the 
Columbia Basin Trust’s 
Communities Adapting to 
Climate Change Initiative. 
Working with climate 
information prepared 
by the Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium, 
combined with local 
input, the community 
identified three priority 
issue areas: Water and 
Forests, Municipal 
Infrastructure, and 
Tourism. A series 
of working groups 
identified vulnerabilities 
in these areas 
and came up with 
recommendations for 
adaptive actions.  
www.city.kimberley.
bc.ca/sites/kimberley.
civicwebcms.
com/files/media/
iWeb/%7B0647EEC8-
854E-424A-A28A- 
026746766D52%7D 
ExecutiveSummary 
-June30.pdf 

PHOTO COURTESy  
CITy OF KIMBERLEy

20

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 


