APPendix c

Developing Climate Change 
adaptation Strategies:  
Checklist for local governments

The purpose of this checklist is to assist local governments in exploring the entry points for integrat-
ing climate change adaptation into policy and operations, as well as the scope of responsibilities 
that may be affected. It is meant to trigger further investigation and discussion about adaptation 
options and strategies. Occasional references to further resources are included. Because adaptation 
is an ongoing process, many of these questions will ideally be revisited over time. This checklist is 
meant to be a practical supplement to the information provided in Part 1 of this guide, and to help 
local governments move to the stage where they are ready to implement climate change adaptation 
strategies as discussed in Part 2.

As described in Part 2, the Official Community Plan (OCP) will be one of the main tools used to imple-
ment adaptation strategies, together with a number of local government bylaw powers and other 
activities that can be used to make communities more resilient to a changing climate. However, prior 
to updating an OCP it is important to start assessing potential climate change impacts, as well as 
options for addressing impacts based on community vulnerability, resources, capacity, local context 
and other factors. Even where local governments have limited resources available for climate change 
adaptation, there are ways to begin preparing, as described in Appendix D — Considerations for Local 
Governments with Limited Resources.

While efforts have been made to include as many useful questions as possible, the checklist is not 
exhaustive. Extra space has been provided so that users can add their own questions.

There will be overlap among the topic areas set out below. A good way to start a review of the check-
list is to establish an inter-departmental committee, have a meeting, and go through the questions 
together in order to explore different viewpoints and start to understand the linkages. It is also use-
ful to review the questions for each of the different types of impacts and to ask “what if…” questions.

90

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
