community infrastructure

 F Has the frequency and intensity of climate change impacts (e.g. severe storms) been 

reviewed and updated?

 F Has community infrastructure been assessed in light of climate change?

 F Is climate change factored into the development of all new facilities and systems? Is it 

considered in procurement processes?

 F Does the community’s application for federal or provincial funding for infrastructure 

require consideration of climate change impacts?

 F Are projected climate change impacts being taken into account in decisions to replace or 

upgrade infrastructure?

 F Have agricultural and other industries that rely on community infrastructure, such as 

drainage and transportation infrastructure, been consulted about the impacts of climate-
related disruptions and failures on their operations?

 F Have water or sewage treatment plants been assessed for vulnerability to climate impacts 

(e.g. more intense storm events; increased risks related to flooding, water shortages; 
disruption of power supply associated with natural hazards, etc.?) Are backup generators 
needed?

 F Is community infrastructure at risk from increased landslide activity (e.g. water quality 

impacts as measured by TSS — total suspended solids)?

 F If higher storm surge, scour or sea level rise are projected impacts of climate change, then:

 F Are intakes and outfalls or linear infrastructure at risk?

 F Are bridges, roads, railways, or airports at risk?

 F Are wells and septic systems at risk from increased precipitation or water shortages 

resulting from climate change?

 F How will warmer water affect water quality (e.g. algae blooms)?

 F How will available water supply be affected by more severe droughts? Can consumption 
be reduced through demand management and leak detection programs? Is there storage 
capacity available?

 F Is there a watering restriction bylaw in place?

 F Will a universal water metering program help manage water resources more effectively in 

the future?

 F In regions where the frequency and intensity of extreme precipitation events are projected 

to increase:

 F Is the capacity of drainage infrastructure adequate? Are board/council and the 

public willing to accept a reduced level of flood protection or should upgrades be 
considered?

97

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
