sPecific RegulAtoRy PoweRs

tree protection

Trees  with  their  canopies  and  roots  are  increasingly  understood  to  be  important  for 
addressing the impacts of climate change. For example, trees help to cool urban areas, 
absorb rainwater, protect steep slopes from sliding and reduce soil erosion. Intact forests 
in watersheds are also important for maintaining water quality. And trees provide im-
portant co-benefits including wildlife habitat, aesthetic value and carbon sequestration.

Urban Forests:
A Climate Adaptation Guide

To consider:

•	

Tree protection bylaws can focus on preserving natural species of trees.

•	

The District of Esquimalt has a Tree Protection Bylaw that requires a 
permit for any activities that may damage or alter trees defined as 
“protected,” which include native species of a certain size or greater 
on both private and municipal property. www.esquimalt.ca/files/PDF/
Bylaws/2664_Tree_Protection_Bylaw.pdf

•	

Some municipalities have bylaws and policies that target only trees on 
municipal property, which may nonetheless be significant in number.

•	

The City of North Vancouver has a Street Tree Master Plan and has 
implemented a number of measures to protect its urban trees. The Plan 
also suggests a number of non-regulatory approaches to encourage the 
planting and retention of trees on private property, including design 
guidelines for multi-residential developments that encourage planting 

See the Ministry of 
Community, Sport and 
Cultural Development 
publication Urban 
Forests: A Climate 
Adaptation Guide for a 
number of examples of 
local regulations and 
policies in BC. www.
retooling.ca/_Library/
docs/Urban_Forests_
Guide.pdf

TREE PROTECTION

Community Charter, ss.8(3)(c),50-52,73(1)(c); Local Government Act, s.923

Under the Community Charter, municipalities have relatively broad powers related to tree 
regulation. They may use bylaws to establish licensing and permitting requirements for tree-
cutting, and they may also impose requirements with respect to tree planting, provided that 
the requirements do not prevent uses or density permitted under the zoning bylaw, unless 
compensation is provided. For example, a municipality might decide that a development 
permit over a certain value triggers the requirement to plant a certain number of trees on that 
property.

It should be noted that regional districts do not have the same broad powers regarding trees. 
Instead, under the Local Government Act, regional districts may designate areas of land that they 
consider to be subject to flooding, erosion, land slip or avalanche as tree cutting permit areas, 
and regulate or prohibit cutting down trees in those areas, provided there is evidence that the 
area is subject to the specified hazard.

48

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
