Another  critical  part  of  the  mainstreaming  process  is  educating  local  government  councils  or 
boards, staff and the community about the projected climate change impacts in their community, 
and having them motivated to develop responses and able to implement them. The consultation 
undertaken as part of the process to revise or develop a new OCP needs to be broadened to include 
education around climate change projections, impacts and strategies, and to include access to cli-
mate scientists and local experts.

Example: District of Elkford Official Community Plan 20101

In 2008, the District of Elkford, a small mountain town in the Eastern Kootenays, was undertaking a 
revision of its OCP. The District decided to integrate climate change adaptation planning into its OCP 
as a result of its participation in an initiative of the Columbia Basin Trust, Communities Adapting to 
Climate Change (CCAC), that aimed to identify projected local climate change impacts and vulner-
abilities, and develop adaptation plans.

With the assistance of funding through the CCAC, Elkford obtained historical and projected climate 
information from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, and used this information to gather fur-
ther scientific information about how Elkford and region could be affected by climate changes. The 
next step was to develop “impact pathways” showing the chain of impacts that could result from 
climate change and how Elkford could be affected. These impact pathways helped to illustrate how 
many different departments and service areas within Elkford would be affected, and that they all 
needed to be involved in evaluating impacts and developing responses. Results were presented to 
the community, and three priority areas were identified: wildfire, flooding/stormwater management, 
and water supply. This was followed by a vulnerability and risk assessment, and then action planning 
to develop an adaptation strategy.

The consultation undertaken by Elkford was significantly more extensive than what would have been 
considered typical for the development of an OCP. It was felt that this was important for building 
understanding and acceptance in the community and on council for integration of climate change 
adaptation into the OCP. Some of the outreach activities included displays at the mall that included 
a quick survey, a paper and web-based survey, facilitated kitchen table meetings, and an open house 
that was attended by members of the community as well as a number of current and local council 
candidates running for election.

The Elkford OCP explicitly references the integration of the climate change adaptation strategy for 
the community into that document, and notes that the OCP “…guides development for at least the 
next 10-20 years and effectively addresses sound science regarding future changes in local weather 
patterns and climatic variables in the District.”2

The Elkford OCP defines climate change adaptation and integrates adaptation goals and objectives 
throughout the plan, across nearly all areas of policy and decision-making. Some examples include:

1  See Official Community Plan, District of Elkford, 2010 www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan; Karen Gorecki, 
Megan Walsh, Jeff Zukiwsky, District of Elkford: Climate Change Adaptation Strategy www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/
Elkford_CACCI_Phase_1_Adaptation_Report.pdf

2  Official Community Plan, District of Elkford, 2010, s.1.2 www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan 

83

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
