While  in  some  cases  local  governments  can  claim  statutory  immunity  from  nuisance 
claims, the courts have indicated that they will interpret the statutory immunity narrow-
ly.46  Damages  related  to  flooding,  in  particular,  can  be  extremely  costly.  The  City  of 
Stratford, Ontario (with a population of around 30,000) paid $7.7 million to settle a class 
action lawsuit arising from flooding in its jurisdiction in 2002, in addition to $1.3 mil-
lion already paid out as emergency compensation. It will spend around $50 million over 
several years to improve its flood protection measures to meet a 250 year storm event 
standard.47

Local  governments  will  want  to  carefully  review  services,  operations  and  permitting 
processes in light of climate change. Both increased community hazards and heightened 
demands on services and infrastructure should be considered.

Some examples of areas that local governments might wish to review in the context of 
potential legal liability and a changing climate include:

•	

Vulnerability of existing infrastructure — local governments might wish to 
investigate whether rising temperatures or other climate change impacts will 
result in significant infrastructure failures that would not have been predicted 
based on historical data;

•	 New infrastructure — new sewer systems, water or drainage facilities, dikes 

and roads that are insufficiently designed to take into account the impacts of 
climate change could lead to liability for damages in the case of failure;48

•	

•	

Permitting and inspections — failing to take into account the risks associated 
with climate change could potentially lead to liability for any losses resulting 
from permitted construction and other activities; and

Approval of development in areas subject to increased risk of natural hazards 
like flooding, landslides and wildfires linked to climate change impacts — this 
could potentially expose local governments to liability.49

In addition to the possibility that a local government will be liable for failing to adapt 
effectively to climate change, in some cases local governments may have the basis for a 
claim themselves if they suffer losses related to climate change impacts that could have 
been prevented by appropriate adaptation by others.

46  While the Local Government Act, section 288 provides immunity to an action where damages arise 

as a result of a “breakdown or malfunction” of a sewage system, drainage facility, dike or road, 
the courts have held that there is not immunity where damages arise from an insufficient design 
that is simply inadequate for the purpose it was meant to fulfill. See Medomist Farms Ltd. v. Surrey 
(Dist.) (1991), 62 B.C.L.R. (2d) 168 (C.A.)

47  See www.city.stratford.on.ca/documents/press_releases/Stratford_Flood_Settlement_Press_

Release.pdf 

48  See note 46, supra.
49  Philippa England (2006) Climate Change: What are Local Governments Liable for? Urban Research 
Program, Griffith University, Brisbane. www.griffith.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/48566/
urp-ip06-england-2007.pdf 

NATuRAL HAzARds 
MANAGEMENT IN THE 
dIsTRICT OF NORTH 
vANCOuvER

After a landslide in 2005 
in a residential area 
resulted in the death of 
one resident, the District 
of North Vancouver 
developed a Natural Hazards 
Management Program, 
and uses the CAN/CSA 
Q850-97 risk management 
framework. Since 2009 the 
District has had a policy for 
risk tolerance criteria that 
can be applied to building 
permits, subdivision and 
development applications 
for sites exposed to 
landslide and debris flow 
hazards. The District also 
has a GeoWeb Hazards 
application that shows areas 
prone to natural hazards, 
as well as areas where 
hazard and risk assessments 
have been completed. 
The District is developing 
new DPAs for different 
types of natural hazards.

77

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
