The mapping and visualizations that were produced included vulnerabilities to wildfire and flood-
ing. Options for reducing vulnerabilities or adapting to changes were also provided. A summary of 
the visualizations was presented to an open house in Kimberley.

The strongest audience response came from the virtual fire tour which situated the projected 
forest fire season extension under climate change within a localized “fire story”. First, a 3D 
historical fire map showed the last 100 years of fires around Kimberley. Further mapping 
displayed in the virtual globe illustrated that the forest ecosystems around Kimberley are 
both fire-dependent, and heavily fuel-loaded due to fire suppression. Then, fire modeling 
results for a simulated current forest fire that starts southwest of the City were shown: each 
hour of the fire was layered on the virtual landscape in a time sequence, showing the fire 
cutting off the Highway access in three hours and reaching the City of Kimberley in four 
hours. The audience visibly responded by sitting up and there was an audible intake of 
breath in the room. The virtual tour then illustrated how the fire season could extend under 
climate change: currently starting in May, it could be starting as early as mid-March by the 
2040s, and mid-February by the 2080s. Again, the time slider in Google Earth was used to 
show the possible future shift, and again the audience visibly and audibly reacted as they 
absorbed the information.12

Surveys conducted among attendees following the Open House indicated that the visualizations 
had been useful in helping people to understand the link between climate change and land use 
decisions. Reduction of wildfire risk and a fuel treatment program were among the recommended 
actions in the report prepared for the City.13

Historic fire map: Google Earth image of previous forest fires around Kimberley  
(data source: Bob Gray). Source: Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning, UBC.

Ibid.

12 
13  Adapting to Climate Change in Kimberley, BC, Report and Recommendations June 2009 (Prepared by Ingrid Liepa)

www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/Kimberley_CACCI_Phase_1_Adaptation_Report.pdf 

89

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
