To consider:

•	

•	

•	

There are important links between a financial plan and an OCP. All bylaws enacted after 
the adoption of the OCP must be consistent with the OCP, and, prior to its adoption 
(after first reading of the OCP bylaw), the OCP must be considered in conjunction with 
the financial plan. Local governments should ensure that the financial plan adequately 
addresses the needs created by the climate change adaptation policies and actions set 
out in the OCP.

The City of Victoria has discussed the possibility of updating the procurement and 
tendering process for capital projects to consider climate change impacts and 
adaptation, and requiring an impact and adaptation assessment for internal capital 
projects. www.shapeyourfuturevictoria.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/HBLVictoriaCl
imateEnergyEDRevision.pdf

According to the Community Charter, financial plans are only required to have a five-
year horizon, and other fiscal policy and decision-making might be even shorter-term. 
However, climate change impacts, just beginning to be felt, will only intensify for the 
next 50–100 years. Local governments will ideally want to look at financial implications 
beyond five years, to ensure they can support service levels and community quality of 
life into the future.

•	 While there may be little funding available specifically for climate change adaptation 
measures, most communities receive investment from both government and private 
sources for development and redevelopment activities. Incorporating climate change 
adaptation measures into development policies and related regulations will ensure 
that both public and private sector investments contribute to the implementation of 
climate change adaptation strategies. Further, to the extent that a local government 
has a climate change adaptation strategy that favours measures that have multiple 
benefits (for example, water conservation and energy efficiency), and improves the 
overall efficiency and performance of land use and infrastructure, this will increase 

CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTs  
ON LOCAL ECONOMIEs

The Cariboo Regional District has 
concluded that its tax base is likely to 
shrink as a result of climate change 
impacts on the forest industry in 
its region leading to less timber 
available for harvest and reduced 
activity. To deal with this several options have been proposed, such as developing a 
strategic plan to address an evolving tax base or reducing the level of essential services 
provided in the region. http://pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/RAC.
CCCCAdaptationStrategy.Sep2011.pdf

The City of Victoria 
has discussed the 
possibility of updating 
the procurement and 
tendering process 
for capital projects to 
consider climate change 
impacts and adaptation.

VICTORIA PARKSIDE 
LEED BUILDING, PHOTO 
COURTESy PAUL P/FLICKR

60

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
