Zoning (or land use) bylaws and density bonuses

Where hazards resulting from or amplified by climate change can be identified for specific 
geographic areas within a community, zoning can be used delineate those areas and pro-
vide requirements that apply uniformly to all development within each zone. In the case 
of wildfire hazards, for example, zoning can be used to direct new residential, commercial 
and industrial development to lower risk areas, and reserve high risk areas for parks and 
open  spaces  for  other  activities,  such  as  grazing,  golf  courses,  airstrips,  tennis  courts, 
sports field and swimming pools. These areas can also function as firebreaks.24

A number of water-related climate impacts (decreased freshwater supplies, increased ero-
sion from run-off during storms, saltwater intrusion in aquifers, and others) may be at least 
partly addressed through the use of the zoning power. Through zoning a local govern-
ment can limit site coverage, or the impervious “footprint” of buildings, structures, and 
paved parking areas and in this way promote onsite rainwater infiltration. As well, in areas 
where climate change is predicted to reduce the available supply of freshwater enough to 
have a significant negative impact on the availability of water, a local government could 
consider the option of low-density zoning to match demand to water supply.25

Along marine shorelines, zoning can include requirements for density, buildings and site 
coverage aimed at creating resilient development in the face of climate impacts like sea 
level rise and the potential for increased storm intensity. Sensitive shoreline areas can be 
designated as conservation areas to protect habitat and species. Setbacks within a zone 
can be used to require that buildings and structures are a certain distance back from sensi-
tive marine and lakeside areas, although those setbacks do not apply to landscaping and 
the removal of vegetation.26

zONING OR LANd usE ByLAWs

Local Government Act, s.903

With zoning or land use bylaws local governments can regulate development 
by establishing permitted (and prohibited) land uses, densities, and the siting, 
size and dimensions of buildings and their uses. A range of measures that may 
be relevant for implementing climate change adaptation strategies can be ac-
complished through the local government zoning power, from setbacks to pro-
hibiting uses that may increase risk of harm in sensitive areas. It is likely that this 
power will be most effective when used together with other local government 
tools such as development permit areas that can provide site-specific guidelines 
aimed at addressing climate impacts and changing environmental conditions.

24  See FireSmart: Protecting your Community from Wildfire www.firesmartcanada.ca/

resources-library/protecting-your-community-from-wildfire

25  Supra note 23.
26  To address landscaping and vegetation local governments must rely on DPAs or bylaw 

powers under s. 909 of the Local Government Act. See The Green Infrastructure Guide: Issues, 
Implementation Strategies and Success Stories www.wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie

To address concerns 
about drought in the 
Comox Valley the 
Regional District created 
a “Water Supply and 
Resource Area” zone, 
where density is limited 
to a single family 
dwelling on any lot. 
www.comoxvalleyrd.
ca/uploadedFiles/
Community_Planning/
Bylaws/2781/Bylaw%20
2781%20Complete.pdf

COMOX PHOTO COURTESy 
MISS604/FLICKR

40

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
