PARt 1

Understanding climate 
change adaptation

setting the context: A chAnging climAte in Bc

Climate is usually defined as the “average weather” in a given location, over a period of 
time ranging from months up to thousands of years. Temperature, precipitation, humidity, 
cloudiness, air pressure and wind are some of the aspects of climate that are measured.

“Climate change” refers to a change in the mean state of the climate, or in climate variabil-
ity, that persists for decades or longer. Thus climate change can mean general warming in 
mean annual air temperature, or warmer winters, but also changes in the frequency and 
intensity of extreme weather events, including heat waves, heavy rain and snow storms, 
and drought. The global climate has changed over long periods of time as a result of 
natural causes. However, more recent and rapid climate change is being attributed to 
human activities, such as burning fossil fuels and land use changes.2

Historical measurements indicate that British Columbia’s climate has changed over the 
past century: average annual temperature increased by 0.6oC on the coast, 1.1oC in the 
interior and 1.7oC in northern BC. Much of the warming was likely due to an increase in 
nighttime minimum temperatures.3

Lakes and rivers now become free of ice earlier in the spring, on average, and two large 
BC glaciers have each retreated by more than a kilometre. The Fraser River discharges a 
larger share of its total annual flow sooner in the year, and has warmer water in summer. 
Since the beginning of the 1900’s, average sea levels have risen by 4 to 12 centimeters 
along most of the coast, with maximum levels up 16 to 34 cm in the Vancouver area. 
Average coastal sea surface temperatures are 0.9oC to 1.8oC higher.4

Climate change science suggests that by mid-century (2050s), mean annual temperatures 
across BC will be 1.4°C to 3.7°C warmer, on average. Extremely warm temperatures will 
become more frequent. A warmer climate will result in more growing degree days and 
frost free days — increasing the potential for plant growth. At the same time, in winter, 

2  Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K. and Reisinger, A. (Eds.), Climate Change 2007 — Synthesis Report 
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Geneva: IPCC, 2007. www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_
ipcc_fourth_assessment_report_synthesis_report.htm

3  British Columbia Ministry of the Environment; Indicators of Climate Change for British Columbia, 

4 

2002. www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/pdfs/indcc.pdf
Ibid., and Bornhold, Brian D. (2008) Projected Sea Level Changes for British Columbia in the 21st 
Century. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Natural Resources Canada and the Government of British 
Columbia. www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/pdfs/sea-level-changes-08.pdf

While these changes 
in temperature 
and precipitation 
may seem small, 
they will have 
significant impacts 
on natural systems.

88

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
