In 2011, the City of duncan, Cowichan Tribes, Cowichan valley Regional district, and district of North 
Cowichan signed an MOu to help manage increased flood risks in the region.  
PHOTO COURTESy COWICHAN VALLEy REGIONAL DISTRICT

collaboration

Most local governments, when confronted with the challenge of climate change, will have 
to deal with capacity issues related to expertise and resources. They may also grapple with 
issues  related  to  jurisdiction,  where  some  of  the  information  needed  to  assess  impacts  or 
levers needed to implement responses lie with other governments or agencies.

One way to enhance the capacity of local governments to assess impacts is to work collabora-
tively, with other local governments, provincial and federal governments, government agen-
cies, First Nations, the academic community and professional associations, many of which are 
already working to understand how the climate is changing and what the impacts will be. A 
number of these groups are already working with various local governments in BC.

Collaboration  is  also  a  way  to  coordinate  responses  to  climate  changes  that  have  impacts 
across a region, and require a larger-scale response in order to be effective. They can ensure 
increased resources and coordinated action in a larger geographic area.

For example, facing increased wildfire risks in the region, the City of Kamloops has recognized 
the need to work with the Thompson-Nicola Regional District, the Ministry of Forests and the 
Kamloops Indian Band to develop cross-jurisdictional community fuel breaks along City of 
Kamloops municipal boundaries.16 In the Okanagan, the Okanagan Water Basin Board17 brings 
together  local  government  and  community  representatives  in  an  innovative  collaborative 
organization  that  engages  in  research  and  outreach  designed  to  support  the  sustainable 
management of water resources in the region. The Board and its members are actively work-
ing on a number of initiatives relating to climate change, and they also work together with 
other levels of government and various government agencies, academics and associations on 
different projects.

16  www.city.kamloops.bc.ca/firerescue/pdfs/cwpp.pdf
17  www.obwb.ca

Facing increased 
wildfire risks in the 
region, the City 
of Kamloops has 
recognized the need 
to work with the 
Thompson-Nicola 
Regional district, 
the Ministry of 
Forests and the 
Kamloops Indian 
Band to develop 
cross-jurisdictional 
community fuel 
breaks along City of 
Kamloops municipal 
boundaries.

25

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
