subdivision and servicing bylaws

In regions where increased precipitation and extreme storm events are likely to result from climate 
change, using a subdivision and servicing bylaw to require green infrastructure can help decrease 
the future burden on what is sometimes referred to as “grey” infrastructure (pipes and drains) 
by reducing the amount of water that the conventional infrastructure needs to handle. Other 
benefits include reducing erosion, limiting pollution and helping to protect sensitive streams and 
wildlife habitat. Subdivision servicing bylaws can specify measures such as bioswales, boulevards, 
rain gardens, topsoil requirements, sloping streets to drain into infiltration areas, landscaping re-
quirements to increase onsite infiltration, and others. Much work has already been done on green 
infrastructure approaches in BC with valuable experience gained, and there are many examples 
and resources available to assist communities.

suBdIvIsION  ANd sERvICING ByLAWs

Local Government Act, s. 938

Subdivision and servicing bylaws set out the infrastructure requirements for 
subdivisions, buildings and other structures in the case of new developments and 
redevelopment. These bylaws usually contain engineering specifications for roads 
and trails, street lighting, water distribution, and sewage and drainage systems, and 
provide an opportunity to incorporate green infrastructure and low impact design 
parameters into new developments. Subdivision and servicing bylaws can also 
include infrastructure specifications that will help make communities more resilient to 
hazards such as interface wildfires. Subdivision and servicing bylaws can have different 
requirements for different geographic areas within a local government’s jurisdiction.

using a subdivision 
and servicing bylaw 
to require green 
infrastructure can help 
decrease the future 
burden on what is 
sometimes referred to 
as “grey” infrastructure 
(pipes and drains) 
by reducing the 
amount of water that 
the conventional 
infrastructure 
needs to handle.

INLAND KENWORTH 
BIOSWALE/POND, NANAIMO. 
PHOTO COURTESy 
INLAND KENWORTH

45

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
