The District of 
Elkford OCP, with 
integrated climate 
adaptation strategy, 
has been featured by 
the UN Framework 
Convention on 
Climate Change in 
a new guidebook.

The District of North Vancouver OCP directs its local government to “work with the North Shore 
Emergency Management Office and service organizations to prepare for and respond to emergen-
cies created by extreme weather events.” 21

Some examples of OCPs with integrated climate change adaptation strategies:

•	

•	

•	

•	

The District of Elkford has developed an OCP with a fully integrated climate change 
adaptation strategy (see www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan). Some of the policies 
included in the Elkford OCP include protecting water resources over the long term through 
aquifer mapping and reductions in community water consumption, addressing the 
increased risk of wildfire and flooding, and exploring economic opportunities associated 
with adaptation. 

The City of Richmond City Centre Area Plan (a local area plan that is a Schedule to its OCP) 
included a direction to explore adaptation strategies that would strengthen community 
resiliency to climate change. www.richmond.ca/__shared/assets/city_centre556.pdf

The City of Prince George is continuing to develop its climate change adaptation strategy; 
its draft OCP (November 2011) has incorporated a number of policies and objectives 
related to climate change impacts. See www.mypg.ca/progress/Documents/BL8383_
The%20ByLAWOCP_Merged.pdf

The Village of Kaslo OCP includes a number of key policies supporting climate change 
adaptation. Council must consider climate change impacts when reviewing new 
development applications and when undertaking long term planning initiatives, and bids, 
tenders and contracts for planning and development must reference climate change and 
Kaslo’s Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. No development will be considered for lands 
subject to significant increased risks due to natural hazards related to climate change 
without mitigation measures. https://kaslo.civicweb.net/Documents/DocumentDisplay.
aspx?Id=1838

CONsuLTATION

The consultative process that is generally undertaken to develop or significantly revise an OCP is an 
excellent opportunity to have a dialogue with the public about climate change impacts occurring 

and expected to occur in the community, and to build 
support for policies and measures to address those impacts. 
Consultation also needs to include climate scientists and 
others with relevant expertise, such as emergency planners 
and responders, and staff responsible for infrastructure asset 
management, finances and parks. Sufficient time and space 
will need to be allocated to consider potentially challenging 
material and the range of policy areas and decision-making in 
the community that will be affected.

PHOTO COURTESy MICHELLE LAURIE

21  The District of North Vancouver 2011 OCP, s. 10.4.1 http://identity.dnv.org 

32

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
