number of BC local governments are leading the way, and some of their actions are dis-
cussed below. There are many ways that governments can use land use planning and re-
lated regulatory powers to help make their communities more resilient to climate change 
impacts over time.

Adaptation brings home the need to break down silos within local governments. Climate 
change impacts cut across nearly every area of local government service and responsibility.

For  example,  planning  for  infrastructure  that  will  be  resilient  to  future  climate  change 
impacts raises questions about capacity and vulnerability, patterns of development and 
green infrastructure options, costs of maintenance, operation, upgrading and replacement, 
options for financing, and operations during emergencies. Engineers, land use planners, 
asset managers or financial planners and emergency planners all need to be engaged at 
some stage. Internal communications are very important. Some communities have found 
it useful to develop a climate change adaptation committee or team that can explore how 
to identify and manage climate change impacts and responses across a local government. 
Building communities that are resilient in the face of future changes will require internal 
cooperation and collaboration in addition to the external collaboration described in Part 1.

In terms of adaptation strategies themselves, several themes emerge from practices and 
experience to date:

•	

•	

•	

Approaches that maintain and enhance the interconnectedness of communities 
with natural systems — low impact development, green infrastructure 
for rainwater management, protecting ecological values within urban 
boundaries — seem to offer increased resilience to a changing climate as well as 
important co-benefits;

Strategies that emphasize more efficient use of resources and operation of 
equipment and facilities are also important for improving resilience where the 
impacts of climate change may result in shortages of resources such as energy or 
water, or increased demands on infrastructure during extreme weather event; and

The need to adapt to a changing climate points towards regional scale responses 
in certain areas: for example, watershed management, food security and 
emergency planning and response. 

All of these themes are illustrated with references to examples from BC and in some cases 
elsewhere in Canada.

Not all of the examples provided in Part 2 were developed specifically as climate change 
adaptation strategies, but they have been included because they nonetheless offer signifi-
cant adaptation benefits, and can be considered to be part of the toolkit available to local 
governments developing climate change adaptation strategies.

Part 2 concludes with a brief discussion of some of the legal liability and insurance issues 
that may arise for local governments in the context of climate change adaptation.

Part 2 first examines the 
higher-level community 
plans under the Local 
Government Act that 
local governments 
can use to implement 
climate change 
adaptation strategies. 

ANNACIS ISLAND PHOTO 
COURTESy LORI&TODD/FLICKR

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

27


