be hesitant to begin in light of challenges with resources and capacity, Appendix C — Developing 
Adaptation Strategies — Checklist for Local Governments provides a series of key questions that can 
help to get started.

As well, a resource developed specifically for smaller BC communities offers helpful guidance about 
assessing impacts and prioritizing actions. The six step process set out in Pathways to Climate Change 
Resilience: A Guidebook for Forest Based Communities15 is reproduced on page 103. It is hoped that 
this material might help some local governments be in a better position to begin implementing the 
climate change strategies described in Part 2 of this Guide. Further guidance with respect to assess-
ing impacts and prioritizing actions is also provided below, and in Appendix C.

learning about climate change impacts

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

A Columbia Basin Trust video (5.41 minutes) provides an introduction to climate change 
from the perspective of a City Councillor, elementary school student, retired mill worker 
and gardener, and scientist. www.youtube.com/watch?v=ECJtF7CfycA

Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions (PICS) has a series of short videos and lessons on 
climate change. http://pics.uvic.ca/education/climate-insights-101 An Introductory Climate 
Insights Trailer (2.50 minutes), Climate 101 module (about 10 minutes) and a series of four 
Climate Lessons: 1. Carbon Dioxide and Greenhouse Gasses; 2. Mother Nature’s Influence; 3. 
Observable Changes and 4. An Introduction to Climate Modeling.

Plan2Adapt is a (free) online tool that offers climate projections by region, and some 
description of impacts. The tool is from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) 
at the University of Victoria. http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt The 
projections are at a regional scale, however some communities have contracted with PCIC 
to get information scaled down to a local level, where possible.

The City of Prince George has prepared a series of short videos about climate change 
impacts in their region and some of the actions they are taking. www.youtube.com/playlist
?list=PLC9CCE982F121480C

Local observations can be an additional source of information about changing weather 
patterns in the community. Consider and discuss the ways the climate has changed in the 
community over the last 30+ years;  for example, it is no longer cold enough for an outside 
skating rink; the wind comes from a different direction and trees have blown down; there is 
increased and earlier spring flooding/ summer droughts/ heat waves; there is increased risk 
of wildfire; there are more intense storms/ ice jams/ high water threats to bridges and water 
pipes/sewage lagoon flooding/dike breaches or overtopping; there are more/different pest 
outbreaks, or they occur at different times. Newspaper stories and pictures from previous 
events may be helpful to catalyze discussion.

Note: The information obtained from community observations can be compared with the scientific 
information obtained about climate change. Both areas of overlap as well as areas where scientific 
information suggests potential risks not anticipated based on anecdotal information alone should 

15  With thanks to Cindy Pearce. See Pathways to Climate Change Resilience: A Guidebook for Forest-based 

Communities www.modelforest.net/pubs/Pathways_to_Climate_Change_Resilience_FINAL_Feb_2011.pdf 

104

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
