be explored. Local governments should be aware that an accurate understanding of the climate 
impacts in their region will likely require expert assistance, whether from PCIC, through BC universi-
ties, or possibly through provincial or federal government departments or agencies.

Some ways to increase local capacity for climate change adaptation

•	

•	

•	

Engage community stakeholders and experts in consultation (e.g. community leaders, 
businesses, local scientists, university/college representatives, utilities, non-governmental 
organizations, recreation groups, and interested stakeholders).

Check in with neighbouring communities, regional districts and First Nations to see what 
they have done, and where there may be opportunities for partnership or cooperation.

Consider creating a citizens advisory committee on climate change adaptation to act as 
an ongoing resource and sounding board for staff as climate change impacts are assessed, 
priorities identified, and adaptation strategies are developed and implemented.

 
Assessing risk and vulnerabilities, and prioritizing actions

•	

Adaptation is place-based so each community will have to assess its own unique situation.

•	

•	

Review the community’s local geography, environmental and regional context 
for climate change impacts. Some of the typical impacts facing BC communities 
(depending on where they are located in the province) include: increased risk 
of riparian flooding; sea level rise and erosion in coastal areas; increased wildfire 
risk; changes in wind patterns and tree blow down; aquifer and water supply 
issues. Community risk and vulnerability to these impacts are important factors in 
prioritizing action. For example, if the climate change impact is a high risk of sea 
level rise of 1 m by 2100, but the local topography is 5-meter rocky bluffs along 
the shoreline, then the community likely has a low vulnerability to coastal erosion. 
By contrast, a community with low-elevation coastal areas may be extremely 
vulnerable if faced with the same risk.

Review land use development patterns, locations of key facilities (e.g. hospitals, 
emergency facilities, works yards etc.), transportation/ emergency routes and check 
for connectivity and stranding in the case of emergencies arising from natural 
hazards associated with climate change such as flooding or wildfire, green space 
and sensitive habitats and check demographics, socio-economic factors, housing 
(location, age, rental) to identify vulnerable populations, etc. Part 2 of this Guide has 
further information about climate change adaptation considerations with respect to 
many of the services and responsibilities of local governments.

•	 Use the risk evaluation matrix to help prioritize actions.

105

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
