Given evolving 
understanding of 
climate change 
impacts, it would 
be wise to consider 
reviewing dPAs and 
dPA guidelines with 
regards to climate 
change impacts at 
least every five years, 
or sooner if new and 
pertinent information 
becomes available.

COBBLE HILL PHOTO 
COURTESy SAM BEEBE, 
ECOJUST/FLICKR

To consider:

•	 DPAs are most useful in areas where significant development and re-development is 

anticipated.

•	

•	

There may be challenges in developing guidelines due to the level of technical 
expertise required. For areas where natural hazards are present, it may be useful to 
have requirements that qualified third-party professionals assess whether proposed 
development or re-development adequately mitigates risk, as well as making reference 
to external standards or practices.22 Local governments could require an assessment by 
a hydrologic engineer where increased risk of flooding as a result of climate change is at 
issue.

Legal enforcement of DPAs and DPs may be challenging, requiring a court injunction. 
However, local governments may require that security be posted with respect to 
performance of specific conditions, including landscaping, safety, and damage to the 
natural environment (Local Government Act, s.925). A municipality may also withhold 
an occupancy permit until DP conditions are met. Additionally, regulatory bylaws with 
permitting and enforcement provisions may supplement the DP process.

•	 Given evolving understanding of climate change impacts, it would be wise to consider 

reviewing DPAs and DPA guidelines with regards to climate change impacts at least every 
five years, or sooner if new and pertinent information becomes available.

•	

Because of their far-reaching impact on development within a community, and potential 
costs to developers and property owners, it is important to incorporate meaningful 
stakeholder consultation into the creation of new DPAs.

•	 When creating the guidelines for DPAs appropriate exemptions should be specified, i.e. 

activities that do not trigger the requirement for a development permit. Factors to consider 
include the scale or location of the development, for example, and whether it is likely to 
significantly affect the objectives of the DPA or face risks related to natural hazards.

22  For example, the forthcoming Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of BC guidelines for 

flood hazard management.

38

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
