•	

•	

The Capital Regional District is proposing to support coordinated efforts to plan for 
and protect the region’s urban forests and environmentally sensitive and significant 
areas. Climate Change (Fall 2010) http://sustainability.crd.bc.ca/media/1280/
climate_change_policy_brief_small.pdf

Promoting connectivity at the landscape level to enhance the resilience of natural 
ecosystems, managing invasive species, and investigating the impacts of climate 
change on water supply and the natural environment in the region are identified 
as priorities for regional management in the Squamish-Lillooet Regional District 
Regional Growth Strategy. (adopted June 2010) www.slrd.bc.ca/files/%7B44E626F3-
81DC-4A10-90E5-7D66BAA6882C%7DBL1062.pdf

To consider:

Many regional districts in BC do not have regional growth strategies. However, preparing 
for climate change may offer cost savings and synergies if undertaken at a regional level, 
both with respect to assessing impacts and implementing responses. Without a regional 
growth strategy this can still be reflected in regional level policy or in a regional-scale 
climate change adaptation strategy. See, for example, the Cariboo-Chilcotin Climate 
Change Adaptation Strategy. www.retooling.ca/_Library/docs/Executive_Summary_-_
Cariboo_Chilcotin_Climage_Change_Adaptation_Strategy_-_September_2011.pdf

REGIONAL GROWTH sTRATEGIEs

Local Government Act, ss. 848-871

Regional growth strategies (optional for regional districts) are land use plans and 
policies designed to apply broadly across regional districts in BC, to “promote human 
settlement that is socially, economically and environmentally healthy and makes 
efficient use of public facilities and services, land and other resources.” Regional 
growth strategies are required to cover a broad range of topics related to regional 
sustainability (sprawl, pollution, adequate, affordable housing, public health 
concerns, efficient use of energy, protection of water and environmentally sensitive 
areas, waste management, efficient movement of goods and people, sustainable 
transportation options). They should provide a comprehensive statement of policies 
and objectives for the region covering a period of at least 20 years.

Regional growth strategies are adopted after an iterative process in which “all 
reasonable efforts” are made by regional boards and affected local governments 
to reach agreement on their contents. Consultation with citizens, First Nations, 
district boards and other levels of government is required, but no public hearing is 
necessary before adoption.

All bylaws and services undertaken by a regional district must be consistent with 
its regional growth strategy, and each municipality must include a regional context 
statement in its OCP describing the relationship between the OCP and regional 
growth strategy and how the OCP will be made consistent with the regional growth 
strategy over time.

Preparing for climate 
change at a regional 
level may offer cost 
savings and synergies, 
both with respect to 
assessing impacts 
and implementing 
responses.

PHOTO COURTESy  
CITy OF COURTENAy

29

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
