Food security has been 
identified in a number 
of communities in BC 
as a climate change 
impact of concern. The 
City of Castlegar has 
proposed changes to its 
zoning bylaw to allow 
greenhouses in certain 
areas and community 
gardens in parks. www.
cbt.org/uploads/pdf/
Castlegar_Climate_
Change_Adaptation_
Report_Final.pdf. The 
City of Parksville has 
already amended its 
zoning bylaw to allow 
urban food gardens. 
www.civicinfo.bc.ca/
weekly/Parksville_
urban_Gardens.pdf

42

There may be opportunities to use density bonuses to assist in implementing climate change 
adaptation measures through the provision of amenities, such as acquiring/developing land for 
community gardens to enhance food security, creating greenways that connect natural areas and 
enhance the resilience of natural species. PHOTOS COURTESy DORyWITHSERIFS/FLICKR

associated with any zone will also need to be considered with this longer term climate 
change lens. For this reason a precautionary approach based on hazard mapping 
informed by up-to-date climate modeling data, or other pertinent information, is 
prudent. As well, periodic reviews of zoning requirements should be undertaken to 
ensure that they are informed by current information about climate impacts.

•	 When defining zones, planners need to work with others who have the appropriate 
expertise. In terms of wildfire hazards, for example, fire and forestry officials should 
be involved in the planning process at the earliest stages so that hazards are well 
articulated before developments are planned. The costs of not mitigating hazards 
must be evaluated. As well, both the suitability of the zone itself for a given type of 
development, and access to the area for the provision of emergency services and 
secondary evacuation routes needs to be considered.

•	

Zoning requirements may be seen by local governments as less resource-intensive 
to administer when compared to development permits. However, the zoning powers 
(uses, density, and siting, size and uses of buildings) also offer less opportunity to 
tailor development to site specific environmental conditions which may be important 
from the point of view of climate change adaptation. For example, zoning can address 
the density and type of development in areas prone to wildfire hazards, but it cannot 
specify the type of landscaping that must be carried out, exterior materials that must 
be used on buildings, the types of reports that must be prepared and submitted, etc. 
For this reason zoning bylaws will likely be more effective in terms of implementing 
climate change adaptation measures when used in concert with development permit 
areas and other local bylaw powers.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
