long teRm finAnciAl PlAnning And RePoRting

Local  governments  are  required  to  prepare,  each  year,  a  financial  plan  setting  out  the 
objectives and policies for the planning period as well as the proposed expenditures, pro-
posed funding sources and proposed transfers to or between funds. The planning period 
for a financial plan is five years. Community Charter, s.165, Local Government Act, s. 815.

Municipalities are also required to prepare an annual report that includes both audited 
financial statements and information about reaching the previous year’s objectives and 
measures, and how it will measure progress in meeting objectives for the next two years. 
Community Charter, s. 98.

Why look at long term financial planning part of climate change adaptation:

Dealing with climate change impacts may have significant financial implications for local 
governments, in terms of increased expenditures, whether from managing increased risk 
and occurrence of natural hazards, dealing with greater wear-and-tear on infrastructure 
or the need to increase infrastructure capacity, training staff to understand and manage 
climate change impacts, training staff or hiring consultants to assess risk and vulnerability, 
engaging with the public around impacts and goal-setting, and others. Planning ahead will 
provide opportunities, for example, to identify investments that can enhance resiliency of 
infrastructure to climate change impacts and to identify co-benefits or costs savings.

Climate change may also have an impact, possibly negative, on local government rev-
enues. Areas of fiscal risk and exposure need to be identified as part of the assessment 
of impacts a community will face as a result of climate change. As well, if a local govern-
ment decides to increase property taxes to modify or expand local government services 
to address climate impacts, it will need to ensure that this measure is accompanied by 
adequate public education about the climate impacts that are behind this decision.

Including  financial  planning  in  climate  change  adaptation  strategies  will  allow  decision-
making about adaptation options to be better informed. In choosing adaptation measures 
to  be  implemented,  and  weighing  trade-offs,  a  key  factor  will  be  the  financial  resources 
available, and whether a given measure has any other benefits (e.g. economic development, 
savings on maintenance and operation costs, community liveability benefits.)

Planning ahead will 
provide opportunities, 
for example, to identify 
investments that can 
enhance resiliency 
of infrastructure 
to climate change 
impacts and to 
identify co-benefits 
or costs savings.

MOBERLEy LAKE PHOTO 
COURTESy ENERGETICCITy

59

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
