PARt 2

Implementing climate change 
adaptation strategies

intRoduction to PARt 2

Local governments have many tools at their disposal to implement climate change 
adaptation strategies. Of course, it is also true that local governments have a lot to 
consider in order to ensure that their communities are prepared for climate change. 
The good news is that a number of BC local governments have already begun to take 
action to address the impacts of a changing climate, and local governments that are 
just getting started have a growing number of examples to consult. The information 
that is provided in this part of the guide is complemented by references to many of 
these examples.

Part 2 first examines the higher-level community plans under the Local Government 
Act that local governments can use to implement climate change adaptation strat-
egies. Regional growth strategies and official community plans can provide a sup-
portive framework for the development and implementation of integrated climate 
change adaptation strategies. The policy guidance offered by these documents can 
help direct action with respect to land use planning and other areas of local govern-
ment jurisdiction such as infrastructure, emergency management planning, asset 
management and financial planning, the protection of biodiversity, and community 
and economic development services.

Also  important  for  developing  an  integrated  response  to  a  changing  climate  are 
the tools that can be used to implement land use planning, such as development 
permits, zoning, and various other measures as outlined below. Some local govern-
ments may be tempted to carry on with status quo land use plans for their com-
munities. However, the decisions made today about land use will have long term 
consequences, enduring until later this century when some of the more significant 
impacts of a changing climate will have become a reality.

Local governments need to start planning now for a climate that is outside the range 
of what has been “normal” for the past century or longer here in BC. As well, plan-
ning for the “new normal” in an integrated way will mean more opportunities to be 
proactive, create additional community benefits and save costs down the road. And 
while liability related to climate change impacts is still a very new area of the law, 
it would be wise for local governments to act prudently in light of projected im-
pacts. For these reasons it is important to begin thinking about how climate change 
preparedness can be integrated into land use planning policies and regulations. A 

2626

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 


