whAt is climAte chAnge AdAPtAtion And why 
is it imPoRtAnt foR locAl goveRnments in Bc?

defining climate change adaptation

The most widely used definition of climate change adaptation is from the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change:

adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected 
climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial 
opportunities.7

According to this definition:

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Adaptation involves “adjustment,” or change;

Both natural and human systems adapt;

They adapt to climate change and/or to its impacts;

Adaptation includes adjusting to actual climate change after the fact, and also 
preparing for expected climate change before it happens; and

Adaptation can moderate harm or take advantage of new opportunities.

Natural systems will only respond to climate change as it happens. By contrast, human 
systems,  including  local  governments,  can  use  increasingly  reliable  information  from 
climate scientists about future climate and its impacts to be pro-active, anticipate and 
prepare ahead. Local governments can consider the costs and benefits of taking action 
in advance compared with making adjustments after the climate changes.

climate change adaptation and local governments

The provincial government has a climate change adaptation strategy8 that recognizes 
local governments as important decisionmakers with respect to climate adaptation. BC 
local governments have powers and responsibilities related to land use, public infrastruc-
ture and finances, and a range of services, from emergency management to economic, 
cultural and social programs that can be used to develop and implement an integrated 
approach to local climate change adaptation.

For  local  governments,  putting  adaptation  to  climate  change  into  practice  will  mean 
enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  built  and  natural  environments  within  their  jurisdic-
tions, managing risk, making sound capital investments, managing infrastructure costs, 

7  Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K. and Reisinger, A. (Eds.), Climate Change 2007 — Synthesis Report 
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Geneva: IPCC, 2007. www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_
ipcc_fourth_assessment_report_synthesis_report.htm [accessed April 2012]

8  Preparing for Climate Change: British Columbia’s Adaptation Strategy at www.livesmartbc.ca/

attachments/Adaptation_Strategy.pdf

“Successful adaptation 
does not mean that 
impacts will not occur, 
only that they will 
be less severe than 
would be experienced 
had no adaptation 
occurred.”

 —  D.S. Lemmen, F.J. 
Warren and J. Lacroix, 
From Impacts to 
Adaptation: Canada 
in a Changing Climate 
2007. www.nrcan.
gc.ca/earth-sciences/
climate-change/
community-
adaptation/
assessments/132

10

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
