Building AdAPtive cAPAcity And Resilience

Because adaptation to climate change needs to be ongoing, successful adaptation will 
require not only good information about climate change, and prioritization of actions, but 
also the ability to implement responses and modify those responses over time. “Adaptive 
capacity” refers to the capabilities of a region, community or group to implement effective 
adaptation actions.12

Most practitioners and experts working in this field seem to agree that it is useful to con-
sider how local government services and functions can continue to be delivered in the 
face of a range of plausible climate change outcomes. As one commentator has observed, 
the question to ask is not “What are all the changes that will happen and how can we 
respond?” but “What do we do, and how should we adjust that for the reality of climate 
change.” The idea is to integrate climate change adaptation into existing activities.13

Once they have assessed risk and vulnerability to impacts, it may be useful for local govern-
ments to undertake a “capacity assessment.” This can look at adaptive capacity both from a 
broader community perspective, as well as with respect to the main institutional bodies in 
a community, including local government. An example is the Atlin Adaptive Capacity As-
sessment.14 In looking at ways to strengthen adaptive capacity, communities might want 
to consider how they responded to events in the past that were similar to those expected 
in the future, such as natural hazards like flooding or wildfire. It is important to build on 
existing strengths and programs within the community.

Three related approaches that can help strengthen adaptive capacity across local gov-
ernment  are  discussed  below:  “mainstreaming”  climate  change  adaptation  into  local 
government planning and decision-making; adaptive management, a way to incorporate 
innovation and responsiveness into planning and decision-making; and cooperating and 
collaborating.

mainstreaming

“Mainstreaming”  adaptation  means  ensuring  that  planning  and  decision-making  take 
climate change impacts and vulnerability assessment into account wherever relevant. It 
puts in place an integrated response to a changing climate, assists in ensuring that op-
portunities to address vulnerabilities are explored, and also helps to avoid policies and 
projects that have an adverse effect on adaptation because climate change impacts were 
not considered. Mainstreaming will not happen overnight, but it is an open-ended process 
that can be improved over time.

COMMUNITY ADAPTATION PROJECT

ATLIN ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
ASSESSMENT 

MARCH 2011

The Atlin Climate Change 
Project assessed the extent 
to which the community of 
Atlin, BC was vulnerable to 
the impacts of a changing 
climate and evaluated 
adaptive capacity, as the 
first stage in developing 
a community climate 
adaptation plan. 

Northern Climate Exchange, 
Atlin Adaptive Capacity 
Assessment, March 2011. 
www.taiga.net/nce/
adaptation/Atlin_Adaptive_
Capacity_Assessment.pdf

12  Definition taken from Natural Resources Canada, Adaptive Capacity in Canada, www.nrcan.gc.ca/

earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/adaptation102/218

13  Hoffman, J. (2010). Adapting your work to climate change. EcoAdapt. Retrieved from CAKE: www.

cakex.org/virtual-library/2355

14  Northern Climate Exchange, Atlin Adaptive Capacity Assessment, March 2011. www.taiga.net/nce/

adaptation/Atlin_Adaptive_Capacity_Assessment.pdf

22

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
