introduction

BC’s climate is changing, and scientists who study the climate are projecting further 
changes over the next decades. Preparing for these changes and the impacts they will 
have  on  natural  systems  and  human  communities  is  usually  called  “climate  change 
adaptation,” and is the subject of this guide. Understandably, much attention has been 
focused  to  date  on “climate  change  mitigation,”  or  efforts  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas 
(GHG)  emissions  in  the  atmosphere  and  help  slow  the  rate  of  climate  change.1  How-
ever, no matter how successful we are at reducing GHG emissions, we still face climate 
change impacts linked to past and ongoing GHG emissions that will be present in the 
atmosphere for many years to come. This means that both types of climate action are 
necessary: mitigation to avoid even more dangerous impacts, and adaptation to deal 
with the inevitable level of change that scientists advise we will continue to face for the 
next century or longer.

Preparing  for  Climate  Change:  An  Implementation  Guide  for  Local  Governments  in  BC  is 
designed to assist local government elected officials and staff, including planners, en-
gineers, chief administrative officers, financial officers and others, to plan and act in ways 
that will make their communities more resilient to the impacts of climate change.

The effects of a changing climate vary and will continue to vary significantly from region 
to region in BC, from sea level rise and flooding in some areas to drought and increased 
risk of wildfire and invasive species in others. Local governments can access information 
about regional climate change impacts in BC through Plan2Adapt http://pacificclimate.
org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt, the website specially developed for BC communities by 
the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium based at the University of Victoria. As well, a num-
ber of publications and approaches have been developed to assist local governments in 
understanding the risks they face, how vulnerable they are, and how to set priorities for 
action. This guide also provides a very brief overview of processes for assessing risk and 
vulnerability to climate change impacts and prioritizing actions, but it is expected that 
local governments will rely on other resources to guide them in these areas. Appendix A 
offers information on further resources on all of these topics.

This resource identifies the tools that local governments can use to implement climate 
change adaptation strategies. Preparing for and responding to climate change impacts 
will, in most communities, engage a wide range of existing local government services 

1  Resources to help local governments reduce their GHG emissions can be found in the BC Climate 

Action Toolkit www.toolkit.bc.ca.

This guide 
identifies the 
tools that local 
governments can 
use to implement 
climate change 
adaptation 
strategies.

66

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
