most of BC will likely receive more precipitation (up to 26% more in some locations). In 
summer, northern BC maybe up to 15% wetter, while southern BC may be up to 20% 
drier. In winter and spring, snowfall will decrease.5

While  these  changes  may  seem  small,  they  will  have  significant  impacts  on  natural 
systems.  Water  resources  and  the  hydrologic  cycle,  for  example,  are  highly  sensitive 
to  year-to-year  climate  variability  as  well  as  long  term  changes  in 
climate.  Changes  in  air  temperature  and  precipitation  patterns 
are already having noticeable effects on weather, water cycles and 
ecology, which in turn have impacts on forests, fisheries, agriculture, 
recreational opportunities and other resource-based sectors.

Many  of  the  most  costly  impacts  of  climate  change  are  associated 
with increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events. 
Heavy “pineapple  express”  rainfall  events  have  caused  widespread 
urban flooding in the Lower Mainland in recent years, and may have 
heightened the risk of slides on steep slopes in some communities.6 
However,  gradual  changes  will  also  have  significant  impacts  over 
time. Some examples are set out below:

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

The mountain pine beetle infestation, linked to milder 
winters and decades of forest fire suppression, has 
significantly affected ecosystems, communities, and the 
economy;

Sea level rise associated with warming, combined with 
higher storm surges, increases the likelihood of flooding and 
erosion in low lying coastal communities;

The 2003 and 2009 wildfire seasons were the most 
dangerous and expensive on record; as summers continue 
to warm and become drier, such seasons will likely become 
more frequent;

Smaller snow packs and shrinking glaciers contribute to 
lower summer stream flows and increased probability of 
summer water shortages in some regions; and

The seasonal droughts of 2003 and 2009 demonstrate the 
vulnerability of water supplies. BC can expect droughts like 
this to become more frequent.

CLIMATE CHANGE:  
GLOBAL PROBLEM, REGIONAL IMPACTs

While climate change is a global problem, 
the way the climate changes, and its 
impacts on natural systems, varies from 
region to region. Sea level rise is an issue 
for coastal communities in BC, for example, 
while increased wildfires are more likely 
to be a problem in the interior regions. As 
well, in some cases geographic features or 
settlement and land use patterns might 
mean that even nearby communities face 
different challenges. In the Lower Mainland, 
sea level rise creates different issues for 
Surrey and Delta, with direct impacts to 
agricultural lands, compared to Vancouver 
where urban areas will be most affected.

5  Zwiers, F.W., Schnorlous, M.A., & Maruszoczka, G.D. (2011), Hydrologic Impacts of Climate Change 
on BC Water Resources, Summary Report for the Campbell, Columbia and Peace River Watersheds, 
Annex 1: Climate Projections for BC. Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium. The summary of future 
climate change also includes information from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium Regional 
Analysis Tool http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/regional-analysis-tool and Plan2Adapt 
http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt websites.

6  Nicholas Heap (2007) Hot Properties: How Global Warming Could Transform B.C.’s Real Estate Sector. 

David Suzuki Foundation, Vancouver, p. 19.

Map figure from: British Columbia 
in From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, 
edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, 
J. Lacroix and E. Bush. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa ON, pp. 329-386

9

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
