•	

A changing climate will mean that heating and cooling demands will also 
change considerably over the coming 50–100 years, and this should be 
considered in the design of HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning) 
systems for new civic buildings and retrofits. 

•	 Greater demands for energy due to hotter summers and greater cooling 

demands may be offset in part through increased energy efficiency in 
buildings. Improving building energy efficiency and encouraging renewable 
energy use can also decrease the vulnerability of a community to disruptions 
in grid energy as a result of natural disasters and extreme weather events. 

•	 A municipality could create a revitalization tax exemption for buildings 
that install renewable energy sources, such as solar panels. (Community 
Charter, s. 226) www.brownfieldrenewal.gov.bc.ca/docs/community_
charter_revital_tax_exemptions.pdf 

•	 A review of options for local governments to require or incentivize 
renewable energy and energy efficiency in buildings is found here:  
www.greenbuildingleaders.ca/docs/gbl-discussionpaper-withcover.pdf 

•	 Green roofs and onsite rainwater harvesting may assist in managing increases 

in precipitation, as well as improving resistance to drier conditions by 
increasing soil moisture and groundwater recharge levels. As discussed above 
local governments can promote this type of design and construction in their 
communities through development permitting and bylaw powers related to 
run-off control.

•	

•	

Constructing and retrofitting civic buildings and facilities can be an 
opportunity to showcase good practices to the community, generate 
public discussion about preparing for climate change, and encourage the 
development of relevant local expertise.

In many communities there may be a lack of local knowledge about 
alternatives to conventional building practices and the advantages they can 
offer. Local governments can play a role in overcoming these types of barriers, 
by showing leadership with civic building policy, as noted above, and also 
through outreach and support for local training initiatives. 

•	

In its draft OCP (January 2012) the City of Campbell River proposes to 
work with partners to support local training related to green building 
practices, including both information about energy retrofits and 
renewable energy deployment, and the financial analysis to support these 
practices. http://sustainablecampbellriver.ca/?p=633

A municipality could 
create a revitalization tax 
exemption for buildings 
that install renewable 
energy sources, such 
as solar panels.

DOCKSIDE GREEN, VICTORIA PHOTO 
COURTESy JAySCRATCH/FLICKR

68

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
