Sector

Impacts in some regions could include…

Aquatic 
ecosystems 
and fisheries

Business

•	 Shifts in species range and distribution
•	
•	 Rising ocean and freshwater temperatures leading to increased stress on 

Invasion of coastal waters by exotic species

coldwater species such as salmon

•	 Changes in the amount, timing and temperature of river flows
•	 Potential increased conflicts of fisheries with other water uses (e.g. 

hydroelectric power generation, irrigation, drinking water), particularly in the 
southern interior

•	 Price volatility in energy and raw product markets due to more extreme 

weather events
Increased insurance premiums due to more extreme weather events
Impacts on business infrastructure located in floodplains or coastal areas

•	
•	
•	 Decreased availability of water resources potentially affecting water-intensive 

activities, such as agriculture, pulp and paper processing, fish hatcheries, 
food processing, mining, chemical and petrochemical processing and 
manufacture, small and large hydro installations and airport operations

•	 Potential for business interruption due to extreme events and the 

subsequent need for business continuity planning

•	 Concern from business community regarding security of investments and 

assets in face of climate change impacts

•	 More heat-related stress, particularly among seniors, children, those with low 

income, and other vulnerable segments of the population (e.g. homeless)

•	 Fewer extreme cold-related health risks
•	
•	 Reduced air quality in urban areas such as Greater Vancouver, Prince George 

Increase in diseases spread by water, air and vectors (e.g. West Nile)

Health

and the Okanagan Valley

•	 Reduced air quality due to increases in forest fire frequency
•	

Increased risks for vulnerable populations as a result of extreme weather or 
related events (e.g. special evacuation needs, access to regular medical care 
and prescription drugs) 

•	 Reduced drinking water security in water-stressed regions

•	

Increased demands on emergency response services related to extreme 
weather events (e.g., heat, flooding, storms) and forest fires

Emergency 
response

•	 Heightened vulnerability of remote communities dependent on limited 

essential services and infrastructure in case of extreme weather events and 
natural hazards

•	 Greater possibility of simultaneous multiple impacts
•	 Greater need to coordinate emergency response across regions

Table adapted 
from Snover, A.K., 
L. Whitely Binder, J. 
Lopez, E. Willmott, J. 
Kay, D. Howell, and 
J. Simmonds. 2007. 
Preparing for Climate 
Change: A Guidebook 
for Local, Regional, and 
State Governments. 
In association with 
and published 
by ICLEI — Local 
Governments for 
Sustainability, 
Oakland, CA. pp. 
40-42, with materials 
from Walker, I.J. and 
R. Sydneysmith. 2008. 
British Columbia 
in From Impacts to 
Adaptation: Canada 
in a Changing Climate 
2007, edited by D.S. 
Lemmen, F.J. Warren, 
J. Lacroix and E. 
Bush. Government of 
Canada, Ottawa ON, 
pp. 329-386.

17

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
