climate change adaptation and climate change mitigation

Climate change adaptation and climate change mitigation (reducing greenhouse gas emissions) are 
related, and both are important for local government. However, they serve different ends: climate 
change  adaptation  is  about  dealing  with  the  problems  created  by  climate  change,  and  climate 
change mitigation is about not making the problem worse.

While  adaptation  and  greenhouse  gas  reduction  decisions  often  occur  within  the  same  con-
texts — land use, infrastructure, park, water use, and other planning processes — there may or may 
not be obvious practical linkages.

For example, addressing increased flooding risks by raising dikes or changes to zoning and require-
ments for development permits does not directly affect the greenhouse gas emissions produced by 
a community. On the other hand, planting urban trees helps communities cope with more frequent 
heat waves and increased stormwater run-off, while at the same time removing carbon from the 
atmosphere as the trees grow — a case where climate change mitigation and adaptation overlap.

Generally speaking, this guide favours approaches to adaptation that increase overall community 
resiliency, and have multiple benefits, however the first priority for adaptation actions should be 
to effectively address the climate change impacts that the community has identified as needing 
attention. It would be ideal if all the adaptation actions local governments choose to implement 
also reduced greenhouse gas emissions, for example, or had other important co-benefits. However, 
many adaptation actions will likely be neutral with respect to greenhouse gas emissions. The dia-
gram below outlines how some adaptation and mitigation policies overlap, and some do not.

Mitigation 

Reduces Emissions

Adaptation 
Reduces Harm 

Renewable energy 

Energy conservation and efficiency 
measures that reduce fossil fuel use 

More Permeable surfaces 

Basement sewer backflow valves 

Green roofs

Upgrades to sewers, culverts &
overland flow routes for extreme 

Combined heat & power systems 

Shade programs

rainfall 

More active transportation 
(cycling and walking)

Expanded transit use 

Fuel efficient & electric vehicles 

Reduced air travel 

Better insulated buildings

Expand tree canopy

Enhanced  emergency & business 
continuity  planning  for extreme 
weather events 

Deep lake water cooling 

Enhanced  heat response system 

Local food 

West Nile & Lyme Disease Programs 

Capture & use landfill gas

Identification & control programs 
for invasive species 

Downspout disconnection

Source:   J. Penney 2008. Climate Change Adaptation in the City of Toronto: Lessons for the Great Lakes 

Figure 2:   Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation Options 

Communities. Clean Air Partnership. Toronto, Canada, www.cleanairpartnership.org/files/Climate%20
The potential for “win-win” solutions did not, however, drive the selection of the short-term 
Change%20Adaptation%20in%20the%20City%20of%20Toronto%20-%20Lessons%20for%20
adaptation actions that were included in Toronto’s adaptation strategy. It is possible that they 
Great%20Lakes%20Communities%20(Penney,%20J.%202008).pdf
may be more important in developing the longer-term strategy.  Certainly TEO recommended 
that in budget proposals for climate change activities in 2009 City Divisions should consider the 
contribution that the proposed actions would make to emissions reduction and to reducing 
impacts.

It remains to be seen the extent to which mitigation and adaptation can be planned together. 
There is no question that these strategies should complement each other wherever possible. It 

12

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
