APPendix B

three land use scenarios: 
Planning for climate change 
in BC communities

Climate  change  is  a  global  problem,  but  the  impacts  of  climate  change  will  vary  regionally,  de-
pending on local weather patterns, natural features, settlement patterns, economic activities and 
other factors. Local governments can help prepare their communities for climate change impacts 
over both the short and long term by making sure that decisions about land use in their jurisdictions 
take these impacts into account. This can be accomplished most effectively by integrating climate 
change adaptation into existing regulatory tools and policies.

What is new about climate change adaptation is the need to look at longer term horizons, and to add 
climate experts and additional public consultation to existing planning processes. There are innova-
tive new tools available to local governments in BC, such as climate projections from Plan2Adapt, and 
new guides and studies that can assist with the place-based analysis that is required to understand 
impacts and prioritize actions. To be effective, adaptation strategies need to be integrated across 
local government areas of responsibility and service, and mainstreamed into practice. It is important 
for local governments to recognize that the uncertainty associated with climate change, as well as 
the need to fully consider the consequences of climate change impacts in their communities will 
necessarily make local government analysis and decision-making more involved than in the past.

Three land use scenarios that look at land use planning in the context of climate change are provided 
below:

1.  Mainstreaming climate change adaptation into land use planning — Example: District of 

Elkford

2. 

Incorporating climate science about natural hazards into land use planning — Example: 
City of Prince George

3.  Using innovative tools to engage the community in understanding and responding to 

climate change — Example: District of Kimberley

81

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
