Local observations and expertise are also an important source of information about climate change 
impacts and vulnerabilities. Making a connection between local knowledge and higher-level scien-
tific information will both enhance understanding of the impacts of a changing climate and help to 
engage the community in considering adaptation strategies.11

Uncertainty about the rate of climate change, and severity of impacts

There are two main sources of uncertainty in scientific climate projections. First, climate change is 
linked to the concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and future levels depend on 
how successful the global community is at reducing greenhouse gas emissions in coming years. 
Second, scientists obtain information about future climate change from computer models of the 
global climate system, and these models, though sophisticated, may not fully reflect the intricacies 
of the climate system.

Despite the uncertainty in projections of future climate, most experts agree there is enough informa-
tion for decisionmakers to start to prepare. The uncertainty is not whether the climate is changing, 
but how rapidly. It is important to view adaptation as a process; as new information becomes avail-
able or certain physical changes become apparent, actions can be re-evaluated and updated.

Some of the resources in Appendix A discuss uncertainty and provide guidance on how local gov-
ernments can address it in their assessment and planning processes. Section 4 of this guide also 
provides an introduction to ways that local governments can build adaptive capacity and resilience 
in their communities so that they can better cope with uncertainty. Part 2 looks at ways to implement 
climate change adaptation strategies, and integrate climate change adaptation into local govern-
ment planning and decision-making. It also considers how certain approaches, for example, green 

11  See, for example, Ingrid Liepa (2009) Adapting to Climate Change in Kimberley, BC, Executive Summary.  

www.city.kimberley.bc.ca/sites/kimberley.civicwebcms.com/files/media/iWeb/%7B0647EEC8-854E-424A-
A28A-026746766D52%7DExecutiveSummary-June30.pdf

despite the 
uncertainty in 
projections of 
future climate, 
most experts agree 
there is enough 
information for 
decisionmakers to 
start to prepare.

PHOTO COURTESy 
ECSTATICIST/FLICKR

19

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
