official community Plans

Integrating climate change adaptation into an OCP

An  Official  Community  Plan  is  one  of  the  key  planning  tools  available  to  a  local  gov-
ernment to put in place climate change adaptation strategies that will be reflected in 
decision-making about land use and development within its jurisdiction. Both the plan-
ning process and the product are important. Depending on how far a local government 
has  advanced  in  assessing  climate  change  impacts  and  developing  climate  change 
adaptation strategies, an OCP can be used in different ways to support action:

•	 When a local government has already assessed its risks and vulnerabilities to 

climate change impacts, or is prepared to undertake this process together with 
a significant revision of its OCP, there is the possibility to address climate change 
adaptation comprehensively across the policies and objectives within the OCP, 
and mainstream associated action throughout all guidelines and regulations; or

•	

•	

For local governments that are just beginning to look at climate change impacts 
and the risks and vulnerabilities in their community, and have limited resources, 
the OCP can be used to frame specific climate change adaptation objectives to 
advance climate change assessment and planning, and/or to modify specific 
policies and objectives to incorporate adjustments to climate change impacts 
where there is enough existing information to do so; or

For local governments that develop stand-alone plans the OCP will need to 
be amended to include the appropriate policies, objectives, maps and related 
material.

Whichever  approach  is  selected,  the  goal  over  time  should  be  for  local  governments 
to develop a comprehensive approach to managing climate impacts, and to have this 
reflected  in  the  OCP.  Climate  change  impacts  cut  across  different  local  government 
policy  areas  and  functions,  and  through  its  OCP  a  local  government  can  put  in  place 
a holistic and integrated approach to addressing impacts across its jurisdiction. It is a 
way to support the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into local government 

Over time local 
governments should 
aim to mainstream 
climate change 
adaptation into local 
government policy 
and decision-making, 
incorporating 
input from climate 
science experts.

NELSON PHOTO COURTESy 
78SPEED/FLICKR

OFFICIAL COMMuNITy PLAN

Local Government Act, ss. 875-884

An official community plan (OCP) is a forward-looking document that sets out overarching policies and 
objectives that apply to land use and development within the area covered by the plan. It also addresses 
infrastructure, housing, and greenhouse gas reduction targets, and can extend to social needs, agriculture 
and environmental protection and other matters. The OCP provides the framework for local government 
decision-making: all bylaws and local government decisions, including capital expenditures, must be 
consistent with the OCP, once it has been legally adopted by a local government. As well, an OCP is developed 
through a process that includes public consultation, and this provides an opportunity to have a community 
dialogue about climate change impacts and possible actions. OCP policies and objectives can also inform 
considerations of public interest made by Approving Officers with respect to subdivision applications.

30

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
