official community Plan (ocP)

 F Is there an opportunity to mainstream climate change adaptation into the OCP through 

a revision? (See pages 30-34 of the Guide, and note that some local governments have 
chosen to develop stand-alone climate change adaptation plans).

 F Have all existing policy areas within the OCP been reviewed through the lens of climate 

change impacts in the community/region, both long and short term, and appropriate 
revisions considered?

 F Where an OCP includes a Sustainability Checklist for reviewing applications for OCP 

amendments, zoning changes, new developments, etc., has it been reviewed and revised in 
light of climate change adaptation priorities (both vulnerabilities and opportunities) for the 
community? (See Halifax Regional Municipality, Developers Guide to Risk Management  
www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf )

 F Have any new policies and objectives identified for the OCP with respect to climate change 

adaptation been considered in conjunction with the financial plan?

 F Has council/board met its statutory requirements for consultation with respect to any 

changes to the OCP that it intends to make related to climate change adaptation?

 F Does the current OCP indicate the need to act to address climate change impacts within 

the current time-frame, even though impacts may not be significant until later iterations of 
these planning documents?

 F Have projected climate change impacts such as changes in water supply, run-off (e.g. 

reduced snowpack volume/earlier spring snowmelt), and temperature; increased intensity 
and frequency of extreme weather events and forest fires; increased occurrence of invasive 
species; and others been taken into account in developing new OCP policies?

 F Have low-impact development and the use of the Water Balance Model to support 

community resilience in the face of climate change been explored? (See City of Courtenay 
OCP, www.courtenay.ca/planning/official-community-plan.aspx)

 F Has mapping of specific climate change impacts and related hazards been carried out, and 

can this be incorporated into the OCP along with appropriate policy direction? Note: This 
may be a big topic that requires separate discussion. For example, What sort of mapping is 
most appropriate? Risk and/or vulnerability mapping? Overlaying hazard and vulnerability? 
What sort of accuracy/ precision is appropriate? Would visualization techniques be useful? 
(See page 34 of the Guide)

 F If mapping has been carried out, has a timeframe been identified for review and updating?

 F Have existing Development Permit Areas related to natural hazards been reviewed, and 

updated with current and projected climate information relevant to the region?

 F Does the OCP address community safety and social planning issues related to climate 

change?

 F Has the need for further outreach and public education related to new policies and 

objectives related to climate change adaptation been considered? Have business and 
industry been included?

94

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
