legAl liABility

This section does not constitute legal advice, nor should it be taken as a description of legal 
liability issues that face any particular local government in BC or elsewhere, or as guidance 
on how to avoid legal liability. It is intended to illustrate some of the areas where there may 
be new or heightened potential for legal liability as a result of climate change and to encour-
age local governments to take steps to evaluate and address their own circumstances. Local 
governments should consult with their own lawyers to obtain legal advice appropriate to their 
circumstances.

How local governments respond to the impacts of climate change is also important from 
the point of view of legal liability. Liability for local governments in the context of climate 
change impacts is most likely to arise in the form of claims against the local government 
for negligence or nuisance.

A local government can be found to be negligent if it can be shown that, in exercising its 
powers, it failed to exercise reasonable care towards people to whom it owes a duty of 
care.42 A key consideration is whether the harm in question was reasonably foreseeable.43 
While there is still some degree of uncertainty associated with future climate change, the 
scientific evidence and related information that is now available make a range of climate 
change impacts increasingly foreseeable for local governments. Accordingly it is becom-
ing less likely that a local government would be able to successfully defend a negligence 
claim if it failed to take those impacts into account when exercising its statutory authority.44

Local governments can also be exposed to nuisance claims, which are based on an inter-
ference with the use or enjoyment of private property.45 A typical example is where a local 
government sewerage or drainage system fails and causes property damage. With climate 
change posing increasing challenges for local government infrastructure, there may be 
more nuisance claims of this type arising.

42  While the courts have made a distinction between policy and operational decisions, holding that 

only operational decisions attract liability, this is a relatively complex area of law and the subject of 
significant litigation. In general, once a local government has decided to offer a program or service, 
it should ensure that the program or service is offered with reasonable care to those likely to be 
impacted by the program or service. 

43  See Mustapha v. Culligan of Canada Ltd., [2008] 2 S.C.R. 114.
44  In Australia, planning tribunals have already recognized that climate change will affect coastal 

developments. In Gippsland Coastal Board v South Gippsland SC & Ors (No 2) [2008] VCAT 1545 (29 
July 2008), an appeal tribunal overturned plans to build six seaside homes partly due to climate 
change considerations. The case summary states: “The case is of particular interest because of 
potential sea level rises due to the effects of climate change. We conclude that sea level rise and 
risk of coastal inundation are relevant matters to consider in appropriate circumstances. We accept 
the general consensus that some level of climate change will result in extreme weather conditions 
beyond the historical record that planners and others rely on in assessing future potential 
impact. The relevance of climate change to the planning decision making process is still in an 
evolutionary phase. Each case concerning the possible impacts of climate change will turn on its 
own facts and circumstances. However, in the present case, applying the precautionary principle, 
we consider that increases in the severity of storm events coupled with rising sea levels create a 
reasonably foreseeable risk of inundation of the subject land and the proposed dwellings, which is 
unacceptable.” Decision is online at www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2008/1545.html 

45  Lawsuits based on “public nuisance” — the interference with a public right in respect of public 
spaces or resources — are also possible, but less likely due to restrictions on the ability of the 
general public to bring such claims.

A local government 
can be found to be 
negligent if it can be 
shown that, in exercising 
its powers, it failed to 
exercise reasonable care 
towards people to whom 
it owes a duty of care.

VANCOUVER LAW COURTS, 
PHOTO COURTESy ALEX 
MAHAN/FLICKR

76

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
