Adaptation is a 
process. Local 
governments and 
their communities 
will need to 
continue to be 
engaged with 
assessing climate 
change impacts, 
prioritizing actions 
and implementing 
responses, as 
long as the 
climate continues 
to change.

CHETWyND 
PHOTO COURTESy 
ENERGETICCITy/FLICKR

implementing, monitoring, and updating adaptation strategies

Finally, the adaptation process involves implementing strategies, monitoring results, and updating 
strategies and decisions over time to reflect new information, priorities, and resources. 

Some communities have chosen to directly address the climate change vulnerabilities they have 
identified through modifications to existing plans and strategies for land use, infrastructure, parks, 
stormwater and other areas of responsibility. This is sometimes called “mainstreaming” and is ad-
dressed further in Section 4. Alternatively, some communities choose to first develop stand-alone 
“adaptation plans.” In this case further steps are necessary to integrate the actions identified in the 
adaptation plans into planning documents and decision-making processes. 

In terms of monitoring results, there is no standard measure of adaptation success. In general, the 
goals of adaptation are to increase community resilience, reduce risk, and advance opportunities. 
Many adaptation actions will also advance broader sustainability goals. In practice, the results of 
adaptation will look different for every community, based on how local impacts are addressed. 

Over time, climate change adaptation strategies and actions will need to be regularly updated and 
refined to take into account both new information and evolving realities about climate change im-
pacts. They will also need to reflect other factors that may be relevant in a given community, such as 
increasing or decreasing populations and shifting demographics, changing economic drivers, new 
technologies, opportunities for cooperation or funding, and others. Adaptation is a process. Local 
governments and their communities will need to continue to be engaged with assessing climate 
change impacts, prioritizing actions and implementing responses, as long as the climate continues 
to change.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

21


