To consider:

•	

•	

Local governments can also re-zone/pre-zone areas to increase the density or type 
of development in existing zones as they are redeveloped over time, lessening 
development pressure on areas that will be subject to greater risk from hazards (e.g. 
wildfire, flood, sea level rise) over time as a result of climate change.

Energy use in communities will be affected both directly and indirectly by climate 
change. Hotter summers may drive up energy demand for cooling, for example, 
while carbon pricing policies within BC and globally are likely to increase the cost of 
traditional energy sources. Greater resiliency to these changes might be achieved 
through measures to relax some common zoning requirements. For example, 
setbacks can be reduced to allow buildings with thicker walls, or building height 
requirements adjusted to allow solar energy installations. See www.toolkit.bc.ca/
diverse-zoning-strategies-diverse-communities#zoning%20for%20low%20carbon%20bldgs

•	 While it may be possible to take a “wait and see” approach to dealing with climate 

change impacts in some circumstances, zoning requirements have long term impacts 
themselves. For example, structures built today in a certain area, or respecting a given 
setback, are likely to be around for 50–100 years or more, and will need to be safe 
and viable over at least that time period. The provision of local government services 

A reminder: new 
or revised DPAs 
and guidelines 
may require 
amendments to the 
zoning bylaw to 
ensure consistency. 
All local government 
enactments must be 
consistent with OCP.

dENsITy BONusEs

Local Government Act, s.904

Local governments can designate zones where increased density, up to a specified 
amount, is available to applicants in exchange for providing community amenities, 
or contributing to a fund that will be used by the local government to 
create amenities. In the climate change context local governments must 
be careful to ensure that density is not being increased in areas that are 
prone to greater risks of natural hazards, such as flooding.

There may be opportunities to use density bonuses to assist in imple-
menting climate change adaptation measures through the provision of 
amenities, such as acquiring/developing land for community gardens to 
enhance  food  security,  creating  greenways  that  connect  natural  areas 
and enhance the resilience of natural species. Gardens and greenways 
may  also  have  important  cooling  benefits  in  urban  areas  subject  to 
rising temperatures. Parks and greenways can protect environmentally 
sensitive areas that are at even greater risk as a result of climate change, 
and preserving trees and natural vegetation can contribute to rainwater 
management.  It  should  be  noted  that  density  bonusing  can  be  con-
troversial,  and  the  process  should  involve  community  dialogue.  Good 
practices would include setting an upper limit on density and where it 
will be located in the OCP after public dialogue, and creating a public 
and transparent process for calculating the value of increased density. 
See www.wcel.org/sites/default/files/publications/TheGreenBuildingsGuide.pdf

41

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
