lAnd use scenARio 3: using innovAtive tools to 
engAge the community in undeRstAnding And 
ResPonding to climAte chAnge

Robust community engagement in developing and implementing climate change adaptation strat-
egies is important, because some of the responses will require significant investment of tax dollars 
and local government resources. Citizens and elected officials will need to have a basic understand-
ing  of  the  climate  change  projections  and  impacts  in  their  communities  so  that  they  can  make 
informed decisions. There may also be cases where priorities with respect to land uses are at issue. 
In areas subject to increased risks with respect to natural hazards as a result of climate change, for 
example, a community might need to weigh the costs and benefits of protection versus relocation. 
However, the implications of climate change at the local level can be complex, and challenging for 
communities to understand.

The  Collaborative  for  Advanced  Landscape  Planning  at  the  University  of  British  Columbia9  has 
developed an innovative visioning tool that has proven effective in helping communities to under-
stand  the  impacts  of  climate  change  in  their  region,  to  appreciate  the  urgency  in  certain  cases, 
and to prioritize actions. The tool brings together climate data with visual representations of local 
geography and neighbourhoods, and allows community members to see vivid representations of 
potential climate impacts. Some of the impacts modeled to date include snow pack reductions on 
the North Shore mountains (District of North Vancouver); sea level rise and flood adaptation (City of 
Delta) and wildfire events (City of Kimberley). The tool has been used in interactive public settings in 
a number of BC communities, and has received very positive feedback from community members.

There is a guidance manual for the tool for BC local governments that is available free of charge. The 
tool can be used with existing planning resources including Google Earth, GIS and CommunityViz 
capabilities.10 Three additional training modules for the use of the tool are being developed.

Example: City of Kimberley

The City of Kimberley in southeastern BC is a small community that relies on tourism and outdoor 
recreation. It faces potential climate change impacts that include flooding, wildfire, water supply 
issues, and others.

As part of the Kimberley Climate Adaptation Project supported by the Columbia Basin Trust, Kim-
berley  worked  with  CALP  to  pilot  a  climate  change  visioning  process,  that “use[d]  tools  such  as 
GIS mapping and 3D visualizations to localize, spatialize and visualize climate change impacts and 
solutions.”11 In particular, the visualizations gave community members the opportunity to ask “what 
if” questions and see the outcomes modeled before them.

9  With support from the Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development.
10  www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/news/viz-guidance-manual/ 
11  CALP Visioning and Visualizations: Kimberley Climate Adaptation Project, Final Project Report to the Real Estate 

Foundation Communities in Transition Program http://cfubc.ehosting.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/REF-
CALP-Kimberley-Report2.pdf 

88

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
