wAteRshed mAnAgement PlAnning

Climate change will significantly affect water resources in most regions of BC, as a re-
sult of increased and more severe storm events, changing run-off patterns, droughts, 
increased forest fires in watersheds, and other impacts. Areas prone to flooding may face 
increased risks, complicated further in coastal areas by sea level rise and storm surges. To 
deal effectively with these challenges local governments may wish to look at how their 
watersheds can be managed more effectively. 

In  some  smaller  watersheds,  local  governments  may  have  jurisdiction  over  most  or 
all  of  the  watersheds  for  their  communities,  and  watershed  management  can  be  ac-
complished using the tools described in Part 2 of this guide, and in particular through 
land use planning. However, many local governments in BC share jurisdiction over their 
watersheds with other local governments, the provincial and/or federal governments, 
First  Nations,  government  agencies,  and  in  some  cases,  private  landowners.  In  these 
cases, watershed management planning can be challenging. Even in Metro Vancouver 
and  the  Capital  Regional  District,  where  most  upstream  areas  of  the  watershed  are 
under regional district ownership or control, there are jurisdictional issues involved in 
downstream areas of the respective watersheds. Watershed management planning thus 
requires coordination and collaboration to be successful.

To consider:

•	 Management at the watershed scale may require new or more detailed 

information than has previously been available. The Okanagan Water Supply 
and Demand Project is using various models and computer technology to 
estimate Okanagan water availability for the future, taking into account climate 
change and population growth. Project partners include the Okanagan Water 
Basin Board, BC Ministry of the Environment, BC Ministry of Agriculture, the BC 
Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development, Environment Canada, 
Agriculture Canada, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, the Okanagan Nation 
Alliance, UBC-Okanagan, SFU, the BC Agriculture Council, and the Water Supply 
Association of BC, www.obwb.ca/wsd/

•	 Watershed management may also require new collaborative forms of 

governance that include not only governments and government agencies, 
but also increased participation of communities and stakeholder groups. 
See, for example, the Cowichan Water Management Plan. www.livingrivers.
ca/dox/081106Cowichan%20Water%20Management%20Plan%20-%20
Wightman%20presentation%20.pdf

•	

Examples of different approaches to watershed management in BC with 
specific reference to the context of climate change adaptation have been 
compiled in a new resource. See Rethinking Our Water Ways: A Guide to Water 
and Watershed Planning for BC Communities in the Face of Climate Change and 
Other Challenges. www.fraserbasin.bc.ca/publications/documents/waterguide_
oct-2011.pdf

Management at the 
watershed scale may 
require new or more 
detailed information 
than has previously 
been available. The 
Okanagan Water Basin 
Board and the Ministry 
of the Environment are 
working to estimate 
Okanagan water 
availability for the 
future, taking into 
account climate change 
and population growth.

PHOTO COURTESy 
MOIZISSIMO/FLICKR

69

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
