dEvELOPMENT APPROvAL INFORMATION AREAs (dAIAs)

Local Government Act, ss. 920.01, 920.1

In an OCP local governments may designate areas or specify circumstances where applicants for 
zoning bylaw amendments, development permits, or temporary use permits must provide, at 
their expense, specific impact information, usually reports prepared by qualified professionals. 
The OCP must set out the justification for the DAIA, and a separate bylaw is needed to establish 
the process for requiring the information and the substance of the information that is required. 
Development Approval Information Areas are sometimes used by local governments to obtain 
information about the potential impact of proposed new developments on environmentally 
sensitive areas, or how risks related to natural hazards will be handled.

development Approval information Areas

Development approval information areas can be used to require professional impact as-
sessment at a site-specific level that can help inform local government decision-making 
about the conditions to place on development, before development takes place.23

They may be useful in cases where climate change is anticipated to increase the vulner-
ability of environmentally sensitive areas to development, or to affect natural hazards in a 
given area, or to affect the availability of critical resources, such as groundwater.

 To consider:

•	

•	

A local government may require that the professional carrying out any required 
impact assessment has relevant expertise in relation to climate change impacts.

The Development Approval Information Area requirements should not be used 
as a replacement for the broader process of community risk and vulnerability 
assessment with respect to climate change, but could potentially be used to help 
understand site specific impacts related to proposed development or activities. 

Examples:

•	

•	

The Village of Port Alice has used development approval information areas 
to obtain information about interface wildfire hazards. http://portalice.ca/
wp-content/uploads/569-DAIA-OCP_Bylaw.pdf See also the City of Chilliwack 
bylaw: www.chilliwack.com/main/attachments/files/363/BL%203815%20
Development%20Approval%20Information%20Bylaw.pdf

The North Pender Island Local Trust Area has designated areas and circumstances 
where development approval information is required, including information 
about sensitive ecosystems and hazardous conditions. www.islandstrust.bc.ca/
ltc/np/pdf/npdaibasebyl0134.pdf

23  Deborah Curran, Doug Geller, Barbara Everdene, Kellie Garcia and Nelson R. Jatel, (2009) 

Groundwater Bylaws Toolkit. Okanagan Basin Water Board. Kelowna. Section 4.8. www.obwb.ca/
fileadmin/docs/groundwater_bylaws_toolkit.pdf 

A local government 
may require that the 
professional carrying 
out any required impact 
assessment has relevant 
expertise in relation to 
climate change impacts.

PHOTO COURTESy 
WRIGHTWOOD CROSSING

39

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
