An oveRview of the AdAPtAtion PRocess

identifying climate change impacts and assessing risks and vulnerabilities

The first stage in local government adaptation is to assess how climate change will likely 
affect the community so that priorities for action can be identified. Climate change and 
its impacts vary from one location to another, and communities vary in their exposure 
and ability to cope. In order to develop a climate change adaptation strategy, a local gov-
ernment will need to learn about the potential regional impacts facing its community, 
identify ways in which the community is vulnerable, and quantify risk related to climate 
change.  Appendix A  identifies  resources  that  can  help  local  governments  carry  out  or 
participate in assessments of vulnerability and risk.

Good information about climate change is the foundation for this stage in the adaptation 
process.

Additional scientific information, in particular on the regional impacts of climate change, 
exists in various forms, mostly technical reports and analyses. The amount available in 
plain language, however, is currently limited, but growing. Appendix A includes a few 
key sources of such information, including the comprehensive high level summary of 
the scientific literature on climate change impacts in BC produced by Natural Resources 
Canada.10

WHERE TO FINd INFORMATION ABOuT REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTs

Plan2Adapt 
interactive 
planning tool 
website

The Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) at the University of Victoria produces regionally 
and locally relevant information about past and future climate and some of its impacts on 
hydrology and ecosystems. PCIC also aims to “bridge the gap” between climate science experts 
and decisionmakers, by supporting the two-way transfer of knowledge, and by making 

scientific information more accessible.

Some communities in BC have engaged PCIC to produce 
information specific to their communities, while others have 
relied on “off the shelf” information about regional climate change 
available from the Plan2Adapt website. The website provides 
access to climate data tables, user-friendly graphs and maps of 
future temperature, precipitation, snowfall, and other climate 
variables, and written summaries of this information. For example, 
Plan2Adapt indicates that mean annual temperature in the Peace 
River Regional District will be 1.4°C to 2.8°C warmer in the 2050s. 
Users can download contents for further analysis, reporting, 
and for use in presentations. See http://pacificclimate.org/
tools-and-data/plan2adapt.

10  D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren and J. Lacroix (2007), From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 

Climate 2007. www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/
assessments/132

18

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
