Adaptive management15

Adaptive management is a way to continuously adapt and improve a system or a policy framework, 
Managers actively plan to revise policies on a regular basis using updated information about per-
formance as well as about external circumstances that affect performance. It is sometimes referred 
to as “learning by doing.” Adaptive management was developed to accommodate the complexity 
and uncertainty associated with natural systems.  It may be a useful approach to help better meet 
management objectives over time in the context of a changing climate.

For adaptive management to work, practical and contextual information needs to flow to man-
agers that are designing policies so that guidance for operational-level decisions can be improved. 
For example, in terms of climate change, as more information about climate change impacts be-
comes available, this could be used to adjust and refine policies. 

Adaptive management is already being applied in the development of green infrastructure. While 
the expected performance of different rainfall capture methods aimed at protecting water quality 
and habitat can be modeled, all the real-life 
variables that affect performance can never 
be  fully  simulated,  or  predicted.  Through 
adaptive management, performance can be 
monitored  and  evaluated,  and  adjustments 
made  as  necessary.  The  experience  gained 
can  also  be  used  to  inform  the  design  of 
future systems.

Adaptive 
management is 
a more flexible 
approach 
than trying to 
predict all future 
conditions and 
design a perfect 
set of policies.

SOURCE: WWW.FOR.GOV.
BC.CA/HFP/AMHOME/
ADMIN/INDEX.HTM

AdAPTIvE MANAGEMENT IN THE PROPOsEd CITy OF vICTORIA OFFICIAL COMMuNITy PLAN (APRIL 2012)

“An adaptive management approach involves deliberately learning from implementation successes and 
failures to improve subsequent policies and actions over time. It is based on the notion that policies 
are developed with inherent uncertainties and that the wider social, cultural, economic and ecological 
environment inevitably changes over time. Change can originate from external factors such as climate 
change or global economic crisis, or from factors particular to Victoria, such as changes to the city’s 
socio-economic conditions, community values or a localized natural disaster. Changes of this kind may 
undermine the goals, broad objectives and policies of this plan and impede progress towards their 
achievement. Anticipating and responding to potential changes or risks is fundamental to the adaptive 
management framework and policies that follow. A system of regular plan review, monitoring and 
adjustment enables the City to incorporate new information, prepare for uncertainty and adapt to change.” 
www.shapeyourfuturevictoria.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/OCP_Section22.pdf 

15  This section is based primarily on materials developed by West Coast Environmental Law. See “Address risk.” 
www.wcel.org/address-risk, and The Green Infrastructure Guide, s.6.4. www.wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie See also ICLEI Oceania, 
Local Government Climate Change Adaptation Toolkit, www.iclei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/ANZ/
CCP/CCP-AU/Projects/AI/AdaptationToolkit/Toolkit_CCPAdaptation_Final.pdf, and www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfp/
amhome/Admin/index.htm

24

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
