Example: City of Prince George

Prince George is a northern BC community that faces significant impacts associated with a changing 
climate.  It  is  located  at  the  confluence  of  the  Nechako  and  Fraser,  with  significant  development 
within the floodplain. It is also surrounded by forests that have been severely affected by mountain 
pine beetle. The Nechako River has historically been subject to ice jams that can cause flooding in 
Prince George. In the winter of 2007/2008 there was a 35 km long ice jam that caused extensive 
flooding.4 Prince George is also in a region affected by the mountain pine beetle epidemic, and both 
surrounding forested lands and trees within municipal boundaries have been damaged.

Faced with questions and potential challenges related to climate change, Prince George has been 
working with the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium and researchers from the University of North-
ern BC5 to assess the climate change impacts faced by the City, and to develop adaptation priorities.

Over the next 50 years, annual temperatures in Prince George are projected to increase by 1.6°C to 
2.5°C, and precipitation is projected to increase by 3% to 10%. The changes are expected to be more 
dramatic in winter, and more precipitation is expected to fall as rain. The result is likely to be more 
flooding and more extreme events such as wildfires, windstorms and extreme precipitation events.6 
Based on these projections Prince George has been taking action to explore and address flooding 
and wildfire risks.

In 2009 Prince George hired technical consultants to prepare a flood risk evaluation that included cli-
mate change projections. While a number of flood control options were identified for Prince George, 
including enlarging existing side channels, building dikes and flood-proofing buildings, changing 
land use in flood prone areas was found to be a potentially cost-effective solution in certain cir-
cumstances. Public consultation about flood control options demonstrated that there was public 
support for proactive measures, largely because of the extensive damage that Prince George had 
experienced in past flood events. In 2011 Prince George adopted a new Flood Plain Regulation Bylaw 

Downstream view of the Nechako River during winter 2007/08 showing the ice-related flooding of the industrial 
area (dashed line) on the floodplain; damage to infrastructure and property. Source: CEBC 2011 Award for 
Engineering Excellence: Managing Price George’s Rising Flood Waters, NHC Consultants and City of Prince George.

4  Environment Canada. Canada’s Top Weather Stories for 2008, Regional Weather Highlights 2008, British Columbia. 

www.ec.gc.ca/meteo-weather/default.asp?lang=En&n=ACC549AF-1 

5  With funding from Natural Resources Canada and assistance from the Fraser Basin Council.
6  See City of Prince George. Prince George Community Climate Change Adaptation http://princegeorge.ca/

environment/climatechange/adaptation/pages/default.aspx, and also http://princegeorge.ca/environment/
climatechange/adaptation/Documents/2012_PGRAC_CaseStudy_Volume3_Forests.pdf 

86

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
