MAKING THE MOsT OF THE CHECKLIsT:  
uNdERsTANdING  CLIMATE CHANGE ANd AdAPTATION

Making the most effective use of this checklist will require a basic understanding of cli-
mate change and adaptation, local impacts, and how to assess risks and vulnerabilities. 
In particular, the following background would be considered helpful:

a.  Climate change adaptation — an understanding of the difference between climate 
change mitigation and adaptation is necessary. See, for example, the diagram and 
discussion on pages 10-12 of this guide.

b.  Climate change projections (how will the global climate change?) — basic knowledge 

might be acquired, for example, through a review of resources such as:

•	

•	

The	Columbia	Basin	Trust	Climate	Basics	(video)	www.youtube.com/
watch?v=ECJtF7CfycA

PICS	Climate	101	series	(videos)	http://pics.uvic.ca/education/
climate-insights-101

c.  Climate change projections at the regional level (how will the climate change in BC 
communities?) — climate  change  information  for  BC  regions  is  available  from  the 
Plan2Adapt tool http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt including:
•	
•	
•	 management	considerations	for	each	impact.

climate	projections;
related	impacts;	and

d.  Risks and vulnerability — Adaptation is place-based. Each community will need 

to review its particular situation, identify what the local government controls, and 
how planning and operations might be affected by climate change. The questions 
below are aimed at helping local governments begin to work through this process, 
and explore some of the options for adapting. It is important to plan for multiple 
events, e.g. unusually high temperatures and power outages. See Appendix A: 
Further resources for help with assessing risks and vulnerability.

Note:  Understanding that the past will no longer be a good predictor of the future is 
a  key  part  of  adapting  to  climate  change.  Local  government  staff  and  elected  repre-
sentatives will need to be aware of the “new normal”: the climate of the future will be 
different than the climate of the past. For example, extreme weather events such as heat 
waves, drought and storms may become more frequent and more severe. Flooding and 
wildfires may be more frequent or extensive, or both, than previously experienced. As a 
consequence, it is important to recognize that what worked in the past to address these 
types of challenges will not necessarily work for the future.

91

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
