To consider:

•	

•	

•	

•	

Input from climate science experts is essential: developing policies and objectives related to 
climate change impacts requires broader consultation than typically undertaken for OCPs. 
Climate scientists and local experts can provide information about regional climate change 
impacts. The Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium has developed regional climate scenarios 
and tools that local governments can use to help understand climate impacts in their regions. 
Historical conditions and projected scenarios are available by regional district. Some potential 
impacts are also listed. http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt

Public consultation about climate change impacts and adaptation strategies requires 
a thoughtful approach. Strong community buy-in helps to ensure support for and 
implementation of adaptation measures. At the outset some community members might not 
be well informed about the science of climate change, even if they have valuable personal 
observations about changing weather patterns. It might be helpful to start with familiar local 
weather-related events (e.g. wildfire, extreme weather events, flooding, drought) and how 
these may be expected to become more frequent or more severe as a result of climate change, 
using climate science from Plan2Adapt and other scenarios.

•	

To develop its climate change adaptation strategy and updated OCP, the District of 
Elkford, assisted with resources and funding from the Columbia Basin Trust, pursued 
a varied community engagement strategy that included a community advisory 
committee, mall displays, paper and web-based surveys and kitchen table meetings, as 
well as extensive involvement of climate scientists and local experts. www.elkford.ca/
include/get.php?nodeid=93

If a local government is not ready to fully implement a climate change adaptation strategy, 
it can use the OCP to identify specific actions or planning processes that it commits to 
undertake. For example, the District of Saanich’s OCP (2008) included the objective “Prepare 
and implement Saanich’s “Climate Change Adaptation Plan” (and a plan has now been drafted). 
www.saanich.ca/living/community/ocp/ocp_adopted_jul808_amended_may1710.pdf

A local government might not be prepared to engage in a revision or update of its OCP. In 
that case other tools may be more appropriate to use to begin integrating climate change 
adaptation measures into local government policy and practice; it isn’t essential to begin with 
the OCP. It is important to start with climate science, assess the risks and vulnerabilities and 
determine how best to proceed.

Climate scientists 
and local experts 
can provide 
information about 
regional climate 
change   impacts.

PHOTO COURTESy 
PROVINCE OF BC

33

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
