Animal control bylaws

With risks to food security being identified as a climate change impact in a number of BC 
communities, there is growing interest in small-scale urban agriculture, such as poultry and 
beekeeping.  Depending  on  community  support  and  interest,  this  may  be  an  option  for 
local governments to explore.

Examples:

•	

A number of BC local governments have animal control bylaws that allow citizens 
to keep “backyard chickens,” bees and other livestock in limited numbers, subject 
to conditions regarding lot size, zoning, registration, enclosures, etc. See, for 
example, District of Saanich www.saanich.ca/living/pdf/animals8556.pdf and 
the amendments to the City of Vancouver animal control bylaw and zoning and 
development bylaw. http://vancouver.ca/commsvcs/LICANDINSP/animalcontrol/
chicken/index.htm

To consider:

•	

•	

Backyard chickens and other types 
of urban livestock activities can be 
controversial, and local governments 
that are considering the regulation of 
these activities in their communities 
would be well advised to carry out 
adequate community consultation. 
For a description of the consultation 
process from the District of Saanich, 
see www.saanich.ca/living/community/
chickensurvey.html

Support for community members 
engaging in urban livestock activities will 
likely be required, in terms of education, 
inspection and disposal options.

ANIMAL CONTROL

Community Charter, s.8(3)(k); Local Government Act, ss. 702.1, 703

Local governments have the power to enact bylaws to regulate, prohibit and impose 
requirements in relation to animals. “Wildlife” is subject to concurrent jurisdiction 
with the provincial government, but animals not defined as wildlife in the Wildlife Act 
are under local government jurisdiction.

A number of BC local 
governments have 
animal control bylaws 
that allow citizens 
to keep “backyard 
chickens,” bees and 
other livestock in 
limited numbers.

VANCOUVER CHICKENS 
PHOTO COURTESy BRENT 
GRANBy/FLICKR

53

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
