dEvELOPMENT COsT CHARGEs

Local Government Act, ss.932 – 937

Local governments in BC have the power to enact bylaws to set development cost 
charges (DCCs). DCCs are one-time charges imposed at the time of subdivision 
approval or the issuance of a building permit to help cover the capital costs of 
infrastructure associated with new subdivisions and buildings, including water, 
sewer, drainage, roads and parkland. Development cost charge (DCC) rates can be 
set for different geographic areas in a community and can vary by land use and 
density. DCCs are subject to the approval of the Inspector of Municipalities. The 
Ministry publishes “best practice” guidance for local governments considering DCCs. 
www.cscd.gov.bc.ca/lgd/finance/development_cost_charges.htm

development cost charges

Where DCCs are in place, local governments have the power to lower DCCs or create exemp-
tions for certain types of development, including subdivisions of small lots designed to have 
low greenhouse gas emissions and developments designed to result in a low environmental 
impact. Both of these types of developments may be considered as possible climate change 
adaptation measures. For example, an adaptation strategy may involve using subdivisions of 
small lots to create greater density in certain areas of the community and avoid the need to 
have development in areas vulnerable to natural hazards. As well, creating incentives for low 
impact developments can have multiple benefits in terms of climate change, by decreasing 
reliance on energy sources that may become more costly, using less water, managing storm-
water more efficiently and others.

Examples:

•	

•	

•	

The City of Penticton reduced DCCs for low impact developments by 50%.  
www.penticton.ca/assets/City~Hall/Bylaws/Land~Use/Development%20Cost%20
Charge%20Reduction%20(Bylaw%202010-11).pdf

The City of Surrey has used development cost charges to help 
finance sustainable drainage infrastructure. See pp. 34-35 in The 
Green Infrastructure Guide. www.wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie

The District of Elkford has proposed using DCCs to help fund the improved 
development of parks, trails and greenspace in riparian areas along with design 
features that will help retain water during flooding, as a means to help mitigate 
flooding in other areas. www.elkford.ca/include/get.php?nodeid=93

To consider:

•	

Reducing DCCs will mean a loss of revenue for local governments.

Creating incentives 
for low impact 
developments 
can have multiple 
benefits in terms of 
climate change.

PHOTO COURTESy SVR DESIGN

43

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
