how vulnerabilities could be addressed. The Insurance Bureau of Canada is currently 
developing an infrastructure risk assessment calculator aimed at helping local govern-
ments identify areas of greatest weakness and target improvements accordingly.53

If local governments fail to take action to reduce climate change-related risks, there 
could  be  indirect  consequences  if  insurance  coverage  cannot  be  maintained.  It  has 
been noted that areas subject to “non-renewal” of policies by insurers could experience 
a decrease in assessed value, regardless of whether they experience any actual physical 
damage.54

INsuRERs REACT TO CLIMATE CHANGE

Insurance premiums are being affected by climate change. “In the past 
23 years [in Toronto], there has been seven events that are only supposed 
to happen every 50 years and two events that are supposed to happen 
every 100 years. It’s essentially rain intensity,” says Michael Tremblay of the 
Insurance Bureau of Canada, pointing to one flash flood in Toronto in 2005 
that caused $500 million in damage. “The why we don’t know. The climate 
has changed. What fed it? I don’t know. What we do here is risk management 
and the risk is higher.” http://business.financialpost.com/2011/11/17/
climate-change-blamed-for-spike-in-home-insurance-premiums/

Faced with higher levels 
of risk, insurers have two 
options: restrict coverage, 
or increase premiums. 

PHOTO COURTESy IAN BC NORTH/FLICKR

finAl thoughts

Local  governments  already  plan  for  medium-  and  long  term  change,  i.e.  population 
growth, shifting demographics, new economic drivers and changing social needs. More 
recently local governments in BC have been mandated to plan to reduce their green-
house  gas  emissions,  by  setting  greenhouse  gas  reduction  targets.  However,  while 
efforts to slow climate change are critical, it is also necessary to plan for the climate 
change that we already face. 

The basis for good planning about adapting to climate change is good information, 
obtained  through  Plan2Adapt  and  other  sources,  and  updated  regularly.  Each  com-
munity needs to assess and monitor its vulnerabilities in light of the climate information 
it obtains. Climate change means that the past is no longer a good predictor of the fu-
ture. Some impacts, such as sea level rise or increased wildfire risk, may require specific 
responses. Adaptation strategies that enhance overall resilience are also being explored 
in a number of communities, as outlined in this guide. Low impact development and 
green infrastructure, emphasizing efficiencies in operations and the use of resources, 
and finding ways to cooperate and collaborate with neighbouring communities are all 
strategies that may increase community resilience in a changing climate.  

53  20 Canadian municipalities will be involved in collecting data to support the development of 

the tool. www.ibc.ca/en/Natural_Disasters/Municipal_Risk_Assessment_Tool.asp 

54  Nicholas Heap (2007) Hot Properties, How Global Warming Could Transform B.C.’s Real 

Estate Sector. David Suzuki Foundation. Vancouver. www.davidsuzuki.org/publications/
downloads/2007/DSF_HotProperties_final1.pdf 

79

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
