Asset mAnAgement

Climate change is likely to have significant impacts on local government infrastructure 
in BC, the largest asset managed by most local governments. At the same time, most 
communities currently have infrastructure assets that are nearing the end of their service 
life,  but  face  challenges  in  renewal  or  replacement  of  those  assets.  It  is  an  opportun-
ity to explore alternative options for renewing infrastructure and at the same time plan 
for climate resilience. One promising approach is to coordinate land use planning with 
longer term financial and infrastructure planning in order to better understand the life 
cycle costs of infrastructure and look at ways to reduce or recover some of the costs.32

Currently, in most communities the initial capital cost of municipal infrastructure related 
to development or re-development is covered by developers and property owners, while 
local governments become responsible for the long term cost associated with operation, 
maintenance and replacement of infrastructure assets. These long term costs are typ-
ically as much as four times the initial capital costs for conventional infrastructure. Green 
infrastructure  options,  which  can  have  important  climate  change  adaptation  benefits 
(see  section  on  Infrastructure),  may  reduce  life  cycle  costs  while  increasing  resilience 
to climate change, and this can be explored in the context of long term planning for 
asset management. See Kim A. Stephens, Integrated Rainwater Management: Move to a 
Levels-of-Service  Approach  to  Sustainable  Service  Delivery.  www.civicinfo.bc.ca/Library/
Asset_Management/Newsletters/AMBC_Newsletter_Issue_No._2--LGAMWG--Jan_2011.
pdf

To consider:

•	

In New Zealand, it is suggested that any significant investment in infrastructure 
should be preceded by a risk assessment that builds in climate change 
implications and a cost–benefit analysis. Climate Change Effects and Impacts 

AssET MANAGEMENT

Asset Management BC defines asset management as:

An integrated approach involving planning, finance, engineering and 
operations to effectively manage existing and new infrastructure to maximize 
benefits, reduce risks and provide satisfactory levels of service to community 
users in a socially, environmentally and economically sustainable manner. 
(Source: assetmanagementbc.ca)

BC  local  governments  are  also  required  to  follow  Public  Sector  Accounting 
Board  Standard  PSAB  3150  –  Tangible  Capital  Assets.  (Community  Charter, 
s.167(2))

32  Asset Management BC, “The State of Asset Management in BC” www.civicinfo.bc.ca/Library/

Asset_Management/Tools_and_Resources/The_State_of_Asset_Management_in_BC--LGAMWG--
September_2010.pdf

For discussion about 
the advantages to 
local governments of 
taking a longer term 
approach to asset 
management in light 
of challenges such 
as climate change, 
see Kim Fowler, Local 
Government Land Use 
and Asset Management 
Planning in BC: Proposed 
Sustainable Service 
Improvements.  
www.waterbucket.
ca/rm/sites/wbcrm/
documents/
media/165.pdf

PHOTO: SEWAGE PIPES TO 
HANDLE CLIMATE CHANGES 
AND EXTREME RAIN, 
COURTESy TOMMELISE84/
DENMARK/FLICKR

62

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
