Run-off control, landscaping, and soil removal and deposit

There are a number of ways that these regulatory powers can be used to help address climate 
change impacts:

•	 Managing increases in precipitation — as climate change is expected to increase 

precipitation and extreme storm events in some regions, putting in place requirements 
to increase onsite infiltration and retention by improving the depth and quality of 
topsoil, for example, and lessening the burden on the conventional drainage system can 
help mitigate the need to make upgrades to pipes and other infrastructure.

•	 Managing drought and decreased water supply — well-rooted, climate tolerant 

landscaping requires less irrigation water, stays green longer during a drought, and 
contributes to sustainability of water supply.

•	

•	

•	

•	

Reducing urban heat island effects — shade and evapo-transpiration from green roofs 
and landscaped areas have the potential to cool urban areas.

Protecting streams and waterways from increased risk of contamination — increasing 
onsite filtration can reduce the contaminants that find their way into streams and 
waterways without infiltration. Increased precipitation could lead to more surface 
contamination from impermeable surfaces being flushed into streams, while droughts 
could mean lower water levels and greater sensitivity to contaminants.

Increasing connectivity — landscaping can increase availability and connectivity of 
habitat for local species.

Enhancing local food security by providing opportunities for urban gardens — green 
roofs and other green spaces have the potential to provide space to grow food.

RuN-OFF CONTROL, LANdsCAPING, ANd sOIL REMOvAL ANd dEPOsIT

Local Government Act, ss. 907, 909; Community Charter, s.195; Local Government Act, s.723

Local governments have a number of specific bylaw powers relating to run-off, 
landscaping, and soil within their jurisdictions (in addition to the more broadly framed 
powers discussed above with respect to development permits, and subdivision and 
servicing requirements):

•	 They can regulate how new paved and roofed areas manage and dispose of surface 

water run-off and stormwater, and can set the maximum area of land that can be 
covered by impermeable material.

•	 They also have the power to set standards for, or regulate the provision of 

landscaping in relation to zones and within zones for the purpose of masking or 
separating uses, protecting, restoring or enhancing the natural environment, or to 
prevent hazardous conditions.

•	 Local governments have the power to regulate the deposit and removal of soil, 

subject to approval by the province.

Landscaping and 
run-off bylaws 
can apply to all 
properties, while DPs 
only apply to new 
development and 
re-development.

50

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
