some notes on permitting and enforcement

Local governments have permitting and enforcement powers available to supplement land use and 
other  regulatory  powers  that  may  offer  opportunities  to  support  the  implementation  of  climate 
change adaptation measures.

For example:

•	

As discussed above, trees in urban areas can offer valuable services related to climate 
change adaptation: cooling, reducing soil erosion, and absorbing rainwater, for example. 
Municipalities can establish a system of permitting for tree-cutting activities.

•	 Development permits over a certain value might be used to trigger tree-planting or 
other required green infrastructure measures on existing properties. This approach 
is being explored in the District of North Vancouver.

•	

•	

•	

Soil removal permitting can be used to help control the loss of 
soil where soil stability is a concern.

Climate change impacts that lead to reductions in water 
supply may create greater concern about industrial 
effluent or other waste discharges, or about the rate of 
local consumption of water. Local governments may wish 
to increase enforcement activities related to regulation of 
discharges and consumption.

In some cases local governments can require that covenants 
under s.219 of the Land Title Act be registered before permits 
for new developments are issued.

soil removal 
permitting can be 
used to help control 
the loss of soil 
where soil stability 
is a concern.

•	

•	

The City of Kamloops Community Wildfire Protection Plan describes the city’s 
Wildland-Urban-Interface covenant, which stipulates that landowners must agree 
to wildfire mitigation measures before a building or subdivision permit will be 
issued, and also notes proposed updates to the covenant wording.  
www.city.kamloops.bc.ca/firerescue/pdfs/cwpp.pdf

The City of Surrey uses a suite of restrictive covenants and easements to promote 
water quality and sediment control, storm drainage detention and a combined 
swale and pipe system in new developments. See, for example: www.surrey.ca/
files/Interim_Storm_Drainage_Detention.pdf

54

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 
