References 

                                                           
i The Expert Panel of Climate Change Adaptation (2009), Adapting to Climate Change in Ontario:  
Towards the Design and Implementation of a Strategy and Action Plan 
ii Health Canada (2008), Human Health in a Changing Climate:  A Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities 
and Adaptive Capacity. 
iii Warren, F.J., Kulkarni, T. And Lemmen, D.S., (2010): Canada in a Changing Climate; Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, ON. 
iv Public Safety Canada (2012), Canadian Disasters Database, Retrieved online at 
http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/prg/em/cdd/index-eng.aspx. 
v Climate Ready Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan, 2011 - 2014 
vi Canada. National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy. 
(2011). Paying the Price: The Economic Impacts of Climate Change for Canada 
vii Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network (2011). Localizer Report.  Retrieved online at 
http://www.cccsn.ec.gc.ca/?page=main&lang=en 
viii Casati, B. and Yagouti, A. (In Press). Analysis of Extreme Temperature in 9 Canadian 
Communities Using the Canadian Regional Climate Model Projections for Public Health 
Planning. Int. J. Biometeorol 
ix Berry, P, et al. (2011) “Assessment of Vulnerability to the Health Impacts of Extreme Heat in the City of 
Windsor”.  
x Bruce, J.P., Egener, M., and Noble D. (2006): Adapting to Climate Change: a risk based guide for Ontario 
municipalities; report submitted to Natural Resources Canada, Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
Program. 
xi Shuter, Brian, Changing Climate and Its Impact on the Great Lakes, Ontario Ministry of Natural 
Resources, Dept. Of Zoology, University of Toronto, printed in the International Joint Commission report 
“Expert Consultation on Emerging Issues of the Great Lakes in the 21st Century”, November 2006. 
xii Chiotti, Q. And Lavendar B. (2008): Ontario; in From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 
Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa,ON. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 


