Climate Change Adaptation Plan  2012 

 
What is Adaptation? 

Adaptation to climate change includes any activity that reduces the negative impact of climate change 
while taking advantage of new opportunities that may be presented. This type of action differs from 
mitigation as adaptation aims to minimize the actual or expected effects of climate change while 
mitigation is action to reduce the sources of anthropogenic greenhouse gases.  

Why is Adaptation Required? 

The average temperature of the planet has increased by 0.74 °C since 1900.  A similar trend is seen right 
here in the City of Windsor. 

“And  now  our  world  is  different.  The  climate  has  been  permanently  altered  and  is  on  an 
escalating vector of change, not because of what we are going to put into the atmosphere in 
the  future  but  as  a  consequence  of  what  we  have  already  done”.  -  Environmental 
Commissioner of Ontario, 2009/2010 Annual Report. 
 

 
The  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC)  has  concluded  that  the  evidence  for  climate 
change  is  “incontrovertible”  and  that  a  large  part  of  the  ongoing  change  is  due  to  human  activities, 
notably the release of greenhouse gases (GHGs) to the atmosphere.  The Earth’s atmosphere has 38% 
more carbon dioxide (CO2) than it had before the beginning of the industrial erai.   

Regardless of the cause, changes in weather patterns already impose risks to life, property, 
and the natural world in Ontario that cannot be ignored. Reducing those immediate risks is 
the  only  prudent  course  of  action  for  all  levels  of  government,  as  well  as  communities, 
corporations, businesses, and individual citizens.  - Climate Ready Ontario 

 
GHGs released decades ago are a main contributor to the change in our climate today.  That means that 
even if globally, greenhouse gases were eliminated, changes will continue due to what was released in 
the past. 

Public  Safety  Canada  has  been  documenting  “significant  natural  disasters”  for  over  a  century  in  the 
Canadian  Disasters  Database.  A  “significant  disaster”  is  a  disaster  that  meets  one  or  more  of  the 
following criteria: 

  10 or more people killed 
  100 or more people affected/injured/infected/evacuated or homeless 
  An appeal for national/international assistance 
  Historical significance 
 

Significant  damage/interruption  of  normal  processes  such  that  the  community  affected 
cannot recover on its owniv 

Figure 1 below clearly shows the increase in “significant natural disasters” occurring across Canada from 
1900 to 2011. 

 

 

6 


