Climate Change Adaptation Plan  2012 

 
Context 

Municipalities have an important role to play in both mitigating and adapting to changes in their local 
environment. The City of Windsor is already experiencing the effects of climate change.  We’ve seen 
more intense summer storms than in previous years which have contributed to increased basement 
flooding.  The summer of 2010 was reported as the second hottest on record, only 0.3⁰C degrees cooler 
than the summer of 2005, the hottest on record. Warming of the Great Lakes has contributed to major 
ecosystem impacts such as extensive algae growth, the invasion of non-native species, pathogen and 
water borne diseases and falling lake levelsi. The West Nile virus and the increase in Lyme disease in 
Ontario are other consequences of climate changeii.   

The climate will continue to change.  Although reducing greenhouse gas emissions is vital to limiting the 
rate and amount of change, it cannot prevent climate change from occurring over at least the next 
several decadesiii.   As a result, governments and communities must now consider how to adapt to the 
unavoidable effects of climate change.  Therefore, in addition to the City of Windsor’s initiatives to 
mitigate climate change, it is becoming more evident that the City of Windsor needs to increase the 
adaptive capacity of the community.   

ICLEI Initiative 

ICLEI – Local Governments for Sustainability (Management) Inc., referred to as ICLEI Canada is an 
international association of local governments as well as national and regional local government 
organizations that have made a commitment to sustainable development.  On November 8th, 2010, 
Windsor City Council approved participation in ICLEI’s Climate Change Adaptation Initiative (CR 
408/2010). This program provided a straightforward methodology to adaptation planning which 
resulted in the creation of this Plan. The initiative will continue to build capacity internally for ongoing 
implementation and monitoring of our Plan.  

Vision 

The overall aim of Windsor’s adaptation strategy is to create a more resilient city to the effects of a 
changing climate. A well-adapted city is able to absorb the effects of climate change, such as extreme 
summer heat or intense rain events, through the advancement of sustainable policies, infrastructure 
investment, and public education. This requires forward thinking and initiative. Being prepared to 
handle the climate challenges facing us will be beneficial to our health, our environment and our 
economy.    

 

 

 

5 


