Climate Change Adaptation Plan  2012 

 
Towards the Development of a Climate Change Plan 

City Council Direction 

On January 23rd 2012, City Council passed a motion approving the development of a corporate wide 
Climate Change Adaptation Plan with a focus on impacts with a medium high – extreme risk rating as 
recommended by the Environment and Transportation Standing Committee (M29-2012). 

Risk is defined as the combination of an event’s likelihood and the severity of its consequences – risk 
therefore equals the probability of projected impact multiplied by the consequence severity of that 
event.  This initiative interpreted the risks levels, broadly speaking, as follows: 

  Extreme risks demand urgent attention at the most senior level and cannot be simply accepted 

as a part of routine operations without executive sanction. 

  High risks are the most severe that can be accepted as part of routine operations without 

executive sanction but they will be the responsibility of the most senior operational 
management and reported upon at the executive level. 

  Medium risks can be expected to form part of routine operations but they will be explicitly 
assigned to relevant managers for actions, maintained under review and reported upon at 
senior management levels. 
Low risks will be maintained under review but it is expected that existing controls will be 
sufficient and no further actions will be required to treat them unless they become more 
severe. 

 

Internal Consultation 

Through consultation with all City departments and some City agencies, a list of over 250 potential 
impacts was realized.  Using the ICLEI climate change adaptation initiative framework, vulnerability and 
risk assessments were completed to give each impact a designated risk level.  

City of Windsor Potential Climate Change Impacts 

Medium High – Extreme Risk Impacts 
The following five potential climate change impacts were rated as posing at least a high risk to our 
municipality. Therefore, the focus of this adaptation plan is on the following impacts: 

1.  Development policies created in the absence of Climate Change considerations may create 

additional vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change. 
Increase in operating/maintenance demands to deal with climate extremes. 
Increased chance of flooding to basements, roads and other infrastructure. 
Increase in demand to all areas of Operations when responding to an increase in severe storms 
(during and after). 
Increase in public health risks due to extreme heat. 

2. 
3. 
4. 

5. 

 

16 


