Climate Change Adaptation Plan  2012 

 
Proposed short-term adaptation actions: 

Reducing Risks Associated with Increased 
Precipitation 
 Mandatory Downspout Disconnection 
 Mandatory Backwater valve installation 
 Enhance sewer maintenance and camera 
inspections 
 Consideration of additional Off-Line Storage  
 Increase the Use of Flow Restrictors on Catch 
basins 
 Update the Rainfall Intensity Duration Frequency 
(IDF) Curves  
 Seal Manhole Covers 
 Undertake Public Education on Sewer Use, Waste 
Water Treatment 
 Targeted Education towards homeowners with 
suspected cross-connections 
 Use Social Media and other communication tools 
to warn public of the risk of basement flooding 
 Enhanced Maintenance & Inspection of road and 
sidewalks during snow or extreme weather events 

 

Reducing Risks Associated with Increased 
Precipitation and Temperatures 
  Development of a Green Roof Policy 
 Installation of Rain Gardens as a pilot project 
 Develop pilot projects for the use of Porous 
Pavement  
 Improvement and Enhancement of Green Space 
 Increase Tree Planting 

Reducing Risks Associated with Increased 
Temperature 
 Increase Capital for Shade Structures 
 Increased Heat Education at Community 
Centres/Pools  
 Complete an Urban Heat Island Study 

 General 
 Develop Clear Policies for Weather Response 
 Creation of an Extreme Weather Fund Reserve 

While these short-term actions may help reduce Windsor’s current vulnerability, the City also needs to 
develop on-going strategies that will continue to address the changing climate over the long-term. The 
following strategies should be undertaken to ensure that the City of Windsor continues to be a leader on 
adaptation well into the future: 

Incorporate climate change adaptation into city policies and high level plans; 

1. 
2.  Create internal mechanisms to ‘ask the climate question’ for all new major infrastructure 

projects; 

3.  Monitor climate change, evaluate the effectiveness of adaptation strategies and adjust as 

needed (adaptive management); 

4.  Use best available science to analyze how the climate is changing locally and how this may 

impact the community; 

5.  Routinely review the City of Windsor’s vulnerability to climate change; 
6.  Continuously conduct risk assessments to identify priority impacts requiring adaptation actions,  
7.  Engage the public, business and other stakeholder groups. 

The actions taken today by the City of Windsor to proactively adapt to the changing climate will enhance 
community resilience to climate change while reducing the human and economic costs of climate-
related impacts. Adaptation actions can often lead to great cost savings as intense storm events and 
extreme heat can result in devastating expenses to repair infrastructure, basement flooding and 
minimize health care costs.  

 

3 


