Climate Change Adaptation Plan  2012 

 
Executive Summary 

Regardless of the cause, the average temperature in Windsor has increased by almost 1°C since 1940. 
Scientists predict that by 2050, the average annual temperature in Ontario will increase by 2.5°C to 
3.7°C from the1961-1990 baseline average. This change, along with predictions that the number of 
“hot” days (over 30 °C/86 °F) in Windsor could almost quadruple by 2071-2100, is cause for concern. 
Heat related illnesses place a strain on our health care services and energy used to cool our buildings is 
expensive.  In addition, this shift in the average weather for the region allows for the survival of invasive 
species and the expansion or introduction of insect vectors that carry disease. 

As air temperature increases, so does the capacity of the air to hold more water. This can lead to more 
intense rainfall events, which Windsor has already experienced directly including events in 2007 and 
2010 which caused severe flooding. In 2011, Windsor experienced the wettest year on record, 
measuring 1,568mm of rain compared to the average annual rainfall of 844mm. Increased temperature 
and intense rainfall events are two climate change impacts that have resulted in direct costs to Windsor 
residents through basement flooding and heat related illness expenses. 

Municipalities have a significant role to play in climate change adaptation as many climate change 
impacts will directly affect the services provided by the City of Windsor and our agencies. This plan was 
developed through consultation with all City departments and select City agencies.  Each department 
was asked to look at all of their potential impacts and determine which impacts would present the most 
significant challenges to operations.  Once these impacts were agreed upon, a vulnerability and risk 
assessment was completed to further narrow down the potential impacts that pose the greatest risk to 
the municipality as a whole.   

The focus of this adaptation plan is on the following five potential climate change impacts which were 
rated as posing substantial risk and therefore may result in the greatest impact on our municipal 
operations: 

1. 
2. 
3. 

4. 
5. 

Increase in operating/maintenance demands to deal with climate extremes. 
Increased chance of flooding to basements, roads and other infrastructure 
Increase in demand to all areas of Operations when responding to an increase in severe storms 
(during and after). 
Increase in public health risks due to extreme heat. 
Implementation of development policies which were created in the absence of Climate Change 
considerations, which may increase our vulnerability. 

The list below summarizes the proposed short-term adaptation actions suggested to increase Windsor’s 
resiliency to weather extremes. Many of these short-term actions build on existing programs in 
recognized areas of vulnerability.  Other adaptation options may be fairly new to the City of Windsor, 
however there is a growing level of expertise available amongst other municipalities. 

  

 

2 


