Climate Change Adaptation Plan  2012 

 
General 
Develop Clear Policies for 
Weather Response 

Creation of an Extreme Weather 
Fund Reserve 
Note: Each of these adaptation options are outlined in more detail in Appendix A  

 

 

Increase resiliency of 
departments to respond to 
major events 
Minimize the impact to annual 
operating budgets 

Continual Improvement of the Climate Change Plan 

While these short-term actions may help reduce Windsor’s vulnerability to current events and future 
climate change scenarios, the City also needs to develop on-going strategies that will continue to 
address the changing climate over the long-term.  As the science of climate change continues to advance 
and the knowledge outlining the most effective ways to reduce climate change impacts develops, the 
City must continuously look at enhancing the resiliency of the community using the best available 
knowledge.  The following strategies should be undertaken to ensure that the City of Windsor continues 
to be a leader on adaptation well into the future: 

Incorporate climate change adaptation into city policies and high level plans; 

1. 
2.  Create internal mechanisms to ‘ask the climate question’ for new major infrastructure projects; 
3.  Monitor climate change, evaluate the effectiveness of adaptation strategies and adjust as 

needed (adaptive management); 

4.  Use best available science to analyze how the climate is changing locally and how this may 

impact the community; 

5.  Routinely review the City of Windsor’s vulnerability to climate change; 
6.  Continuously conduct risk assessments to identify priority impacts requiring adaptation actions,  
7.  Engage the public, business and other stakeholder groups. 

Conclusion 

As stated in the City of Windsor’s Environmental Master Plan, “The City of Windsor is committed to 
being a leader through its daily actions and services to enhance the environment for present and future 
generations”.  This is shown through the commitment of City Council and City administration on the 
development of this Climate Change Adaptation Plan.  As one of the first municipalities in Ontario and 
Canada to undergo adaptation planning, Windsor has committed to building a more resilient and livable 
community. 

This adaptation plan is not the end of the climate change discussion.  As highlighted in this report, the 
City of Windsor must continue to review the science and risks associated with the potential impacts of 
climate change and modify the plan as required.  In addition, the creation of this adaptation plan does 
not negate the necessity of developing and implementing a climate change mitigation plan.  The 
mitigation of greenhouse gases is still required to minimize the extent of future climate change impacts.  

 

20 


