                                   on Clean Growth   and Climate Change  PAN‑CANADIAN FRAMEWORK    Canada's Plan to Address Climate   Change and Grow the Economy    PDF version   Cat. No.: En4-294/2016E-PDF  ISBN: 978-0-660-07023-0  Photos: © Thinkstock, 2016  Aussi disponible en français    PAN‑CANADIAN FRAMEWORK   on Clean Growth    and Climate Change Canada's Plan to Address Climate    Change and Grow the Economy      FOREWORD The Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change presented here is our collective  plan to grow our economy while reducing emissions and building resilience to adapt to a changing  climate. It will help us transition to a strong, diverse and competitive economy; foster job creation,  with new technologies and exports; and provide a healthy environment for our children  and grandchildren.  The Pan-Canadian Framework is both a commitment to the world that Canada will do its part on  climate change, and a plan to meet the needs of Canadians. We have built on the momentum of the  Paris Agreement by developing a concrete plan which, when implemented, will allow us to achieve  Canada's international commitments.  When First Ministers met last March in Vancouver, they agreed to take ambitious action in support  of meeting or exceeding Canada's 2030 target of a 30 percent reduction below 2005 levels of  greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. First Ministers issued the Vancouver Declaration on Clean Growth  and Climate Change and agreed that a collaborative approach between provincial, territorial, and federal  governments is important to reduce GHG emissions and to enable sustainable economic growth.  The Pan-Canadian Framework builds on the leadership shown and actions taken individually  and collectively by the provinces and territories, including through the Declaration of the Premiers  adopted at the Quebec Summit on Climate Change in 2015. To note, the province of Saskatchewan  has decided not to adopt the Pan-Canadian Framework at this time. The federal government has  committed to ensuring that the provinces and territories have the flexibility to design their own  policies and programs to meet emission-reductions targets, supported by federal investments in  infrastructure, specific emission-reduction opportunities and clean technologies. This flexibility  enables governments to move forward and to collaborate on shared priorities while respecting each  jurisdiction's needs and plans, including the need to ensure the continued competitiveness and  viability of businesses.  In the Paris Agreement, Parties agreed that they should, when taking action to address climate  change, recognize and respect the rights of Indigenous Peoples. As we implement this Framework,  we will move forward respecting the rights of Indigenous Peoples, with robust, meaningful  engagement drawing on their Traditional Knowledge. We will take into account the unique  circumstances and opportunities of Indigenous Peoples and northern, remote, and vulnerable  communities. We acknowledge and thank Indigenous Peoples across Canada for their climate  leadership long before the Paris Agreement and for being active drivers of positive change.  Pricing carbon pollution is central to this Framework. Carbon pricing will encourage innovation  because businesses and households will seek out new ways to increase efficiencies and to pollute  less. We will complement carbon pricing with actions to build the foundation of our low-carbon  and resilient economy.  As Canada transitions to a low-carbon future, energy will play an integral role in meeting our  collective commitment, given that energy production and use account for over 80 percent of  Canada's GHG emissions. This means using clean energy to power our homes, workplaces, vehicles,  and industries, and using energy more efficiently. It means convenient transportation systems that  run on cleaner fuels, that move more people by public transit and zero-emission vehicles, and that  have streamlined trade corridors. It means healthier and more comfortable homes that can generate     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change     as much power as they use. It means more resilient infrastructure and ecosystems that can better  withstand climatic changes. It means land use and conservation measures that sequester carbon and  foster adaptation to climate change. It means new jobs for Canadians across the country and  opportunities for growth. It means leveraging technology and innovation to seize export and trade  opportunities for Canada, which will allow us to become a leader in the global clean growth economy  and will also help bring down the cost of low-emission technologies. It means healthier communities  with cleaner air and healthy and diverse ecosystems across the country.  We will maintain a sustained focus on implementation of the Pan-Canadian Framework, consistent  with the commitment under the Paris Agreement, to increase the level of ambition over time.  The Pan-Canadian Framework is a historic step in the transition to a clean growth and resilient  economy. It is informed by what we have heard from Canadians. We will continue to grow our  economy and create good jobs as we take ambitious action on climate change. We will work to  ensure that the Pan-Canadian Framework opens new opportunities for Canadian businesses to not  only maintain but also enhance their competitiveness. We will continue to engage Canadians to  strengthen and deepen our action on clean growth and climate change. And we are committed to  transparently assessing and reporting to Canadians on our progress.  Together, we have developed a Pan‑Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change.   This is Canada's plan to address climate change and grow the clean economy.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  TABLE OF CONTENTS 1 INTRODUCTION .......................................................................................................................................1  1.1 How we developed the Framework .......................................................................................2 1.2 Pillars of the Framework .....................................................................................................2 1.3 Elements of collaboration ...................................................................................................3 1.4 Emissions trajectory to 2030 ..............................................................................................5  2 PRICING CARBON POLLUTION ...................................................................................................................6  3 COMPLEMENTARY ACTIONS TO REDUCE EMISSIONS ..................................................................................8 3.1 Electricity .......................................................................................................................10 3.2 Built environment ............................................................................................................14 3.3 Transportation .................................................................................................................17 3.4 Industry  .........................................................................................................................19 3.5 Forestry, agriculture, and waste .........................................................................................21 3.6 Government leadership .....................................................................................................23 3.7 International leadership ....................................................................................................25  4 ADAPTATION AND CLIMATE RESILIENCE ..................................................................................................26 4.1 Translating scientific information and Traditional Knowledge into action  ...............................28 4.2 Building climate resilience through infrastructure ...............................................................30 4.3 Protecting and improving human health and well-being .......................................................31 4.4 Supporting particularly vulnerable regions  .........................................................................32 4.5 Reducing climate-related hazards and disaster risks ............................................................34  5 CLEAN TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION, AND JOBS  ........................................................................................36 5.1 Building early-stage innovation ..........................................................................................37 5.2 Accelerating commercialization and growth ........................................................................39 5.3 Fostering adoption ...........................................................................................................41 5.4 Strengthening collaboration and metrics for success ............................................................43  6 PATHWAY TO MEETING CANADA'S 2030 TARGET .....................................................................................44  7 REPORTING AND OVERSIGHT  .................................................................................................................45  8 LOOKING AHEAD ....................................................................................................................................46  ANNEX I: FEDERAL INVESTMENTS AND MEASURES TO SUPPORT THE TRANSITION  TO A LOW‑CARBON ECONOMY ........................................................................................................................47  ANNEX II: PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL KEY ACTIONS AND COLLABORATION OPPORTUNITIES  WITH THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA ..............................................................................................................51      Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  1  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  1  INTRODUCTION In Canada and abroad, the impacts of climate  change are becoming evident. Impacts such as  coastal erosion; thawing permafrost; increases in  heat waves, droughts and flooding; and risks to  critical infrastructure and food security are already  being felt in Canada. The science is clear that  human activities are driving unprecedented changes  in the Earth's climate, which pose significant risks  to human health, security, and economic growth.  Taking strong action to address climate change  is critical and urgent. The cost of inaction is greater  than the cost of action: climate change could cost  Canada $21-$43 billion per year by 2050,  according to 2011 estimates from the National  Round Table on the Environment and the Economy.  Businesses and markets are increasingly considering  climate risks. In recent years, severe weather events  have cost Canadians billions of dollars, including in  insured losses. Indigenous Peoples, northern and  coastal regions and communities in Canada are  particularly vulnerable and disproportionately  affected. Geographic location, socio-economic  challenges, and for Indigenous Peoples, the reliance  on wild food sources, often converge with climate  change to put pressure on these communities. Much  has been done to begin addressing these  challenges, including by Indigenous Peoples.  Acting on climate change will reduce risks and  create new economic opportunities and good jobs  for Canadians. There is already a global market for  low-carbon goods and services worth over $5.8  trillion, which is projected to keep growing at a rate  of 3 percent per year. Clean growth opportunities  will benefit all sectors and regions. Canada will  remain globally competitive through innovation,  including through the development and promotion  of innovative technologies with the potential to  address climate change globally. This includes clean  technology to enable the sustainable development of  Canada's energy and resource sectors, including  getting these resources to market, as Canada  transitions to a low-carbon economy. Innovation can  help further reduce emissions and the cost of taking  action at home. Canadian technologies and  solutions can also be exported abroad and deployed  around the world, creating new markets and  partners for Canadian businesses and supporting  global action to reduce emissions.  The federal government will continue to work in  close collaboration with other countries on climate  solutions, including with partners across North  America. A number of provinces and territories have  already joined or are exploring entry into regional  and international efforts to reduce GHG emissions.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  2  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  3  Canadian municipalities will also continue to be  important partners in developing and implementing  climate solutions locally, as well as through  international collaboration with other municipalities  around the world.  The international community has agreed that  tackling climate change is an urgent priority and  also an historic opportunity to shift towards a global  low-carbon economy. The adoption of the Paris  Agreement in December 2015 was the culmination  of years of negotiations under the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change. The  Paris Agreement is a commitment to accelerate  and intensify the actions and investments needed  for a sustainable low-carbon future, to limit global  average temperature rise to well below 2 °C above  pre-industrial levels, and to pursue efforts to limit  the increase to 1.5 °C. This will require taking action  on long-lived GHGs such as carbon dioxide and  short-lived climate pollutants such as methane,  hydrofluorocarbons and black carbon.    As a first step towards implementing the  commitments Canada made under the Paris  Agreement, First Ministers released the Vancouver  Declaration on Clean Growth and Climate Change  on March 3, 2016.  1.1 How we developed  the Framework  The development of the Pan-Canadian Framework  was informed by input from Canadians across the  country, who made it clear that they want to be part  of the solution to climate change. Under the  Vancouver Declaration, First Ministers asked four  federal-provincial-territorial working groups to work  with Indigenous Peoples; to consult with the public,  businesses and civil society; and to present options  to act on climate change and enable clean growth.  The working groups heard solutions directly from  Canadians, through an interactive website, in-person  engagement sessions, and independent town halls.  Representatives of Indigenous Peoples contributed  their knowledge and expectations for meaningful  engagement in climate action and provided   important considerations and recommendations  either directly to working groups or to ministers,  which helped shape this framework.  Ministers also reached out to Canadians,  businesses, non-governmental organizations,  and Indigenous Peoples to hear their priorities.  In addition, ministerial tables were convened  to provide their advice, including the Canadian  Council of Ministers of the Environment, Ministers  of Innovation, Ministers of Energy, and Ministers  of Finance.  ENGAGING CANADIANS: The Let's Talk Climate Action website  was launched on April 22, 2016 to  gather ideas and comments from  Canadians about how Canada should  address climate change. By the  submission deadline of September 27,  2016, over 13,000 ideas and comments  were received. In addition, consultations  by governments and working groups on  clean growth and climate change were  held across Canada.  1.2 Pillars of the Framework The Pan-Canadian Framework has four main pillars:  pricing carbon pollution; complementary measures  to further reduce emissions across the economy;  measures to adapt to the impacts of climate change  and build resilience; and actions to accelerate  innovation, support clean technology, and create  jobs. Together, these interrelated pillars form  a comprehensive plan.  Pricing carbon pollution is an efficient way to reduce  emissions, drive innovation, and encourage people  and businesses to pollute less. However, relying on a  carbon price alone to achieve Canada's international  target would require a very high price.  Complementary climate actions can reduce emissions  by addressing market barriers where pricing alone is  insufficient or not timely enough to reduce  emissions in the pre-2030 timeframe. For instance,  tightening energy efficiency standards and codes for     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  2  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  3  vehicles and buildings are common sense actions  that reduce emissions, while also helping consumers  save money by using less energy.  Canada is experiencing the impacts of climate  change, so there is also a need to adapt and build  resilience. This means making sure that our  infrastructure and communities are adequately  prepared for climate risks like floods, wildfires,  droughts, and extreme weather events, including in  particularly vulnerable regions like Indigenous,  northern, coastal, and remote communities. This  also means adapting to the impacts of changes in  temperature, including thawing permafrost.  A low-carbon economy can and will be a strong and  thriving economy. Taking action now, to position  Canada as a global leader on clean technology  innovation, will help ensure that Canada remains  internationally competitive and will lead to the  creation of new good jobs across the country.  Investing in clean technology, innovation, and jobs  will bring new and in-demand Canadian  technologies to expanding global markets. These  investments will help improve the efficiency and  cost-effectiveness of mitigation and adaptation  measures and will equip Canada's workforce with  the knowledge and skills to succeed.  In implementing the Pan-Canadian Framework on  Clean Growth and Climate Change, federal, provincial  and territorial governments will review progress  annually to assess the effectiveness of our  collective actions and ensure continual  improvement. First Ministers commit to report  regularly and transparently to Canadians on progress  towards GHG-reduction targets, on building climate  resilience, and on growing a clean economy.   Our governments will continue to recognize, respect  and safeguard the rights of Indigenous Peoples as we  take actions under these pillars.  1.3 Elements of collaboration The Pan-Canadian Framework reaffirms the principles  outlined in the Vancouver Declaration, including  • recognizing the diversity of provincial and  territorial economies and the need for fair and  flexible approaches to ensure international   competitiveness and a business environment  that enables firms to capitalize on opportunities  related to the transition to a low-carbon economy  in each jurisdiction;  • recognizing that growing our economy and  achieving our GHG-emissions targets will require an  integrated, economy-wide approach that includes  all sectors, creates jobs, and promotes innovation;  • recognizing that a collaborative approach between  provincial, territorial, and federal governments is  important to reduce GHG emissions and enable  sustainable economic growth;  • recognizing that provinces and territories have  been early leaders in the fight against climate  change and have taken proactive steps, such as  adopting carbon pricing mechanisms, placing  caps on emissions, involvement in international  partnerships with other states and regions, closing  coal plants, carbon capture and storage projects,  renewable energy production (including  hydroelectric developments) and targets, and  investments in energy efficiency;  • recognizing that the federal government has  committed to ensuring that the provinces and  territories have the flexibility to design their own  policies to meet emission-reductions targets,  including their own carbon pricing mechanisms,  supported by federal investments in infrastructure,  specific emission-reduction opportunities and  clean technologies;  • recognizing the commitment of the federal  government to work with provinces and territories  to complement and support their actions without  duplicating them, including by promoting  innovation and enabling clean growth across  all sectors;  • strengthening the collaboration between our  governments and Indigenous Peoples on mitigation  and adaptation actions, based on recognition of  rights, respect, cooperation, and partnership;  • recognizing the importance of Traditional  Knowledge in regard to understanding climate  impacts and adaptation measures;     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  4  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  5  • recognizing that comprehensive adaptation  efforts must complement ambitious mitigation  measures to address unavoidable climate change  impacts; and  • implementing a collaborative, science-based  approach to inform Canada's future targets that  will increase in stringency as required by the  Paris Agreement.  Governments recognize the unique circumstances  of the North, including disproportionate impacts  from climate change and the associated challenges  with food security, emerging economies and the high  costs of living and of energy.  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work collaboratively to grow the economy, create  good-paying and long-term jobs, and reduce GHG  emissions in support of meeting or exceeding  Canada's 2030 target. These actions will be  supported by strong, complementary adaptation  policies to build climate resilience. Indigenous  Peoples will be important partners in developing  real and meaningful outcomes that position them as  drivers of climate action in the implementation of  the Pan-Canadian Framework. All governments  across Canada are committed to ambitious and  sustained action on climate change, building on  current actions and future opportunities.  THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT’S  RENEWED RELATIONSHIP WITH  INDIGENOUS PEOPLES: The federal government also reiterates  its commitment to renewed nation-to- nation, government-to-government, and  Inuit-to-Crown relationships with First  Nations, the Métis Nation and Inuit,  based on the recognition of rights,  respect, cooperation, and partnership,  consistent with the Government of  Canada’s support for the United Nations  Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous  Peoples, including free, prior and  informed consent.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  4  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  5  1.4 Emissions trajectory to 2030 The graph below highlights that total Canadian GHG  emissions are projected to be 742 megatonnes (Mt)  in 2030 under the December 2016 emissions  projections (Environment and Climate Change  Canada)1. Canada's target is 523 Mt.  Projections from the December 2016 emissions  projections include revised forecasts for GDP and oil  and gas prices and production2. Also incorporated  are new federal, provincial, and territorial  government measures that have legislative or   1 Canada's 2016 greenhouse gas emissions projections to 2030 will be released by Environment and Climate Change Canada in  December 2016.  2   Scenarios  December 2016 Assumptions Low Reference High  Average Annual GDP Growth (2014-2030) 1.0% 1.7% 2.3%  2030 WTI Oil Price (2014 US$/bbl) 42 81 111  2030 Henry Hub Natural Gas Price (2014 US$/GJ) 2.89 3.72 4.62  2030 GHG Emissions (Mt CO2eq.) 697 742 790  funding certainty as of November 1st, 2016 and  were not included in the 2015 emissions  projections. These include: federal measures for  increasing energy efficiency of equipment in  buildings; Ontario's commitment to join the Western  Climate Initiative cap-and-trade system; Alberta's  coal phase-out, carbon levy, and oil sands emissions  cap;  Quebec's regulations for new high-rise  buildings; and, British Columbia's low carbon  fuel standard.  Figure 1: Emissions Projections to 2030    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  6  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  7  PRICING CARBON POLLUTION Overview  Carbon pricing is broadly recognized as one of the  most effective, transparent, and efficient policy  approaches to reduce GHG emissions. Many  Canadian provinces are already leading the way on  pricing carbon pollution. British Columbia has a  carbon tax, Alberta has a hybrid system that  combines a carbon levy with a performance-based  system for large industrial emitters, and Quebec and  Ontario have cap-and-trade systems. With existing  and planned provincial action, broad-based carbon  pricing will apply in provinces with nearly 85 per cent  of Canada's economy and population by 2017,  covering a large part of our emissions.  The federal government outlined a benchmark for  pricing carbon pollution by 2018 (see Annex I). The  goal of this benchmark is to ensure that carbon  pricing applies to a broad set of emission sources  throughout Canada and with increasing stringency  over time either through a rising price or declining  caps. The benchmark outlines that jurisdictions can  implement (i) an explicit price-based system (a  carbon tax or a carbon levy and performance-based  emissions system) or (ii) a cap-and-trade system.  Some existing provincial systems already exceeded  the benchmark. As affirmed in the Vancouver  Declaration, provinces and territories continue to   have the flexibility to design their own policies to  meet emissions-reduction targets, including carbon  pricing, adapted to each province and territory's  specific circumstances.  “THERE IS A GROWING CONSENSUS  AMONG BOTH GOVERNMENTS  AND BUSINESSES ON THE  FUNDAMENTAL ROLE OF CARBON  PRICING IN THE TRANSITION TO  A DECARBONIZED ECONOMY.”  World Bank, State and Trends  of Carbon Pricing 2015  The following principles guide the pan-Canadian  approach to pricing carbon pollution, and they are  broadly based on those proposed by the Working  Group on Carbon Pricing Mechanisms:  • Carbon pricing should be a central component  of the Pan-Canadian Framework.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  6  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  7  • The approach should be flexible and recognize  carbon pricing policies already implemented  or in development by provinces and territories.  • Carbon pricing should be applied to a broad  set of emission sources across the economy.  • Carbon pricing policies should be introduced  in a timely manner to minimize investment into  assets that could become stranded and maximize  cumulative emission reductions.  • Carbon price increases should occur in  a predictable and gradual way to limit  economic impacts.  • Reporting on carbon pricing policies should be  consistent, regular, transparent, and verifiable.  • Carbon pricing policies should minimize  competitiveness impacts and carbon  leakage, particularly for emissions-intensive,  trade-exposed sectors.   • Carbon pricing policies should include revenue  recycling to avoid a disproportionate burden  on vulnerable groups and Indigenous Peoples.  NEW ACTIONS  1) Provincial and territorial actions on pricing  carbon pollution are described in Annex II.  2) The federal government will work with the  territories to find solutions that address their  unique circumstances, including high costs of living  and of energy, challenges with food security, and  emerging economies. The federal government will  also engage Indigenous Peoples to find solutions  that address their unique circumstances, including  high costs of living and of energy, challenges with  food security, and emerging economies.  3) The overall approach will be reviewed   by 2022 to  confirm the path forward.  “CARBON PRICING IS THE MOST  PRACTICAL AND COST‑EFFECTIVE  WAY TO LOWER GHG EMISSIONS  WHILE ENCOURAGING  LOW‑CARBON INNOVATION.”  Canada's Ecofiscal Commission    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  8  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  9  COMPLEMENTARY ACTIONS  TO REDUCE EMISSIONS Overview  To reduce emissions, meaningful action will need to  be taken across all regions and sectors of the  economy. Many of the things that Canadians do  every day—like driving cars and heating homes— produce GHG emissions. Many activities that drive  economic growth in the country, like extracting  natural resources, industrial and manufacturing  activities, and transporting goods to customers, also   produce emissions. The policies that help drive  down emissions can also help the economy to keep  growing by cutting costs for Canadians, creating new  markets for low-emission goods and services, and  helping businesses use cleaner and more efficient  technologies that give them a leg up on international  competitors.  Emissions by sector in 2014  (megatonnes of CO2 eq.)    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  8  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  9  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to make sure new actions build on  and complement existing plans, policies, programs,  and regulations and reflect lessons learned from  past experience. New policies will be designed to  focus on GHG-emission outcomes and will recognize  flexibility for regional differences, including through  outcomes-based regulatory equivalency agreements.  Indigenous Peoples will be involved in defining and  developing policies to support clean energy in their  communities.  In developing policies, a number of factors will  be considered, including:  • economic, environmental, and social impacts  and benefits;   • how individual policies will work with carbon  pricing;  • the need to consider and mitigate the impacts  on emissions-intensive trade exposed sectors  (e.g., resource sectors that are price takers on  the global market), including the need to avoid  carbon leakage;  • co-benefits such as improved health due to   air pollutant reductions, and jobs and business  growth;   • opportunities to realize near-term climate  and health benefits through reducing emissions  of short-lived climate pollutants; and,  • benefits for ecosystems and biodiversity.   FALLING COSTS OF RENEWABLE  ENERGY: Between 2010 and 2015, the costs for  new utility-scale solar photovoltaic (PV)  installations declined by two-thirds,  while over the same period the cost of  onshore wind fell by an estimated 30  percent on average (IEA, 2016)  Governments will be supporting the actions outlined  in the Pan-Canadian Framework through policies  and investments. Federal actions are described in  Annex I, and provincial and territorial key actions  and collaboration opportunities with the Government  of Canada are described in Annex II.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  10  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  11  3.1 Electricity Canada already has one of the cleanest electricity  systems in the world. About 80 percent of electricity  production comes from non-emitting sources, more  than any other G7 country. While electricity  emissions are going down in large part due to the  move away from coal-fired power toward cleaner  sources, electricity generation is still Canada's  fourth-largest source of GHG emissions.   Clean, non-emitting electricity systems will be  the cornerstone of a modern, clean growth economy.  Transformations to electricity systems will be  supported by federal, provincial, and territorial  governments, and, undertaken by utilities,   private-sector players, and Indigenous Peoples.  The approach to electricity will include  (1) increasing the amount of electricity generated  from renewable and low-emitting sources;  (2) connecting clean power with places that need it;  (3) modernizing electricity systems; and  (4) reducing reliance on diesel working with  Indigenous Peoples and northern and remote  communities.  Provinces and territories have already taken action  on moving from traditional coal-fired generation to  clean electricity. Ontario and Manitoba have already  phased out their use of coal, Alberta has plans in  place to phase out coal-fired electricity by 2030,  Nova Scotia has created a regulatory framework to  transition from coal to clean electricity generation,  and Saskatchewan has a coal-fired generating unit  with carbon capture technology, which captures  90 percent of emissions. New capacity will come  from non-emitting sources—including hydro, wind,  and solar—as well as natural gas. Energy efficiency  and conservation will make added contributions to  clean electricity systems.   ONTARIO'S COAL PHASE-OUT:  On April 15, 2014, Ontario became  the first jurisdiction in North America  to fully eliminate coal as a source of  electricity generation. This action is the  single largest GHG-reduction initiative  in North America, eliminating more  than 30 Mt of annual GHG emissions  and equivalent to taking seven million  vehicles off the road. On November 23,  2015, Ontario passed the Ending Coal  for Cleaner Air Act, permanently  banning coal-fired electricity generation  in the province.  SASKATCHEWAN'S BOUNDARY  DAM INTEGRATED CARBON  CAPTURE AND STORAGE PROJECT:  is the world's first commercial-scale,  coal-fired carbon capture and storage  electricity project, and it is able  to capture and sequester up to 90  percent of its GHG emissions.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  10  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  11  WIND POWER:  Wind capacity in Canada grew 20 times  between 2005 and 2015, and there is  strong potential for further growth.  For example, 4 wind farms in Prince  Edward Island now generate almost  25 percent of the province's electricity  requirements.   ALBERTA'S COAL PHASE-OUT:  Alberta's commitments to end  emissions from coal-fired electricity  and replace it with 30 percent  renewable energy by 2030 are  expected to achieve cumulative  emission reductions of 67 Mt between  now and 2030, and emissions in 2030  will be at least 14 Mt below what is  forecast under the status quo. This  reduction is the equivalent of taking  2.8 million cars off the road. This move  will improve air quality and the health  of Albertans and other Canadians. It  will also ensure reliability, encourage  private investment, and provide price  stability for all Albertans.  Connecting clean power across Canada through  stronger transmission-line interconnections will help  reduce emissions and support the move away from  coal. Many provinces already trade electricity across  their borders, and there is potential to increase  these flows, consistent with market rules and fair  competition among electricity producers.  THE CANADIAN ENERGY STRATEGY: Provinces and territories are already  taking a cooperative approach toward  sustainable energy development  through the Canadian Energy Strategy,  which was released by premiers in July  2015. As agreed under the Vancouver  Declaration and building on the Quebec  Summit on Climate Change in 2015,  federal, provincial, and territorial  energy ministers are collaborating on  specific actions through the Canadian  Energy Strategy, to contribute to the  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean  Growth and Climate Change. Actions  include energy conservation and  efficiency, clean energy technology and  innovation, and deployment of energy  to people and global markets.  Modernizing electricity systems will involve  expanding energy storage, updating infrastructure,  and deploying smart-grid technologies to improve  the reliability and stability of electric grids and to  allow more renewable power to be added. As a  leader in the development and deployment of  innovative energy-storage solutions and smart-grid  technology, Canadian clean technology producers  stand to benefit from increased investments in our  electricity systems.  Many Indigenous Peoples, as well as northern and  remote communities in Canada rely on diesel fuel to  produce electricity and heat. Opportunities exist for  clean electricity infrastructure, distributed energy  systems, renewable energy microgrids, as well as  grid connections and hybrid systems, which will  enhance wellbeing, create local economic  opportunities, and contribute to better air quality  and a cleaner environment overall. Investing in  clean energy solutions will advance the priorities of  Indigenous Peoples, as well as northern and remote  communities to transition away from diesel.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  12  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  13  COLVILLE LAKE SOLAR PROJECT – Colville Lake, Northwest Territories is  located north of the Arctic Circle, and it  is served with a winter road that is open  just a couple of months each year. To  reduce diesel use in this remote, off- grid community, a solar/diesel/battery  hybrid electricity system has been  installed. This system has allowed the  diesel generators to be shut down for  extended periods in the summer. This  innovative energy solution has reduced  diesel use and related emissions by  20-25 percent per year.   Taking these actions will have a number of benefits  beyond reducing GHG emissions. Phasing out coal  and reducing the use of diesel will reduce harmful  air pollutants, which have significant implications  for human health and associated health-care costs.  Designing and building clean-power technologies  and transmission lines represents major economic  opportunities for Canada. Increasing the amount  of clean and renewable electricity sold to the  United States could also bring new revenue to  utilities and provinces, respecting open-access  rules under the authority of the U.S. Federal  Energy Regulatory Commission.  THE CANADA  INFRASTRUCTURE BANK:  The federal government is creating the  Canada Infrastructure Bank, which will  work with provinces, territories, and  municipalities to further the reach of  government funding directed to  infrastructure, including clean  electricity systems.   COMMUNITY-BASED  ENERGY GENERATION:  In May 2015, New Brunswick  introduced legislation to allow local  entities to develop renewable-energy  sourced electricity generation in their  communities. This legislation will allow  universities, non-profit organizations,  cooperatives, First Nations, and  municipalities to contribute to NB  Power's renewable energy  requirements.  NEW ACTIONS   1. Increasing renewable and non‑emitting  energy sources  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to accelerate the phase out of  traditional coal units across Canada, by 2030, as  recently announced by the federal government  (see Annex I) and to build on provincial and  territorial leadership.   The federal government has announced it will set  performance standards for natural gas-fired  electricity generation, in consultation with  provinces, territories, and stakeholders  (see Annex I).  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to facilitate, invest in, and increase  the use of clean electricity across Canada, including  through additional investments in research,  development, and demonstration activities.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  12  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  13  2. Connecting clean power with places that need it Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to help build new and enhanced  transmission lines between and within provinces  and territories.  3. Modernizing electricity systems Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to support the demonstration and  deployment of smart-grid technologies that help  electric systems make better use of renewable  energy, facilitate the integration of energy storage  for renewables, and help expand renewable power  capacity.  4. Reducing reliance on diesel working  with Indigenous Peoples and northern  and remote communities  Governments are committed to accelerating and  intensifying efforts to improve the energy efficiency  of diesel generating units, demonstrate and install  hybrid or renewable energy systems, and connect  communities to electricity grids. This will be done  in partnership with Indigenous Peoples and  businesses. These actions will have significant  benefits for communities, such as improving air  quality and energy security, and creating the  potential for locally owned and sourced power  generation.  RAMEA WIND-HYDROGEN-DIESEL  ENERGY PROJECT:  The off-grid community of Ramea in  Newfoundland and Labrador hosts one  of the first projects in the world to  integrate generation from wind,  hydrogen, and diesel in an isolated  electricity system. Since 2010, the  Ramea Wind-Hydrogen-Diesel Energy  Project has successfully produced  approximately 680 000 kilowatt hours  of renewable energy.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  14  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  15  Text box 10: The off-grid community of Ramea in Newfoundland and Labrador hosts one of the first projects  in the world to integrate generation from wind, hydrogen and diesel in an isolated electricity system. Since  2010, the Ramea Wind-Hydrogen-Diesel Energy Project has successfully produced approximately 680,000  kilowatt hours of renewable energy.  3.2 Built environment In Canada, using energy to heat and cool buildings  accounted for about 12 percent of national GHG  emissions in 2014 or 17 percent if emissions from  generating the electricity used in buildings is also  included. The emissions in this sector—created by  burning fossil fuels and leaks in air conditioning  systems—are projected to grow modestly by 2030  unless further action is taken.  In a low-carbon, clean growth economy, buildings  and communities will be highly energy efficient,  rely on clean electricity and renewable energy, and  be smart and sustainable. Making the built  environment more energy efficient reduces GHGs,  helps make homes and buildings more comfortable  and more affordable by lowering energy bills, and  can promote innovation and clean job opportunities.  Most building owners and architects estimate that  retrofitting commercial and institutional buildings  pays off in less than ten years, according to data  from the Canada Green Building Council.  Residential energy efficiency improvements helped  Canadians save $12 billion in energy costs in 2013,  an average savings of $869 per household.  The approach to the built environment will include  (1) making new buildings more energy efficient;  (2) retrofitting existing buildings, as well as fuel  switching; (3) improving energy efficiency for  appliances and equipment; and (4) supporting  building codes and energy efficient housing in  Indigenous communities.  Advances in clean technologies and building practices  can make new buildings “net-zero energy”, meaning  they require so little energy they could potentially  rely on their own renewable energy supplies for  all of their energy needs. Through research and   development, technology costs continue to fall, and  government and industry efforts and investments  will accelerate that trend. These advances, supported  by a model “net-zero energy ready” building code,  will enable all builders to adopt these practices  and lower lifecycle costs for homeowners.  EFFICIENCY NOVA SCOTIA: Canada's first energy efficiency utility— works with more than 100 local  partners, and it has helped 225 000  program participants complete energy  efficiency projects, saving Nova  Scotians $110 million in 2016 alone.  For example, the HomeWarming service  is funded by the province of Nova  Scotia as part of a long-term plan to  upgrade all low-income homes in Nova  Scotia, over the next 10 years.   https://efficiencyns.ca/service/home-warming/   Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  14  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  15  At the same time, action is needed on existing  buildings, since more than 75 percent of the  building stock in 2030 will be composed of  buildings already standing today. This can be  supported by innovative policies like labelling a  building's energy performance, establishing retrofit  codes, and offering low-cost financing for retrofits.   Housing for Indigenous communities is particularly  pressing. New housing will be built to high- efficiency standards and existing housing will be  retrofitted. Indigenous Peoples have also identified  the need to incorporate Traditional Knowledge and  culture into building designs. Governments will  partner with Indigenous Peoples in the design of  relevant policies and programs.  Energy efficiency standards for equipment and  appliances save consumers and businesses money  on energy bills. An early market signal by the  government, in the form of an intention to introduce  standards by a specific year, can motivate the  market to accelerate the uptake of the targeted  technologies. Regulations can be supported by  actions to educate consumers, to demonstrate  benefits, and to overcome market barriers.  Construction in Canada is a $171 billion industry,  and it employs well over a million people. New  building codes will spur innovation and support  Canadian businesses in developing more efficient  building techniques and technologies. Investments  in retrofits to improve energy efficiency have been  shown to be strong job creators, providing direct  local benefits, creating local jobs, and reducing  energy bills.      NET-ZERO ENERGY BUILDINGS:  Construction costs for net-zero energy  buildings have dropped 40 percent in  the past decade, and they are  continuing to fall. The benefits of  net-zero energy buildings are  significant. Estimated operating costs  for a net-zero energy ready house is  30 percent to 55 percent less than for  a typical house, depending on region,  fuel type and occupant behaviour.  For example, on a -32 °C day, the  Riverdale NetZero Project (a semi- detached duplex in Edmonton, Alberta)  only needs 6500 W of power for heat— the same amount of heat produced by  four toasters.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  16  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  17  NEW ACTIONS   1. Making new buildings more energy efficient  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work to develop and adopt increasingly stringent  model building codes, starting in 2020, with the  goal that provinces and territories adopt a “net-zero  energy ready” model building code by 2030. These  building codes will take regional differences into  account. Continued federal investment in research,  development, and demonstration, and cooperation  with industry will help to reduce technology costs  over time.  2. Retrofitting existing buildings Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work to develop a model code for existing buildings  by 2022, with the goal that provinces and territories  adopt the code. This code will help guide energy  efficiency improvements that can be made when  renovating buildings.  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together with the aim of requiring labelling of  building energy use by as early as 2019. Labelling  will provide consumers and businesses with  transparent information on energy performance.  Provincial and territorial governments will work to  sustain and, where possible, expand efforts to  retrofit existing buildings by supporting energy  efficiency improvements as well as fuel switching,  where appropriate, and by accelerating the adoption  of high-efficiency equipment while tailoring their  programs to regional circumstances. The federal  government could support efforts of provinces and  territories through the Low Carbon Economy Fund  and infrastructure initiatives.  3. Improving energy efficiency for appliances  and equipment   The federal government will set new standards for  heating equipment and other key technologies to  the highest level of efficiency that is economically  and technically achievable.  4. Supporting building codes and energy efficient  housing in Indigenous communities   Governments will collaborate with Indigenous  Peoples as they move towards more efficient  building standards and incorporate energy  efficiency into their building-renovation programs.  SOCIAL HOUSING RETROFITS:  To help fight climate change, Ontario  invested $92 million in 2016 to retrofit  social housing buildings to reduce GHG  emissions by installing energy efficient  boilers, insulating outer walls and  mechanical systems, and installing  more energy efficient windows and  lighting. Ontario's Climate Change  Action Plan builds on this initial  investment by committing up to $500  million more for social housing retrofits  over the next five years.  Aki Energy in Manitoba is a non-profit  Aboriginal social enterprise that works  with First Nations to start green  businesses in their communities and to  create local jobs and strong local  economies. Aki Energy is committed to  helping First Nations lower the utility  bills to heat buildings, and it has  installed over $3 million in cost- effective renewable energy technologies  in partnership with Manitoba First  Nations.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  16  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  17  3.3 Transportation The transportation sector accounted for about  23 percent of Canada's emissions in 2014, mostly  from passenger vehicles and freight trucks.  Transportation emissions are projected to decline  slightly by 2030 if no further action is taken.  Governments are already working to make all modes  of transportation more efficient and convenient, but  more action is needed.   Low-carbon transportation systems will use cleaner  fuels, will have more zero-emission vehicles on the  road, will provide convenient and affordable public  transit, and will transport people and goods more  efficiently.   The approach to transportation will include  (1) setting and updating vehicle emissions  standards and improving the efficiency of vehicles  and transportation systems; (2) expanding the  number of zero-emission vehicles on Canadian  roads; (3) supporting the shift from higher to  lower-emitting types of transportation, including  through investing in infrastructure; and (4) using  cleaner fuels.  Emissions standards for cars and trucks ensure new  engines are more fuel efficient. Retrofitting freight  trucks to reduce wind resistance can also cut  emissions. And streamlining how goods are  transported can improve the overall efficiency of  transportation systems.  Zero-emission vehicle technologies include plug-in  hybrids, electric vehicles, and hydrogen fuel-cell  vehicles. Many of these are becoming increasingly  affordable and viable, and governments can help  accelerate these trends, including by investing in  charging and fueling infrastructure.  ELECTRIFICATION OF  TRANSPORTATION:  Québec  has committed to take  significant action on the electrification  of transportation by 2020, including by  increasing the number of electric and  plug-in hybrid vehicles registered in  Québec to 100 000; adding  5000 electric-vehicle jobs and  generating $500 million in  investments; reducing the amount of  fuel used each year in Québec by  66 million liters; and cutting annual  GHG emissions from the transportation  sector by 150 000 tonnes.  Shifting from higher- to lower-emitting modes of  transportation includes things like riding public  transit or cycling instead of driving a car, and  transporting goods by rail instead of trucks.  Improving public transit infrastructure and  optimizing freight corridors can help drive these  shifts.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  18  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  18  Using cleaner fuels such as advanced biofuels can  reduce the lifecycle carbon intensities of all fuels  across transportation systems, as well as in other  sectors like industry and buildings.   Taking these actions will have additional  environmental and economic benefits beyond  reducing GHG emissions. Efficiency improvements  can help Canadians and businesses save money by  spending less on fuel and reducing the costs of  transporting goods. New, cleaner fuels can create  opportunities for resource sectors. Businesses that  develop new fuel and vehicle technologies will  create jobs, help the economy grow, and give those  businesses a competitive edge.   NEW ACTIONS  1. Setting emissions standards  and improving efficiency  The federal government will continue its work to  implement increasingly stringent standards for  emissions from light-duty vehicles, including  fuel-efficient tire standards, and to update  emissions standards for heavy-duty vehicles.   The federal government will work with provinces,  territories, and industry to develop new  requirements for heavy-duty trucks to install   fuel-saving devices like aerodynamic add-ons.   The federal government will take a number of actions  to improve efficiency and support fuel switching in  the rail, aviation, marine, and off-road sectors.  2. Putting more zero‑emission vehicles on the road Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work with industry and other stakeholders to develop  a Canada-wide strategy for zero-emission vehicles  by 2018.   Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together, including with private-sector partners,  to accelerate demonstration and deployment of  infrastructure to support zero-emission vehicles,  such as electric-charging stations.  3. Shifting from higher‑ to lower‑emitting modes  and investing in infrastructure  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments  will work together to enhance investments in  public-transit upgrades and expansions.  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  invest in building more efficient trade and  transportation corridors including investments  in transportation hubs and ports.  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  consider opportunities with the private sector to  support refueling stations for alternative fuels for  light- and heavy-duty vehicles, including natural  gas, electricity, and hydrogen.  4. Using cleaner fuels The federal government, working with provincial  and territorial governments, industry, and other  stakeholders, will develop a clean fuel standard to  reduce emissions from fuels used in transportation,  buildings and industry.  This will take into account the unique  circumstances of Indigenous Peoples and northern  and remote communities.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  19  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  19  3.4 Industry  Canada's industries are the backbone of the  economy, but they are also a major source of GHG  emissions. In 2014, industrial sectors accounted for  about 37 percent of Canada's emissions, the majority  of which came from the oil and gas sector. Industrial  emissions are projected to grow between now and  2030 as demand grows for Canadian-produced  goods, at home and abroad.   A low-carbon industrial sector will rely heavily on  clean electricity and lower-carbon fuels, will make  more efficient use of energy, and will seize  opportunities unlocked by innovative technologies.  The province of Alberta has legislated an absolute  cap of 100 Mt a year on emissions from the oil sands  sector. There are a number of near-term opportunities  to reduce industrial emissions while maintaining the  competitive position of Canadian firms.   The approach to the industrial sector will include  three main areas of action: (1) regulations to reduce  methane and hydrofluorocarbon (HFC) emissions;  (2) improving industrial energy efficiency; and  (3) investing in new technologies to reduce  emissions. Together, these actions will help set the  path for long-term clean growth and the transition  to a low-carbon economy.  Methane and HFCs are potent GHGs, dozens to  thousands of times more powerful than carbon  dioxide. The oil and gas sector is the largest  contributor to methane emissions in Canada.  Building on provincial actions and targets, the  federal government has committed to reduce  methane emissions by 40-45 percent by 2025.  Canada joined almost 200 other countries in signing  the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol,  which will push the global phase out of HFC   emissions. Taking action on HFCs can prevent up to  0.5 °C of global warming due to the potency of these  gases, while continuing to protect the ozone layer.  There is significant potential to improve energy  efficiency in Canada's industrial sectors. Energy  management systems such as ISO 50001, the  Superior Energy Performance program (SEP), and the  ENERGY STAR for Industry program are useful tools  that help businesses track, analyze, and improve  their energy efficiency.  Using today's low-emission technologies and  switching to clean electricity and lower-carbon fuels  are near-term actions industry can take to reduce  emissions. Over the longer-term, more dramatic  emission reductions will be possible by using new  technologies to transform how some industries  operate. Investing in promising new technologies is  an important area for action. Innovation will help  Canadian businesses access global markets and  attract foreign investment.  LOWER-CARBON INDUSTRIAL  ACTIVITY IN CANADA:  Quebec's aluminum smelters have  reduced their emissions by 30 percent  since 1990. The modernized world- class aluminum smelter in Kitimat, BC  will boost production and reduce  emissions by nearly 50 percent. As a  result of these investments, Canada's  aluminum industry is now the most  carbon-efficient producer of aluminum  in the world.  http://www.unep.org/newscentre/Default.aspx?DocumentID=27086&ArticleID=36283&l=en   Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  20  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  21  OIL SANDS INNOVATION:  COSIA (Canada's Oil Sands Innovation  Alliance) is an alliance of 13 oil sands  producers, representing 90 percent of  production from the Canadian oil sands,  who are working together to develop  technologies that help reduce the  environmental impact of the oil sands,  including reducing GHG emissions.  Member companies have shared 936  distinct environmental technologies,  costing $1.33 billion, since coming  together in 2012.   Taking these actions will benefit businesses.  Strengthening energy performance is one of the most  cost-effective ways for industry to reduce energy use,  it generally has quick payback periods, and it will  continually generate financial savings. Measures that  help cut costs or develop new technologies can  improve competitiveness and create jobs and export  opportunities for the clean technology sector.   NEW ACTIONS  1. Reducing methane and HFC emissions  The federal government will work with provinces and  territories to achieve the objective of reducing  methane emissions from the oil and gas sector,  including offshore activities, by 40-45 percent by  2025, including through equivalency agreements.   The federal government has introduced proposed  regulations to phase down use of HFCs to support  Canada's commitment to the Montreal Protocol  amendment.  2. Improving industrial energy efficiency  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to help industries save energy and  money, including by supporting them in adopting  energy management systems.  3. Investing in technology  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments  working with industry will continue to invest in  research and development and to promote  deployment of new technologies that help reduce  emissions.   Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  also work with industry to identify demonstration  projects for promising pre-commercial clean energy  technologies required to reduce emissions from  energy production and use in the Canadian economy,  including in the oil and gas sector.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  20  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  21  3.5 Forestry, agriculture,  and waste  Emissions from agriculture (livestock and crop  production) and extraction of forestry resources  accounted for about 10 percent of Canada's  emissions in 2014, and they are not projected  to significantly change by 2030. Municipal waste  accounts for a small portion (about 3 percent) of  Canada's total GHGs, and these emissions are  projected to decline, largely due to increases in  landfill gas capture.  Agricultural soils and forests also absorb and store  carbon. The emissions or removals from carbon  sinks can fluctuate with natural disturbances  (e.g. forest fires), but there are still a number of  actions that can increase carbon storage and reduce  emissions.   Forests, wetlands, and agricultural lands across  Canada will play an important natural role in a  low-carbon economy by absorbing and storing  atmospheric carbon. Actions taken by jurisdictions  and woodlot owners to accelerate reforestation, to  continuously improve sustainable management  practices, and to plant new forests where they do  not currently exist will enhance stored carbon. Clean  technology, such as lower-carbon bioenergy, and  bioproducts that use feedstock from agriculture and  forestry waste and dedicated crops to replace  higher-carbon fuels can also reduce emissions.  Continued innovation and clean technology in  agriculture will build on past GHG reduction  successes of decreasing emissions per unit of  production. The municipal waste sector will also be  a key source of cleaner fuels such as renewable  natural gas from landfills.   The approach to these sectors will include  (1) enhancing carbon storage in forests and  agricultural lands; (2) supporting the increased use  of wood for construction; (3) generating fuel from  bioenergy and bioproducts; and, (4) advancing  innovation.  Forests, wetlands, and agricultural lands can be  enhanced as “carbon sinks” through actions such as  planting more trees, improving forest carbon  management practices, minimizing losses from fires  and invasive species, restoring forests that have  been affected by natural disturbances, and  increasing adoption of land management practices  like increasing perennial and permanent cover crops  and zero-till farming. Protecting and restoring  natural areas, including wetlands, can also benefit  biodiversity and maintain or enhance carbon  storage.   Increasing the use of wood for construction can  reduce emissions as the carbon stored in that wood  gets locked in for a long period of time. Increasing  domestic demand for Canadian wood products will  also support the vibrant forest industries across  Canada, which have a long history of innovating to  develop new products and more efficient and  sustainable forest practices.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  22  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  23  The Cheakamus Community Forest  carbon offset project is located  adjacent to the Resort Municipality of  Whistler, within the traditional  territories of the Squamish and Lil'wat  Nations. The project retains more  carbon in the forest by using  ecosystem-based management  practices that include increasing  protected areas and using lower-impact  harvesting techniques.   The forestry, agriculture, and waste sectors also  provide biomass for bioproducts that can be used in  place of fossil fuels in other sectors. For example,  waste products from forestry, agriculture, and  landfills can be converted into energy sources such  as renewable natural gas. Dedicated crops can be  grown as feedstocks for products like bioplastics.  Expanding renewable fuel industries represents an  opportunity to create new jobs and economic growth  across Canada.  BIOMASS-FIRED DISTRICT  HEATING:  Prince Edward Island is home to  Canada's longest running, biomass- fired district heating system. Operating  since the 1980's, the system has  expanded to serve over 125 buildings  in the downtown core of Charlottetown,  including the University of Prince  Edward Island and the Queen Elizabeth  Hospital, and cleanly burns 66 000  tons of waste materials annually.  Innovative solutions, including clean technologies,  are required to reduce emissions from agriculture.  Promising new technologies are being developed to  reduce emissions from livestock and crop  production, including from the use of precision  farming and “smart” fertilizers, which time the  release to match plant needs, and from feed  innovations that reduce methane production in  cattle. Actions pertaining to the agriculture sector  will be developed collaboratively through Canada's  Next Agriculture Policy Framework.  These actions in the forestry, agriculture, and waste  sectors, and supporting clean technology  businesses, can help to create jobs and build more  sustainable communities.   NEW ACTIONS   1. Increasing stored carbon  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to protect and enhance carbon sinks,  including in forests, wetlands, and agricultural lands  (e.g. through land-use and conservation measures).   2. Increasing the use of wood for construction Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  collaborate to encourage the increased use of wood  products in construction, including through updated  building codes.    3. Generating bioenergy and bioproducts  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to identify opportunities to produce  renewable fuels and bioproducts, for example,  generating renewable fuel from waste.   4. Advancing innovation  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to enhance innovation to advance  GHG efficient management practices in forestry  and agriculture.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  22  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  23  3.6 Government leadership Governments are directly responsible for a relatively  small share of Canada's emissions (about  0.6 percent), but they have an opportunity to lead  by example. A number of provinces are already  demonstrating leadership, including through   carbon neutral policies.   CARBON NEUTRAL GOVERNMENT:  British Columbia's public sector has  successfully achieved carbon neutrality  each year since 2010. Over the past  6 years, schools, post-secondary  institutions, government offices, Crown  corporations, and hospitals have  reduced a total of 4.3 million tonnes of  emissions through improvements to  their operations and investments of  $51.4 million in offset projects. British  Columbia was the first—and continues  to be the only—carbon neutral  jurisdiction on the continent.  In a low-carbon, clean growth economy, federal,  provincial, and territorial governments will be  leaders in sustainable, low-emission practices that  support the goals of clean growth and address  climate change.   Municipalities are also essential partners. How  cities develop and operate has an important impact  on energy use and therefore GHG emissions.   LEADERSHIP BY CITIES:   The City of Whitehorse's Sustainability  Plan outlines 12 community-wide goals  in areas such as transportation,  buildings, waste, GHG reductions, and  resilient, accessible food systems, with  associated targets for 2020, 2030, and  2050. For example, Whitehorse has set  a target that new buildings will be   30 percent more efficient than the  National Energy Code of Canada for  Buildings, the National Building Codes,  or achievable comparable EnerGuide  ratings, while city-owned buildings will  be 50 percent more efficient than the  National Energy Code.  The public sector can play an important role by  setting ambitious emissions reduction targets  and by demonstrating the effectiveness of policies  to reduce emissions (e.g. from vehicle fleets  and buildings).  The approach to government leadership will include  (1) setting ambitious targets; (2) cutting emissions  from government buildings and fleets; and  (3) scaling up clean procurement.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  24  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  25  Governments control a significant share of assets  like fleets and buildings. By setting targets and  implementing policies to make buildings more  efficient and to reduce emissions from vehicle  fleets, the public sector can help to demonstrate the  business case for ambitious action. Governments  are also major purchasers and providers of goods  and services, and they can help to build demand for  low-carbon goods and services through procurement  policies. They can also provide a testing ground for  new and emerging technologies, creating new  opportunities for Canadian firms developing clean  technology products, services, and processes.    NEW ACTIONS   1. Setting ambitious targets  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments  will demonstrate leadership through commitments  to ambitious targets to reduce emissions from  government operations. The federal government is  committed to reduce its own GHG emissions to  40 percent below 2005 levels, by 2030 or sooner.   2. Cutting emissions from government buildings  and fleets   Federal, provincial, and territorial government will  scale up efforts to transition to highly efficient  buildings and zero-emission vehicle fleets. The  federal government has set a goal of using  100 percent clean power by 2025.  3. Scaling up clean procurement  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to modernize procurement practices,  adopt clean energy and technologies, and prioritize  opportunities to help Canadian businesses grow,  demonstrate new technologies, and create jobs.      Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  24  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  25  3.7 International leadership Governments will work with their international  partners, including developing countries, to help  reduce emissions around the world. The federal  government is investing $2.65 billion in climate  finance to help developing countries transition to  low-carbon economies and build climate resilience.  The priority is to first focus on reduction in emissions  within Canada, but part of Canada's approach to  climate change could also involve acquiring  allowances for emissions reductions in other parts  of the world, as a complement to domestic emissions  reduction efforts. As recognized under the Paris  Agreement (article 6), countries may choose to use  emissions reductions that take place outside of their  own borders, known as “internationally transferred  mitigation outcomes”, to meet their targets.  Emissions reductions that take place outside of  Canada may have lower costs and contribute to  investment in sustainable development abroad.  Quebec and California already participate in  international emissions trading under their linked  cap-and-trade system, which Ontario will soon join.   The approach to international leadership will include  (1) delivering on Canada's international climate  finance commitments; (2) acquiring internationally  transferred mitigation outcomes; and (3) engaging  in trade and climate policy.   Federal, provincial, and territorial governments  will also explore mechanisms and opportunities  for provinces and territories to collaborate in  international fora, joint missions, and discussions  on climate change and energy.  The federal government will continue to engage  with and support Indigenous Peoples' action on  international climate change issues, including   through the United Nations Framework Convention  on Climate Change, to formulate a platform  for Indigenous Peoples, as agreed to in the  Paris decision.  NEW ACTIONS  1. Delivering on Canada's international   climate-finance commitments  The federal government will deliver on its historic  commitment of $2.65 billion by 2020 to help  the poorest and most vulnerable countries mitigate  and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change.   2. Acquiring internationally transferred mitigation  outcomes  The federal government, in cooperation with  provincial and territorial governments and relevant  partners, will continue to explore which types of  tools related to the acquisition of internationally  transferred mitigation outcomes may be beneficial  to Canada and will advance a robust approach to the  implementation of article 6 of the Paris Agreement.  A first priority is ensuring any cross-border transfer  of mitigation outcomes is based on rigorous  accounting rules, informed by experts, which result  in real reductions.  The federal government will work with Ontario,  Quebec, and other interested provinces and  territories, as well as with international partners, to  ensure that allowances acquired through  international-emissions trading are counted towards  Canada’s international target.  3. Engaging in trade and climate policy   The federal government, in cooperation with  provincial and territorial governments, will work  with its international partners to ensure that  trade rules support climate policy.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  26  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  27  ADAPTATION AND CLIMATE RESILIENCE Overview  The impacts of climate change are already being felt  across Canada. These changes are being magnified  in Canada's Arctic, where average temperature has  increased at a rate of nearly three times the global  average. They pose significant risks to communities,  health and well-being, the economy, and the natural  environment, especially in Canada's northern and  coastal regions and for Indigenous Peoples.  Indigenous Peoples are among the most vulnerable  to climate change due to their remote locations  and reliance on wild foods. The changes already  being experienced are both dramatic and  permanent, with significant social, cultural,  ecological, and economic implications.  Taking action to adapt to current and future climate  impacts will help protect Canadians from climate  change risks, build resilience, reduce costs, and  ensure that society thrives in a changing climate.  INUIT AND CLIMATE IMPACTS:  Inuit and Inuit Nunangat, the  homeland of Inuit in Canada, are  experiencing significant climate  change impacts, as highlighted in Inuit  Tapiriit Kanatami's recent report on  Inuit Priorities for Canada's Climate  Strategy. More than 70 per cent of  Canada's coastline is located in the  Arctic and it is defined by ice. Average  sea ice thickness is decreasing and  sea ice cover is now dominated by  younger, thinner ice. Some models are  projecting that summer sea ice cover  could be almost completely lost before  2050. These changes are already  impacting access to wild foods and  contributing to hazards and risks on  ice.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  26  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  27  Developing adaptation expertise and technology can  further contribute to clean growth by creating jobs  and spurring innovation. Adaptation is a long-term  challenge, and it requires ongoing commitment to  action, leadership across all governments, strong  governance to assess and sustain progress, adequate  funding, and meaningful engagement with, and  continued leadership by, Indigenous Peoples.  Federal investments (see Annex I) will support key  adaptation measures.  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments have  identified new actions to build resilience to climate  change across Canada in the following areas:   1. Translating scientific information and  Traditional Knowledge into action  2. Building climate resilience through  infrastructure  3. Protecting and improving human health  and well-being  4. Supporting particularly vulnerable regions   5. Reducing climate-related hazards  and disaster risks      Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  28  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  29  4.1 Translating scientific  information and Traditional  Knowledge into action   Canadians need authoritative science and  information to understand current and expected  changes. This includes changing conditions (e.g.,  rainfall, temperature, and sea ice) and the impacts  of climate change across Canada. Long-term  monitoring and local observations are also key. Data,  tools, and information need to be widely accessible,  equitable, and relevant to different types of  decision-makers in different settings.   Translating knowledge into action takes leadership,  skilled people, and resources. The Government of  Canada's Adaptation Platform supports collaboration  among governments, industry, and professional  organizations on adaptation priorities. Building  regional expertise and capacity for adaptation will  improve risk management; support land-use  planning; help safeguard investments; and  strengthen emergency planning, response, and  recovery. Decision-making by all governments will be  guided by consideration of scientific and Traditional  Knowledge.   INFORMATION AND TOOLS FOR  ADAPTATION DECISIONS:  Decision-makers in five Quebec  coastal municipalities collaborated  with researchers, notably from the  Université du Quebec à Rimouski and  from Ouranos, a regional climate and  adaptation consortium,  to explore  solutions to repeated damage of coastal  infrastructure. Projections of future  erosion, studies of sea ice and coastal  vulnerability due to climate change,  and cost-benefit analyses provided  the foundation for the municipalities  to make decisions on an adaptation  solution.  The approach to information, knowledge, and  capacity building will include (1) providing  authoritative climate information and (2) building  regional adaptation capacity and expertise.  Ensuring Canadians across all regions and sectors  have the capacity to make informed decisions and  to act on them provides the foundation for   http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/impacts-adaptation/adaptation-platform/10027 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/impacts-adaptation/adaptation-platform/10027   Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  28  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  29  advancing adaptation in Canada. Indigenous-led  community-based initiatives that combine science  and Traditional Knowledge can help guide decision  making. Including this information in regional and  national impacts and adaptation assessments can  further advance understanding of climate change  across the country.  NEW ACTIONS   1. Providing authoritative climate information The federal government will establish a Canadian  centre for climate services, to improve access to  authoritative, foundational climate science and  information. This centre will work with provincial  and territorial governments, Indigenous Peoples and  other partners to support adaptation decision  making across the country.   2. Building regional adaptation capacity and expertise   Governments will work with regional partners,  including with Indigenous Peoples through  community-based initiatives, to build regional  capacity, develop adaptation expertise, respectfully  incorporate Traditional Knowledge, and mobilize  action. Canada's Adaptation Platform and regional  consortia and centres support the sharing of  expertise and information among governments,  Indigenous Peoples and communities, businesses,  and professional organizations and support action  on joint priorities.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  30  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  31  4.2 Building climate resilience  through infrastructure  Climate change is already impacting infrastructure,  particularly in vulnerable northern and coastal  regions, as well as Indigenous Peoples. Climate- related infrastructure failures can threaten health  and safety, interrupt essential services, disrupt  economic activity, and incur high costs for recovery  and replacement.   The approach to building climate resilience through  infrastructure will include (1) investing in  infrastructure that strengthens resilience and  (2) developing climate-resilient codes and  standards.  Traditional built infrastructure (e.g. roads, dykes,  seawalls, bridges, and measures to address  permafrost thaw) can address specific  vulnerabilities. Additionally, living natural  infrastructure (e.g. constructed/managed wetlands  and urban forests) can build the resilience of  communities and ecosystems and deliver additional  benefits, such as carbon storage and health  benefits.  Considering climate change in long-lived  infrastructure investments, including retrofits and  upgrades, and investing in traditional and natural  adaptation solutions can build resilience, reduce  disaster risks, and save costs over the long term.  ADAPTATION INFRASTRUCTURE:  The Red River Floodway was originally  constructed in 1968 at a total cost of  $63 million. It was recently expanded  in 2014, at a cost of $627 million.  Since 1968, the Floodway has  prevented over $40 billion (in 2011  dollars) in flood-related damages for  the City of Winnipeg.  NEW ACTIONS  1. Investing in infrastructure to build   climate resilience   Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  partner to invest in infrastructure projects that  strengthen climate resilience.   2. Developing climate‑resilient codes and standards Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work collaboratively to integrate climate resilience  into building design guides and codes. The  development of revised national building codes for  residential, institutional, commercial, and industrial  facilities and guidance for the design and  rehabilitation of climate-resilient public  infrastructure by 2020 will be supported by  federal investments.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  30  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  31  4.3 Protecting and improving  human health and well‑being  Climate change is increasingly affecting the health  and well-being of Canadians (e.g. extreme heat, air  pollution, allergens, diseases carried by ticks and  insects, and food security). Indigenous Peoples and  northern and remote communities in particular are  experiencing unique and growing risks to health and  vitality.  The approach to protecting and improving human  health and well-being will include (1) taking action  to address climate change related health risks and  (2) supporting healthy Indigenous communities.  Adaptation actions with an inclusive view of well- being (e.g. social and cultural determinants of  health and mental health) will keep Canadians  healthy and reduce pressures on the health system.   NEW ACTIONS   1. Addressing climate change‑related health risks  Governments will collaborate to prevent illness  resulting from extreme heat events and to reduce  the risks associated with climate-driven infectious  diseases, such as Lyme disease. Federal adaptation  investments will support actions including  surveillance and monitoring, risk assessments,  modelling, laboratory diagnostics, as well as health- professional education and public awareness  activities. Efforts will also continue to advance the  science and understanding of health risks and best  practices to adapt.  2. Supporting healthy Indigenous communities The federal government will increase support for  First Nations and Inuit communities to undertake  climate-change and health adaptation projects that  protect public health.   The federal government will also work with the Métis  Nation on addressing the health effects of climate  change.  FOOD SECURITY AND  SUSTAINABILITY – PLANNING  FOR CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS  IN ARVIAT, NUNAVUT:  With the goal of promoting and  providing access to healthy foods,  a community-based project in Arviat,  Nunavut involved researchers and  community youth to monitor and  collect data on optimal growing  conditions in the community  greenhouse and to build capacity  for its ongoing operation.      Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  32  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  33  4.4 Supporting particularly  vulnerable regions   The Indigenous Peoples of Canada, along with  coastal and northern regions are particularly  vulnerable and disproportionately affected by the  impacts of climate change. Unlike rebuilding after  an extreme event like a flood or a fire, once  permafrost has thawed, coastlines have eroded, or  socio-cultural sites and assets have disappeared,  they are lost forever.   The approach to supporting vulnerable regions will  include (1) investing in resilient infrastructure to  protect vulnerable regions; (2) building climate  resilience in the North; (3) supporting community- based monitoring in Indigenous communities; and  (4) supporting adaptation in coastal areas.  Action taken to support adaptation in vulnerable  regions can help communities, traditional ways of  life, and economic sectors endure and thrive in a  changing climate. The knowledge, expertise,  technologies, and lessons from adaptation actions in  vulnerable northern and coastal regions can benefit  other vulnerable regions and sectors.  COLLABORATING TO ADDRESS  CLIMATE IMPACTS IN THE NORTH: Nunavut, the Northwest Territories,  and Yukon hosted the Pan-Territorial  Permafrost Workshop in 2013, which  brought together front-line decision  makers and permafrost researchers  from each territory to share knowledge,  form connections, and look at  possibilities for adaptation in  the future.  NEW ACTIONS  1. Investing in resilient infrastructure to protect  vulnerable regions  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to ensure infrastructure investments  help build resilience with Indigenous Peoples as  well as in vulnerable coastal and northern regions.  2. Building climate resilience in the North Federal, territorial, and northern governments and  Indigenous Peoples will continue working together  to develop and implement a Northern Adaptation  Strategy to strengthen northern capacity for climate  change adaptation. Federal investments to build  resilience in the North and northern Indigenous  Peoples will support this work.   3. Supporting community‑based monitoring  by Indigenous Peoples  The federal government will provide support for  Indigenous communities to monitor climate change  in their communities and to connect Traditional     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  32  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  33  Knowledge and science to build a better  understanding of impacts and inform adaptation  actions.  4. Supporting adaptation in coastal regions Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  support adaptation efforts in vulnerable coastal and  marine areas and Arctic ecosystems. Activities will  include science, research, and monitoring to  identify climate change impacts and vulnerabilities;  the development of adaptation tools for coastal  regions; and the improvement of ocean forecasting.  This knowledge will help inform adaptation  decisions related to fisheries and oceans  management and coastal infrastructure. Federal  adaptation investments will help advance this work.  SUPPORTING VULNERABLE  COASTAL COMMUNITIES:  Through the Atlantic Climate Adaptation  Solutions Project, Newfoundland and  Labrador, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward  Island, and New Brunswick partner  together and with Indigenous  communities, regional non-profits, and  industry to develop practical tools and  resources to help vulnerable coastal  communities consider climate change in  planning, engineering practices, and  water and resource management.  Examples include land-use planning  tools, best practices, and risk  assessments.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  34  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  35  4.5 Reducing climate‑related  hazards and disaster risks  Climate change is impacting the intensity and  frequency of events such as floods, wildfires,  drought, extreme heat, high winds, and winter road  failures. Recognizing this reality, Federal-Provincial- Territorial Ministers Responsible for Emergency  Management are updating emergency management  in Canada including work to mitigate disasters,  review the Disaster Financial Assistance  Arrangements, develop build-back better strategies,  and collaborate on public alerting. Additionally, the  Canadian Council of Forest Ministers is working on  the establishment of the Canadian Wildland Fire  Strategy, with climate change highlighted as a key  challenge.  The approach to reducing climate-related hazards  and disaster risks will include (1) investing in  infrastructure to reduce disaster risks; (2) advancing  efforts to protect against floods; and (3) supporting  adaptation for Indigenous Peoples.  Disaster risk-reduction efforts and adaptation  measures can reduce the negative impacts of these  events, some of which have a disproportionate   impact on Indigenous Peoples.  NEW ACTIONS  1. Investing in infrastructure to reduce  disaster risks  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  partner to invest in traditional and natural  infrastructure that reduces disaster risks and  protects Canadian communities from climate-related  hazards such as flooding and wildfires.  2. Advancing efforts to protect against floods Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together through the National Disaster  Mitigation Program to develop and modernize flood  maps and assess and address flood risks.  3. Supporting adaptation in Indigenous Communities Governments will work in partnership with  Indigenous communities to address climate change  impacts, including repeated and severe climate  impacts related to flooding, forest fires, and failures  of winter roads. The federal government will provide  support to Indigenous communities for adaptation.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  34  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  35  FLOOD AND DROUGHT  PROTECTIONS THROUGH  WETLANDS RESTORATION: Alberta's Watershed Resiliency and  Restoration Program provided a grant  to Ducks Unlimited to restore  approximately 558 hectares of  wetlands in the South Saskatchewan  River basin for the purposes of water  storage for flood and drought  protection. Using historical imagery  and LiDAR data to identify drained  wetlands, project leads then work with  and compensate landowners to restore  wetlands on private land.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  36  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  37  CLEAN TECHNOLOGY, INNOVATION,  AND JOBS  Overview  Global demand for clean technologies is significant  and increasing. Fostering and encouraging investment  in clean technology solutions can facilitate economic  growth, long-term job creation, and environmental  responsibility and sustainability. Taking action on  climate change will help to capture new and  emerging economic opportunities, including for  Indigenous Peoples and northern and remote  communities. The window of opportunity exists for  Canada to create the conditions for new clean  technology investment and exports and seize growing  global markets for clean technology goods, services,  and processes.  To effectively compete in the global marketplace and  capitalize on current and future economic  opportunities, Canada needs a step change in clean  technology development, commercialization, and  adoption across all industrial sectors. Clarity of  purpose, investment, and strong coordination that  leverages pan-Canadian regional and provincial/ territorial strengths are essential to seizing the  economic growth and job-creation opportunities of  clean technology. International research,  development, and demonstration collaboration is also  essential. Governments, Indigenous Peoples, industry,  and other stakeholders all have a role to play and  must be engaged.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  36  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  37  5.1 Building early-stage innovation To become a leader in the development and  deployment of clean technologies, Canada needs  a strong flow of innovative ideas.   Government investments in clean technology  research, development, and demonstration will  create the largest benefit where coordinated and  focused in areas that will most effectively help  Canada to meet its climate change goals, create  economic opportunities, and expand global-market  opportunities. Efforts to coordinate and focus  investment must go beyond governments and  involve the collaboration of industry, stakeholders,  academia, and Indigenous Peoples in the innovation  process. Canada must leverage its domestic  strengths, which vary by region. Developing  international partnerships will create new economic  opportunities, build areas of shared expertise, and  foster stronger bilateral relations.   Sustainable Development Technology  Canada (SDTC) provides funding support  to companies across Canada to develop,  demonstrate, and deploy innovative new  clean technologies. SDTC has also  launched joint funding opportunities in  collaboration with Emissions Reduction  Alberta and Alberta Innovates and  partners with the Ontario Centres of  Excellence to enhance Ontario's  Greenhouse Gas Innovation Initiative.  SDTC estimates its projects have  reduced annual emissions by 6.3 Mt of  CO2e, generated $1.4 billion in annual  revenue and, in 2015, supported more  than 9200 direct and indirect jobs.  Through its participation in Mission  Innovation, the federal government has  committed to double its investments in  clean energy research and technology  development over five years, while  encouraging greater levels of private  sector investment in transformative  clean energy technologies. On  November 14, 2016, Canada and  21 other Mission Innovation partners  launched seven Innovation Challenges  aimed at catalyzing global research  efforts in areas that could provide  significant benefits in reducing GHG  emissions, increasing energy security,  and creating new opportunities for clean  economic growth.  http://mission-innovation.net/ http://mission-innovation.net/   Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  38  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  39  NEW ACTIONS  1. Supporting early‑stage technology development  Governments will support new approaches to  early-stage technology development, including  breakthrough technologies, to advance research  in areas that have the potential to substantially  reduce GHG emissions and other pollutants.  Innovative partnerships with the private sector  will make an important contribution to this effort.  2. Mission‑oriented research and development Governments will encourage new “mission-oriented”  research approaches to focus RD&D facilities,  programs, and supports on clean technology  and environmental performance issues.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  38  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  39  5.2 Accelerating commercialization  and growth  Given Canada's small domestic market, Canadian  firms must look to highly competitive international  markets to achieve scale. Succeeding in the globally  competitive clean technology marketplace requires  globally competitive talent, access to the capital and  resources needed to demonstrate the commercial  viability of products, and strong international  networks that facilitate the cross-border flow of clean  technology goods and services.   Canadian clean technology producers and researchers  are currently confronted by a myriad of programs and  services, at the federal, provincial, and territorial  level. Streamlining and integrating access to support  programs and services is a priority for businesses and  essential to building commercial capacity in this  area.  Compared with other technology areas, clean  technologies face unique challenges and often take  longer to get to market, making access to “patient  capital” important to successful commercialization.  While federal and provincial governments already  have a range of supports in place, key needs exist in  terms of accessing venture capital as well as working  capital and support for first, large-scale commercial  projects or deployments.  20/20 Catalysts Program is a mentorship  program that matches Indigenous  and non-Indigenous project mentors  with Indigenous mentees to promote  knowledge sharing that will enable  Indigenous communities to drive  change towards clean technology  business and economic development.  Further development of clean technologies could  create new opportunities in Canada's resource  sectors, increase the productivity and  competitiveness of Canadian businesses, and create  new employment opportunities, while also improving  environmental performance. Canada will need to be  able to access the skills and expertise of talented  workers from around the world to enable Canadian  businesses to succeed in the global marketplace. It  will also be important to ensure a commitment to  skills and training to provide Canadian workers with  a just and fair transition to opportunities in  Canada's clean growth economy.  Indigenous Peoples are leaders of change in the  transition to a low-carbon economy. Indigenous  governments, organizations, and businesses can  play a key role in developing pathways for the  adoption and adaptation of clean technology  solutions for Indigenous Peoples.   Building stronger businesses and commercial  capacity in all of Canada's regions is essential to  taking advantage of new market opportunities.  Support for new technology start-ups, through  incubators and accelerators, is important to this  effort. A strong, focused Canadian clean technology  export strategy is needed to position Canada in  growing and emerging global markets.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  40  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  41  MaRS Cleantech works closely with  entrepreneurs and investors to create  solutions in energy, water, agri-tech,  advanced materials and manufacturing,  and smart cities. Industry looks to  MaRS Cleantech to assist with  company growth and to remove  complex technology-adoption barriers.  MaRS supports high-impact businesses  by connecting innovators with potential  partners, customers, investors, talent,  and capital. MaRS strives to build  globally competitive companies and to  drive clean technology innovation.  NEW ACTIONS  1. Access to government programs Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to create a coordinated “no-wrong  door” approach to supporting Canadian clean  technology businesses, ensuring full and effective  access to the suite of government programs and  services available to support their commercial  success.  2. Increasing support to advance and commercialize  innovative technologies  Governments will collaborate to enable access to  capital for clean technology businesses to bring  their products and services to market, including at  the commercial-scale demonstration and  deployment stages. This will include support for  clean technology businesses in the natural resource  sectors to improve both competitiveness and  environmental performance.  3. Strengthening support for skills development  and business leadership   Governments will work together to strengthen skills  development and business-leadership capacity in  support of the transition to a low-carbon economy.    VENTURE CAPITAL:  BDC Capital is launching a new  $135 million venture capital fund  to support Canadian energy and clean  technology start-up businesses with  global potential. The Industrial, Clean  and Energy Technology (ICE) Venture  Fund II will invest in 15 to 20 new  high-impact Canadian start-up firms  that demonstrate efficiency and strong  scalability and will support the transition  to a low-carbon economy. Fund II is  a follow-on to BDC Capital's highly  successful ICE Venture Fund I, which  was launched in 2011 with investments  of $287 million now under management.  4. Expedite immigration of highly qualified personnel  Governments will work together to enable expedited  processing of visas and work permits for global  talent, in particular for high-growth Canadian  businesses such as those in the clean technology  sector. This will attract top international talent and  expand Canada's clean growth capacity.  5. Promoting exports of clean technology goods  and services  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work collaboratively to strengthen clean technology  export potential. This will include targeted export  missions and the development of better market  intelligence, addressing barriers to markets, support  for export financing and marketing, and leveraging  Canada's Trade Commissioner services.  6. Standards‑setting Governments will work together to exert a strong  leadership role in international standards-setting  processes for new clean technologies and to ensure  that Canada's clean-technology capacity shapes  future international standards.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  40  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  41  5.3 Fostering adoption The adoption of clean technology can create economic  opportunities and improve environmental outcomes.  Canada's performance on clean technology adoption  by industry has significant room for improvement.  Even amongst Canadian businesses that regularly  adopt advanced technologies, clean technologies are  the least likely to be adopted.  SmartICE (Sea-ice Monitoring And  Real-Time Information for Coastal  Environments) is a partnership with  community, academic, government,  and industry participation. It is  developing an integrated system to  provide near-real-time information  about coastal sea-ice travel and  shipping, improving safety and the  ability to adapt to changing climate  conditions. The pilot program is  preparing to expand across the Arctic  through a northern social enterprise.  Pricing carbon pollution will send a market signal  that can drive innovation among Canadian businesses  and, in return, will make them more competitive,  including by opening up access to new markets and  reducing costs of deploying clean technologies.  There is significant potential for Canadian  governments to “lead by example” as early adopters  of clean technology serving an essential role as a  first or “reference customer” for Canadian clean  technology goods, services, and processes. Having  a “first sale” in Canada would boost businesses'   chances of securing sales abroad. Beyond direct  federal, provincial, and territorial government  operations, other bodies, such as municipalities and  publicly regulated utilities, could become significant  markets for and adopters of clean technology.  Done effectively, the adoption of clean technology  could be a mechanism for improving environmental  circumstances and creating economic opportunity for  Indigenous Peoples and northern and remote  communities. Effective engagement and partnership  with Indigenous Peoples is essential to this effort.  Encouraging dialogue between regulators and  industry could improve certainty in clean technology  development and allow for more effective and  responsible regulation.   NEW ACTIONS  1. Leading by example Federal, provincial, and territorial governments  will develop action plans for greening government  operations and encourage utilities and  municipalities and other public sector entities  to adopt clean technologies to lead by example.  2. Supporting Indigenous Peoples and northern and  remote communities to adopt and adapt clean  technologies  Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  support Indigenous Peoples and northern and  remote communities in adopting and adapting clean  technologies, and ensuring business models support  community ownership and operation of clean  technology solutions.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  42  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  43  3. Consumer and industry adoption Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  work together to promote and encourage effective  working relationships between regulators and  industry, providing for early dialogue and effective  guidance, which can assist in bringing new clean  technologies to market quickly and responsibly.  Governments will also support visible and effective  certification programs to ensure consumer and  business confidence and support green procurement.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  42  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  43  5.4 Strengthening collaboration  and metrics for success  An effective approach to clean technology  development, commercialization, and adoption in  Canada requires coherent, collaborative, and  focused approaches. This is true within individual  governments and between Canadian jurisdictions. A  collaborative approach between governments should  take into account regional strategies and  jurisdictional responsibilities.  Regular and ongoing discussions between federal,  provincial, and territorial governments regarding  clean technology and clean growth would help  eliminate duplication of efforts and identify gaps in  support for clean technology development. Engaging  Indigenous Peoples, industry, and stakeholders as a  routine component of this process would be  important.  There is inadequate data on Canada's clean  technology capacity and potential. Building better  data, and clear metrics for tracing the impact of  government activities, would properly focus these  activities and ensure that they achieve intended,  meaningful results.  NEW ACTIONS  1. Enhance alignment between federal, provincial,  and territorial actions  Governments will work together to improve policy  and program coordination and sharing of data and  best practices, which can sustain intergovernmental  momentum and action on clean technology and  clean growth. Continued partnership and  engagement of Indigenous Peoples, industry, and  stakeholders is essential to this effort.  Governments will work together to target and better  align clean technology RD&D investments and  activities in Canada, including opportunities for  co-funding clean technology projects.  2. Establishing a clean technology data strategy The federal government, working with the provinces  and territories, will support the collection and  regular publication of comprehensive data on clean  technology in Canada to inform future government  decision making, to improve knowledge in the  private sector and stakeholder community, and to  foster innovation.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  45  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  44  PATHWAY TO MEETING CANADA'S  2030 TARGET    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  44  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  45  REPORTING AND OVERSIGHT  Overview  To help achieve the goals and actions laid out in  this Pan-Canadian Framework, the programs and  policies put in place will be monitored, results will  be measured including impacts on GHG emissions,  and actions and performance will be reported on  publicly in a way that is transparent and  accountable to Canadians. This public reporting will  be complemented by ongoing public outreach,  including with youth, inviting their contributions to  Canada's action on clean growth and climate  change. The effectiveness of actions will also be  assessed with a view to ensuring continual  improvement so as to increase ambition over time,  in accordance with the Paris Agreement.  NEW ACTIONS  Measurement and reporting on emissions – Federal,  provincial, and territorial governments will continue  to collaborate on efforts to track and report GHG  emissions in a consistent way across the country, to  track progress on the Pan-Canadian Framework, and  to support international reporting obligations. This   will involve further technical work on measurement  to improve emissions inventories and projections,  and aligning these where possible.  Federal,  provincial, and territorial governments will work  together through the Canadian Council of Ministers  of the Environment (CCME) to examine options for  the reporting of emissions and inventories to ensure  consistency across provinces and territories, to  support Canada’s reporting to the UNFCCC, and for  a pan-Canadian offset protocol framework and  verified carbon credits that can be traded  domestically and internationally.    Reporting on implementation – Federal, provincial,  and territorial governments will work together to  support the coordinated implementation of the  Pan-Canadian Framework, engaging with relevant  ministerial tables including ministers of  environment, energy and mines, transportation,  forestry, agriculture, innovation, infrastructure,  emergency management, and finance, and with  meaningful involvement of Indigenous Peoples. This  will include a process to take regular stock of     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  46  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  46  progress achieved, to report to Canadians and, to  inform Canada's future national commitments in  accordance with the Paris Agreement.  Analysis and advice – Federal, provincial, and  territorial governments will engage with external  experts to provide informed advice to First Ministers  and decision makers; assess the effectiveness of  measures, including through the use of modeling;  and identify best practices. This will help ensure  that actions identified in the Pan-Canadian  Framework are open to external, independent  review, and are transparent and informed by science  and evidence.  Review - Federal, provincial, and territorial  governments will work together to establish the  approach to the review of carbon pricing, including  expert assessment of stringency and effectiveness  that compares carbon pricing systems across  Canada, which will be completed by early 2022 to  provide certainty on the path forward. An interim  report will be completed in 2020 which will be  reviewed and assessed by First Ministers. As an  early deliverable, the review will assess approaches  and best practices to address the competitiveness of  emissions-intensive trade-exposed sectors.   Federal, provincial, and territorial governments will  continue to engage and partner with Indigenous  Peoples as actions are implemented and progress  is tracked.   LOOKING AHEAD This Plan provides a foundation for working together  to grow the economy, reduce emissions, and  strengthen resilience. Ongoing, collaborative action  is needed to generate transformational change and  to ensure that all Canadians benefit from the  transition to a low-carbon economy. First Ministers  are tasking their officials to develop an agenda for  federal, provincial, and territorial Ministers to  implement this Plan. Annual reports to First  Ministers will enable governments to take stock of  progress and give direction to sustain and enhance  efforts.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  47  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  47  ANNEX I: FEDERAL INVESTMENTS  AND MEASURES TO SUPPORT THE  TRANSITION TO A LOW-CARBON  ECONOMY FEDERAL INVESTMENTS  The federal government will help catalyze the  transition to a clean growth economy through  significant new investments to complement provincial  and territorial actions and investments, including  investments in infrastructure, the Low-Carbon  Economy Fund, and clean technology funding.    • Budget 2016 outlined a number of new federal  investments that will support a transition to a   low-carbon economy. Some of these investments  include    » $62.5 million to support the deployment of  infrastructure for alternative transportation  fuels, including charging infrastructure for  electric vehicles and natural gas and hydrogen  refueling stations as well as demonstration   of next generation recharging technologies;    » $50 million over two years to invest in  technologies that will reduce GHG emissions  from the oil and gas sector;    » $82.5 million over two years to support  research, development, and demonstration of  clean energy technologies with the greatest  potential to reduce GHG emissions;   » $100 million per year from the Regional  Development Agencies to support clean  technology, representing a doubling of  thei existing annual aggregate support;   » $50 million over four years to Sustainable  Development Technology Canada (SDTC) for  the SD Tech Fund. These resources will enable  SDTC to announce new clean technology projects  in 2016 that support the development and  demonstration of new technologies that  address climate change, air quality, clean  water, and clean soil;    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  48  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  49  THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT   HAS COLLABORATED WITH   THE FEDERATION OF CANADIAN  MUNICIPALITIES ON THE GREEN  MUNICIPAL FUND (GMF)   SINCE 2000.  • Budget 2016 provided an additional   $125 million over two years  including for projects that reduce  GHG emissions.   • Recently announced projects under  the GMF include a $31.5 million  investment for 20 new sustainable  municipal projects, such as  Canada’s first net-zero municipal  library and Halifax’s ground- breaking Solar City project.   » $40 million over five years to integrate climate  resilience into building design guides and  codes. The funding will support revised  national building codes by 2020 for  residential, institutional, commercial, and  industrial facilities;    » $129.5 million to implement programming  focused on building the science base to inform  decision making, protecting the health and  well-being of Canadians, building resilience  in the North and Indigenous communities,  and enhancing competitiveness in key  economic sectors; and   » $10.7 million over two years to implement  renewable energy projects in off-grid  Indigenous and northern communities that rely  on diesel and other fossil fuels to generate heat  and power.  • Building on the infrastructure investments  outlined in Budget 2016, the federal government  has announced an additional $81 billion over  11 years for investments in public transit, social  infrastructure, transportation that supports trade,  Canada's rural and northern communities, smart  cities, and green infrastructure.  • Green infrastructure funding will support projects  that reduce GHG emissions, enable greater  climate change adaptation and resilience, and  ensure that more communities can provide clean  air and safe drinking water for their citizens.  Specific projects could include interprovincial  transmission lines that reduce reliance on coal,  the development of new low-carbon/renewable  power projects, and the expansion of smart grids  to make more efficient use of existing power  supplies.  • The federal government is proposing the creation  of the Canada Infrastructure Bank that will work  with provinces, territories, and municipalities to  further the reach of government funding directed  to infrastructure. The Canada Infrastructure Bank  will be responsible for investing at least  $35 billion on a cash basis from the federal  government into large infrastructure projects that  contribute to economic growth through direct  investments, loans, loan guarantees, and equity  investments.  • Funding under the $2 billion Low Carbon  Economy Fund will begin in 2017. This Fund will  support new provincial and territorial actions to  reduce emissions between now and 2030.  Projects will focus on concrete measures that  generate new, incremental reductions, while  considering cost-effectiveness.  • The Government has also committed more than  $1 billion, over four years, to support clean  technology including in the forestry, fisheries,  mining, energy and agriculture sectors.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  48  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  49  FEDERAL CARBON PRICING BENCHMARK  The federal government outlined a benchmark for  carbon pricing that reflects the principles proposed  by the Working Group on Carbon Pricing Mechanisms  and the Vancouver Declaration. Its goal is to ensure  that carbon pricing applies to a broad set of emission  sources throughout Canada with increasing stringency  over time to reduce GHG emissions at lowest cost to  business and consumers and to support innovation  and clean growth.  The benchmark includes the following elements:  1. Timely introduction.  All jurisdictions will have carbon pricing by 2018.  2. Common scope.  Pricing will be based on GHG emissions and  applied to a common and broad set of sources to  ensure effectiveness and minimize interprovincial  competitiveness impacts. At a minimum, carbon  pricing should apply to substantively the same  sources as British Columbia's carbon tax.  3. Two systems. Jurisdictions can implement (i) an explicit  price-based system (a carbon tax like British  Columbia's or a carbon levy and  performance-based emissions system like in  Alberta) or (ii) a cap-and-trade system  (e.g. Ontario and Quebec).  4. Legislated increases in stringency, based on  modelling, to contribute to our national target  and provide market certainty.   For jurisdictions with an explicit price-based  system, the carbon price should start at a  minimum of $10 per tonne in 2018 and rise by  $10 per year to $50 per tonne in 2022.  Provinces with cap-and-trade need (i) a 2030  emissions-reduction target equal to or greater than  Canada's 30 percent reduction target and  (ii) declining (more stringent) annual caps to at  least 2022 that correspond, at a minimum, to the  projected emissions reductions resulting from the  carbon price that year in price-based systems.  5. Revenues remain in the jurisdiction of origin.  Each jurisdiction can use carbon-pricing revenues  according to their needs, including to address  impacts on vulnerable populations and sectors and  to support climate change and clean growth goals.  6. Federal backstop.  The federal government will introduce an explicit  price-based carbon pricing system that will apply  in jurisdictions that do not meet the benchmark.  The federal system will be consistent with the  principles and will return revenues to the  jurisdiction of origin.  7. Five‑year review. The overall approach will be reviewed by early  2022 to confirm the path forward, including  continued increases in stringency. The review will  account for progress and for the actions of other  countries in response to carbon pricing, as well as  recognition of permits or credits imported from  other countries.  8. Reporting.  Jurisdictions should provide regular, transparent,  and verifiable reports on the outcomes and  impacts of carbon pricing policies.  The federal government will work with the territories  to address their unique circumstances, including  high costs of living, challenges with food security,  and emerging economies.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  50  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  50  OTHER RECENT FEDERAL MEASURES  The federal government has also recently  announced new federal measures, including  • During the North American Leaders Summit in  June 2016, the federal government made joint  commitments with the United States and Mexico to   » phase out fossil fuel subsidies by 2025. The  commitment was reaffirmed by G-20 countries  in September 2016.   » reduce methane emissions from the oil and  gas sector by 40 to 45 percent below 2012  levels by 2025.   • On October 15, 2016, Canada signed onto  the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol  and committed to propose new regulations  to significantly reduce HFC consumption and  prohibit the manufacture and import into Canada  of certain products containing HFCs. These  proposed regulations were published on  November 26, 2016. This is additional to  measures already introduced to increase the  recovery, recycling, and destruction of HFCs  in refrigeration and air conditioning equipment  and to established regulatory provisions for an   HFC reporting system.  • On November 17, 2016, Canada released its  Mid-Century Long-Term Low-Greenhouse Gas  Development Strategy. The mid-century strategy  describes various pathways for innovative and  creative solutions. Canada's mid-century  strategy is not a blueprint for action nor is it  policy prescriptive. It is based on modelling of  different scenarios and looks beyond 2030 to  start a conversation on the ways we can reduce  emissions for a cleaner, more sustainable future  by 2050. As  a result, it will be a living document.  • On November 21, 2016, the federal government  announced that it would be amending its existing  coal-fired electricity regulations  to accelerate the  phase out of traditional coal-fired electricity by  2030. The federal government also announced  that, to support the transition away from coal  towards cleaner sources of generation,  performance standards for natural gas-fired  electricity are also being developed.   • On November 25, 2016, the federal government   announced that it will consult with provinces  and territories, Indigenous Peoples, industries,  and non-governmental organizations to develop  a clean fuel standard. It is expected that once  developed, a clean fuel standard would promote  the use of clean technology and lower carbon  fuels, and promote alternatives such as electricity,  biogas, and hydrogen.  http://www.unep.org/newscentre/Default.aspx?DocumentID=27086&ArticleID=36283&l=en   Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  51  Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change  51  ANNEX II: PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL  KEY ACTIONS AND COLLABORATION  OPPORTUNITIES WITH THE GOVERNMENT  OF CANADA INTRODUCTION  The Paris Agreement and the Vancouver Declaration  have set an ambitious course for low carbon growth  and climate action in Canada.  The Pan-Canadian  Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change will  build on the leadership shown and actions taken by  the provinces and territories as well as new policies  announced by the federal government.   This annex outlines provincial and territorial  accomplishments in reducing greenhouse gas  emissions and accelerating clean growth, and  presents steps that each jurisdiction has taken or is  taking to implement carbon pricing.   The annex also outlines areas where the federal  government and each provincial and territorial  government will work together to implement the  Pan-Canadian Framework in order to spur growth and  jobs for Canadians, reduce our emissions and adapt  to climate change.   Each province and territory is unique and is  responding to the urgency of climate change and the  opportunity offered by clean growth in its own way.  Effective action will require close collaboration  between governments. Each provincial and territorial  government has identified multiple areas for potential  partnerships with the federal government, adapted to  their own priorities, circumstances and strengths.  Governments are committed to working together on  these priorities to support the implementation of the  Pan-Canadian Framework. Governments will also  engage the contributions of Indigenous Peoples in  advancing shared goals.  This work will be supported by significant new federal  investments to drive the transition to a clean growth  economy, as outlined in Budget 2016 and the 2016  Fall Economic Statement, including public transit  and Green Infrastructure, the Canada Infrastructure  Bank, the Low-Carbon Economy Fund, and funding  for clean technology and innovation. Federal  investments are intended to supplement and  accelerate investments by provinces and territories,  and will follow applicable program criteria.      Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    52   BRITISH COLUMBIA KEY ACTIONS TO DATE    Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in British Columbia include:    British Columbia’s Climate Leadership Plan   B.C. has proven that it is possible to reduce  emissions while growing the economy and  creating jobs and it’s important that this balance  be maintained.  With this in mind, B.C. released  its Climate Leadership Plan in the summer   of 2016.     Building on the comprehensive foundation  established in 2008, the plan lays out a series of  targeted, sector-specific actions that will reduce  emissions by 25 million tonnes (Mt) of carbon  dioxide equivalent (CO2e) and create 66,000  jobs.  The plan will be further strengthened in  the months and years ahead, as B.C. continues  to work with First Nations, the federal  government, communities, industry and others.   B.C. is committed to reducing GHG emissions by  80% below 2007 levels by 2050.  To read B.C.’s  Climate Leadership Plan, visit:  http://climate.gov.bc.ca/    Revenue-Neutral Carbon Tax   B.C. has the highest broad-based carbon tax   in North America.  The carbon tax sets a  transparent and predictable price on carbon  while returning all revenue to B.C. individuals  and businesses.  The price signal creates a real  incentive to reduce emissions across the  economy and is the backbone of B.C.’s approach  to climate action.   Forestry   B.C.’s forests offer potential for storing carbon,  so the Province is taking further action to  rehabilitate up to 300,000 hectares of Mountain   Pine Beetle and wildfire impacted forests over  the first five years of the program; recover  more wood fibre; and avoid emissions from  burning slash.    Clean LNG   B.C. has an abundance of natural gas, which is   a lower carbon fuel that will play a critical role   in transitioning the world economy off of high  carbon fuels such as coal.  B.C. is developing the  resource responsibly, and provincial legislation  will make the emerging LNG sector the cleanest  in the world.  B.C. is also electrifying upstream  development of natural gas and will require a  45% reduction in methane emissions by 2025.   100% Clean Electricity   Thanks to significant historical investments,  B.C.’s electricity is already 98% clean or  renewable and British Columbians have the  third-lowest residential rates in North America.  Going forward under the Climate Leadership  Plan, 100% of the supply of electricity acquired  by BC Hydro for the integrated grid must be from  clean or renewable sources.  The $8.3 billion  Site C Clean Energy Project is a major part of  B.C.’s clean energy future and will create enough  electricity to power 450,000 homes.   Clean Transportation   B.C. is taking real action to reduce emissions  from the transportation sector and help British  Columbians make greener choices—initiatives  include Zero Emissions Vehicles rebates and  funding for more charging stations (which have  helped BC become the Canadian leader in clean  energy vehicle sales per capita); a scrap-it  program; low carbon and renewable fuel  standards; and historic investments in transit.   B.C.’s actions in the transportation sector have   http://climate.gov.bc.ca/   Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    53   already reduced annual emissions by an  estimated 2.5 Mt and combined with the new  actions, will reduce annual emissions by up to   a further 3.4 Mt by 2050.    Adaptation   In 2010, the Province created a comprehensive  strategy to address the changes we will see as a  result of climate change. It is based on three key  strategies: build a strong foundation of  knowledge and tools; make adaptation a part   of government business; and assess risks and  implement priority adaptation actions in key  climate sensitive sectors.  The Province is now  working with the federal government and other  Canadian jurisdictions to further improve the  management of the risks associated with a  changing climate.   These actions provide a strong contribution   to a comprehensive pan-Canadian framework.     ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   B.C.’s revenue-neutral carbon tax has been in  place since 2008.  It is set at $30/tonne and  covers approximately 75% of the province’s  economy. All revenues generated will be returned  to tax payers. B.C. will assess the interim study  in 2020 and determine a path forward to meet  climate change objectives.   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   British Columbia and the Government of Canada  intend to collaborate in the following domains of  priority to address climate change and advance  clean growth:   Growing our forests; reducing  our emissions   Forests present a unique opportunity to address  climate change because trees absorb CO2 when  they grow. British Columbia, the Government of  Canada and First Nations will work together to  reduce GHG emissions through forestry activities,  including reforestation, enhanced silviculture  techniques, and the salvaging of unmerchantable  trees for processing into dimensional lumber and  bioenergy.  The initiative is expected to reduce  emissions by 12 Mt in 2050 and create  20,000 jobs.   Preparing for and adapting to  climate change   British Columbia and the Government of Canada  will support projects across the province to make  infrastructure more resilient to a changing  climate, and to help communities adapt to a  changing climate.  Flood mitigation will be an  area of focus.   Reduce Emissions from Natural Gas  Activities   British Columbia and the Government of Canada  will work together to bring clean grid electricity  to natural gas operations in northeast B.C.  They will co-fund the construction of new  transmission lines and other public  electrification infrastructure that could serve  up to 760 megawatts of upstream natural gas  processing load and avoid up to 4 Mt of  emissions per year.     Electricity Grid Interconnection   British Columbia and the Governments of Canada  and Alberta will work together to restore the  capability of the existing high-voltage electricity  grid interconnection with Alberta.  This project  will improve access to clean electricity in Alberta  and will result in lower GHG emissions and air     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    54   pollution, and improved grid reliability in both  provinces.      Clean Technology Innovation   British Columbia and the Government of Canada  will work together to spur the development and  commercialization of new technologies that will  reduce emissions and create jobs for Canadians.        Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    55   ALBERTA KEY ACTIONS TO DATE    Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in Alberta include:    Climate Leadership Plan   The Climate Leadership Plan is a made-in- Alberta climate change strategy, specifically  designed for Alberta's unique economy. While  details of the final strategy are still being  developed, the Alberta government has moved  forward on a number of key areas.   Clean Electricity   Alberta will phase-out GHGs from coal-fired  power plants and achieve 30% renewable energy  by 2030.   Alberta will add 5,000 megawatts of renewable  energy capacity by 2030 through the Renewable  Electricity Program. To meet this target,  investment in Alberta’s electricity system will be  solicited through a competitive and transparent  bidding process, while ensuring projects come  online in a way that does not impact grid  reliability and is delivered at the lowest possible  cost to consumers.   A new provincial agency, Energy Efficiency  Alberta, has been created to promote and  support energy efficiency and community energy  systems for homes, businesses and communities.   Capping Oil Sands Emissions    A legislated maximum emissions limit of 100 Mt  in any year, with provisions for cogeneration and  new upgrading capacity, will help drive  technological progress.   Reducing Methane Emissions   Alberta will reduce methane gas emissions from  oil and gas operations by 45% by 2025.   Innovation and Technology   Alberta is investing in innovation and technology  to reduce GHGs, encourage a more diversified  economy and energy industry, and create new  jobs, while improving opportunities to get the  province’s energy products to new markets.  Alberta has created a task force that will make  recommendations on a Climate Change  Innovation and Technology Framework.    These actions provide a strong contribution   to a comprehensive pan-Canadian framework.     ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   A carbon levy to be included in the price of all  fuels that emit greenhouse gases when combusted,  including transportation and heating fuels such  as diesel, gasoline, natural gas and propane. The  levy will be applied at a rate of $20/tonne on  January 1, 2017 and will increase to $30/tonne  one year later.   The Climate Leadership Plan is designed for  Alberta’s economy. The economic impact of  carbon pricing is expected to be small, and every  dollar will be reinvested back into the local  economy. Reinvesting carbon revenue in our  economy will diversify our energy industry by  investing in large scale renewable energy,  bioenergy initiatives, and transformative  innovation and technology. Over the next 5 years:   $6.2 billion will help diversify our energy  industry and create new jobs:   • $3.4 billion for large scale renewable  energy, bioenergy and technology     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    56   • $2.2 billion for green infrastructure  like transit   • $645 million for Energy Efficiency Alberta   $3.4 billion will help households, businesses   and communities adjust to the carbon levy:   • $2.3 billion for carbon rebates to help   low- and middle-income families   • $865 million to pay for a cut in the small  business tax rate from 3% to 2%   • $195 million to assist coal communities,  Indigenous communities and others with  adjustment   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   Alberta and the Government of Canada intend to  collaborate in the following domains of priority to  address climate change and advance clean  growth:   Clean Electricity   Alberta and the federal government will to work  together to advance renewable energy, coal to  natural gas conversion, and potential  hydroelectric projects, including pump storage  projects. Alberta is committed to developing  incentives for renewable generation in a manner  that is compatible with Alberta’s unique  electricity market.    B.C. – Alberta Intertie   Alberta is working with British Columbia and the  federal government to explore new and enhanced   interties. The Alberta Electric System Operator is  currently working with BC Hydro and industry on  a key project, the restoration of the B.C.-Alberta  950 MW intertie to its full path rating (expected  completion is in 2020). This restoration would  allow imports of 1200 MW on the BC-AB  intertie.     Innovation and Technology   Alberta is focused on the opportunity to leverage  environmental policies and programs into new  manufacturing, innovation, and clean technology  businesses. Current opportunities include  superclusters, advanced sensor technology for  environmental applications including methane  monitoring and reductions, and municipal waste  diversion. Innovative solutions will result in  meaningful GHG reductions across Canada and  the export of solutions to promote a lower  carbon world.   Disaster Mitigation / Infrastructure    Alberta is undertaking targeted work to address  the hazards to which Albertans are vulnerable,  including flood, wildfire, heat, drought,  landslides, and wind.    While hazards and disaster risks have always  been a concern, climate change is driving the  need to adapt to more intense and frequent  events. Federal support for wildfire mitigation  infrastructure will reduce the risk of wildland  fires. In addition, flood risk requires immediate  mitigation infrastructure such as dykes and  dams. Federal partnership on these initiatives  will support risk management.   .                 Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    57   ONTARIO KEY ACTIONS TO DATE   Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in Ontario include:    Permanent Closure of Coal-fired Electricity  Generating Stations   On April 15, 2014, Ontario became the first  jurisdiction in North America to fully eliminate  coal as a source of electricity generation. This  action is the single largest GHG reduction  initiative in North America. On November 23,  2015, Ontario passed the Ending Coal for  Cleaner Air Act, permanently banning coal-fired  electricity generation in the province.    Ontario’s Climate Change Strategy and  Action Plan   On November 24, 2015, Ontario released its  Climate Change Strategy setting the framework  for the province to meet its long-term 2050  GHG emissions reduction target. The Strategy  highlights five key objectives for transformation:   1. A prosperous low-carbon economy with  world-leading innovation, science and  technology   2. Government collaboration and leadership   3. A resource-efficient, high-productivity society   4. Reducing GHG emissions across sectors   5. Adapting and thriving in a changing climate   On June 8, 2016, Ontario released its Climate  Change Action Plan to implement the strategy  over the next five years and put Ontario on the  path to achieve its longer term objectives.  Policies and programs identified in the Action  Plan include:   • Transforming how ultra-low and carbon-free  energy technologies are deployed in our   homes and workplaces, and how we move  people and goods    • Halting rising building-related emissions,  with a focus on helping homeowners and  small businesses move to low- and zero- carbon energy   • Making available funding for industries and  manufacturers proposing to transform their  operations and move off carbon-based fuels  and peak electricity    • Aligning Ontario’s R&D and innovation  funding to place a greater emphasis on  climate change science and technologies,  with a view to making the discoveries  that could lead to breakthroughs in   zero-carbon technology   Ontario has made measurable progress in  reducing GHGs. According to Environment   and Climate Change Canada’s 2016 National  Inventory Report, from 2005 to 2014, Ontario’s  emissions decreased by 41 Mt (-19%), over the  same period, Canada-wide emissions fell by   15 Mt (-2%).    These actions provide a strong contribution   to a comprehensive pan-Canadian framework.     ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   On May 18, 2016, Ontario passed its landmark  Climate Change Mitigation and Low-carbon  Economy Act, which creates a long term  framework for climate action. The Act creates a  robust framework for cap and trade program,  ensures transparency and accountability on how  any proceeds collected under the program are  used and enshrines emission reduction targets  in legislation.    Ontario’s approach, including its cap and trade  program and associated emissions reduction     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    58   targets, will exceed the standards of the federal  carbon pricing benchmark. Ontario’s targets are:    • 15% below 1990 levels by 2020;    • 37% below 1990 levels by 2030; and   • 80% below 1990 levels by 2050.   Ontario is a founding member of the Western  Climate Initiative (WCI), a not-for-profit  organization established in 2008 to help member  states and provinces execute their cap and trade  programs. In 2017, Ontario will link its cap and  trade system with those of WCI members Quebec  and California to create the largest cap and trade  system in North America.     Ontario will set a cap on total emissions from the  covered sectors in 2017 based on the forecast  emissions for large final emitters, electricity  generation and transportation and heating fuels.  Allowances will then be created in an amount  equal to the cap and either sold or provided free- of-charge to Ontario emitters.   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   Ontario and the Government of Canada intend   to collaborate in the following domains of priority  to address climate change and advance clean growth:   Invest in Zero Emission Transportation   and Infrastructure   Ontario is committed to increase uptake of zero  emission passenger and commercial vehicles,  both by providing purchasing incentives and by  expanding the EV charging network across  Ontario. In its 2016 budget, the federal  government committed to support the  deployment of alternative transportation fuel  infrastructure, including electric charging  stations.  Ontario and the Government of Canada  will work together to support the deployment of  EV vehicles through enabling infrastructure.   Invest in Other Zero Emission  Transportation   Ontario seeks a partnership with the Government  of Canada to support enabling infrastructure that  will increase the availability and use of lower  carbon fuels, including LNG, increase the use of  low carbon trucks and buses and increase the  availability of LNG fueling infrastructure.   Ontario is dedicating significant resources for  these additional transportation initiatives.  Expected emissions reductions in the  transportation sector overall are 2.45 Mt  in 2020.     Assist with Building Retrofits, Energy Audits  and Technology Deployment   Ontario seeks a partnership with the Government  of Canada as the province develops programs for  fuel switching and energy efficiency, such as  retrofits for existing residential buildings  (including targeted initiatives for low-income  households), and clean technologies for  industries and small and medium enterprises.   Partnership would increase investment in  this area, allowing acceleration and scaling up  of progress.     Ontario Climate Modelling   Services Consortium   Ontario seeks a partnership with the Government  of Canada to build regional capacity and support  adaptation actions. Ontario plans to establish an  Ontario Climate Modelling Services Consortium,  which would act as a one window source of data  to help the public and private sectors make  evidence-based decisions.     The Consortium would operate at arm’s length  from government. Ontario would seek  partnerships with other governments, non- governmental organizations and the private  sector to ensure the organization’s effectiveness  and long term success.  The Consortium would  also be expected to develop service fee revenue     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    59   streams to contribute to the organization’s  fiscal sustainability.   Electricity Transmission    Ontario, in collaboration with the Government   of Canada, will work with its regional partners  to advance opportunities to expand and upgrade  electricity transmission infrastructure to  support clean hydroelectric power to displace   the production of electricity from fossil fuels.    Ontario will also collaborate with the Government  of Canada to accelerate access to clean electricity  in remote Indigenous communities.  This will  lessen dependence on expensive diesel fuel and  reduce greenhouse gas emissions and air pollution.         Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    60   QUÉBEC KEY ACTIONS TO DATE   Some of the key measures taken to date by  Québec, which has the lowest greenhouse gas  emissions per capita between the provinces in  Canada, include:    2013-2020 Action Plan on Climate Change  (PACC 2013-2020)   PACC 2013-2020 will reduce GHG emissions by  20% below the 1990 level by 2020. Among its  other measures, the action plan offers financial  help to the different stakeholders of Québec  society so they can reduce their energy  consumption, improve their practices, innovate  and adjust. The work surrounding the  development of the actions of Québec after the  2020 period is underway, in particular to reduce  GHG emissions of the province by 37.5 % below  the 1990 level by 2030.   2016-2030 Energy Policy   The Energy Policy will favour a transition to a low  carbon footprint economy, chiefly by improving  energy efficiency by 15%, by reducing petroleum  consumption by 40%, and by increasing the  production of renewable energies by 25%.  Québec is one of the world’s main producers of  renewable energy, which represents 99.8% of its  total electricity production.   2013-2020 Governmental Climate Change  Adjustment Strategy    The Strategy will mitigate the impact of climate  change on the environment, the economy and the  communities, and will strengthen the resiliency  of Québec society. The government of Québec  has, notably, invested in the Ouranos consortium  in order to get a better understanding of the  impact of climate change on its territory, and to  better inform the decision-making process and  the development of solutions.    2015-2020 Transport Electrification Plan    Québec targets 100,000 electric vehicles on the  road in 2020 and one million in 2030. The zero- emission vehicle (ZEV) standard adopted in  October 2016 will encourage automotive  manufacturers to improve their offer of ZEV,   and the investments in electrification will allow  Québec to build up its available renewable  energies, its expertise and its world-class   know-how.   These measures represent a major contribution   at the Pan-Canadian level.    ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   Pioneer in the use of cap-and-trade systems for  greenhouse gas emissions allowances, Québec`s  system has been linked to California’s since  2014, and will soon be linked to that of Ontario.  It represents the largest carbon market in North  America, and is often referred to as an example  of performance and rigour. Because it is based  on hard caps to reduce GHG emissions, it is a  robust and efficient tool to achieve the ambitious  mitigation goals Québec has set for itself for  2020 and 2030.    Furthermore, auction revenues from its   cap-and-trade system are entirely reinvested  in measures that will spur the transition of  Québec’s economy to a more resilient and   low-carbon one. This comprehensive approach,  tailored to the needs and specificities of  Québec, allows Québec to fulfill its leadership  role in the fight against climate change in North  America and internationally.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    61   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE    The governments of Québec and Canada intend  to collaborate in the following priority areas in  order to fight climate change and allow clean  economic growth:   Electric and Public Transport   Support the development of the offer and  infrastructure of electric and public transport, by  completing various projects such as the  Metropolitan Electric Network (MEN), the  implementation of bus rapid transit (BRT)  systems between Montreal and Laval, the  extension of the BRT in Gatineau, and the  implementation of a BRT in Québec.   Energy Efficiency and Conversion   Speed up the reduction of GHG emissions in  Northern communities, as well as on the Lower  North Shore and Magdalen Islands, by replacing  diesel with renewable energy sources for the  electricity supply of their free-standing network.    Promote the implementation of energy  performance and efficiency standards for new  buildings, as well as for the renovation of existing  buildings. Invest in the industrial sector to  improve the energy performance of fixed  production processes, by providing innovative  technologies and reducing the use of gases with  high warming potential such as  hydrofluorocarbons, which Québec will continue  to prioritize.   Recognition of the International Trade of  Emission Rights   Contribute to the implementation of Articles 6  and 13 of the Paris Accord, to which the  accounting and disclosure principles of the  Western Climate Initiative (WCI) can contribute,  as well as within a possible agreement between  Canada and the United States regarding the  accounting and attribution of “internationally  transferred mitigation outcomes” as part of the  contributions determined at national level (CDN).    Québec will also share with the government of  Canada a detailed methodology, developed in  collaboration with California and soon Ontario,   in order to tabulate in its international reports  the emission reductions achieved by Québec  thanks to the carbon market.   Innovation and Adjustment to  Climate Change    Promote innovation in green technology and GHG  emission reduction, and collaborate on  increasing the resiliency of the communities  affected by climate change, by assessing the  vulnerabilities and risks, adjusting land planning  and use, and designing sustainable projects.    Québec will provide its expertise to the initiatives  of the government of Canada, focusing in  particular on joint financing of prevention and  protection infrastructure against certain natural  disasters linked to climate change.         Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    62   NEW BRUNSWICK KEY ACTIONS TO DATE   Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in New Brunswick include:    Transitioning to a Low-Carbon Economy:  New Brunswick’s Climate Change Action Plan   The Climate Change Action Plan outlines a bold  vision for New Brunswick and sets renewed GHG  reduction targets: 2030 target of 35% below  1990 levels; and 80% below 2001 levels by  2050. The plan also address other commitments,  such as the Canadian Energy Strategy, released  by the Council of the Federation in 2015, and  contains a Climate Change Adaptation Strategy  supported by actions to build resilience into New  Brunswick communities, businesses, infrastructures  and natural resources.    The Action Plan provides a clear path forward to  reduce GHG emissions while promoting economic  growth and enhancing current efforts to adapt to  the effects of climate change.    Locally-owned Renewable Energy Projects  that are Small Scale (LORESS)   In May 2015, the province introduced legislation  to allow local entities to develop renewable  energy sourced electricity generation in their  communities. This will enable universities, non- profit organizations, co-operatives, First Nations  and municipalities to contribute to NB Power’s  renewable energy requirements.   Shifting to renewables in   electricity generation   Two fossil fuelled power plants were closed in  recent years – one coal and one heavy oil.  Also,  300 megawatts of wind energy was installed in  the province and biomass fuel use in industry  was expanded to displace oil. Solid waste   landfills are capturing biogas and some are  generating electricity.    These actions are allowing NB Power to achieve  the regulated Renewable Portfolio Standard of  40% of in-province sales from renewable energy  sources by 2020. This translates to  approximately 75% non-emitting by 2020  including nuclear.   Adaptation    The province has developed a progressive  Climate Change Adaptation Program including  assembling future climate projections, and  supporting climate impact vulnerability  assessments in communities and for  infrastructure.  Adaptation projects also focus   on solutions building and advanced planning to  help reduce or avoid the costs of impacts such   as more severe and frequent flooding, coastal  erosion and storm events and disease and pest  migration.    Several projects are carried out in collaboration  with other Atlantic provinces, notably under the  Regional Adaptation Collaborative (RAC), which  involves federal support, as well as with the Gulf  of Maine Council and US partners.   These actions provide a strong contribution   to a comprehensive Pan-Canadian Framework.     ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   The province will implement a made-in-New  Brunswick carbon pricing mechanism that  addresses the requirements of the federal  government for implementing a price on carbon  emissions by 2018 and that at the same time  recognizes New Brunswick’s unique economic  and social circumstances. The provincial  government will take into consideration the  impacts on low-income families, trade-exposed  and energy-intensive industries, and consumers     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    63   and businesses, when developing the specific  mechanisms and implementation details,  including how to reinvest proceeds.   Any carbon pricing policy will strive to maintain  competitiveness and minimize carbon leakage  (i.e., investments moving to other jurisdictions).  Proceeds from carbon emissions pricing will be  directed to a dedicated climate change fund.   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   The Government of New Brunswick and the  Government of Canada intend to collaborate   in the following domains of priority to address  climate change and advance clean growth:   Enhanced Electricity Generation   and Transmission System    New Brunswick will work with the other Atlantic  provinces and the Government of Canada to  advance opportunities for clean electricity  generation, transmission, storage and demand  management linkages across the region. This  will: improve access to non-emitting electricity;  support the phase-out of coal-fired electricity  generation; improve grid reliability and energy  security; and, consistent with fair market  principles, help provinces access export markets  for clean, non-emitting electricity.    This will contribute to both the Atlantic Growth  Strategy and Canadian Energy Strategy and  will build on existing regional coordination  efforts, leading to an integrated regional  electricity strategy.   Energy Efficiency   The Government of New Brunswick, in  partnership with the Government of Canada, will  seek to enhance energy efficiency programs by  targeting GHG emission reduction opportunities  across sectors and fuels.     Examples of possible targeted interventions  include programs that help: trucking fleets add  aerodynamic and other efficiency measures to  existing equipment; small- to medium-size  industry improve their compressed air systems,  boilers and lighting; commercial and institutional  facilities invest in heating, lighting and other  retrofits; and families retrofitting their homes to  reduce energy costs, with special treatment for  low- and fixed-income families.   Industrial Emissions Reductions   The Government of New Brunswick and the  Government of Canada will work to support  industrial emission reduction initiatives through  technology and energy efficiency improvements  while maintaining productivity. For example,  there are significant opportunities to reduce  emissions resulting from industrial production   in the Belledune area of New Brunswick.    Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    64   NOVA SCOTIA KEY ACTIONS TO DATE    Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in Nova Scotia include:    The Environmental Goals and Sustainable  Prosperity Act (2007)   In 2007, Nova Scotia passed legislation  outlining principles for sustainable economic  growth, including a requirement to reduce GHG  emissions in the province to 10% below 1990  levels by 2020. The development and  implementation of the Nova Scotia Climate  Action Plan led to early action on the electricity  sector, the largest source of emissions in the  province. As a result, Nova Scotia has not only  achieved its target six years early, it has also  already met the Canadian 2030 target of 30%  below 2005 levels, and is on a track to continue  reducing emissions.   Nova Scotia’s Greenhouse Gas Emissions  Regulations   Nova Scotia was the first province in Canada to  place a hard cap on GHG emissions from the  electricity sector. These regulations, created in  2009 and enhanced in 2013, required the utility  to reduce GHG emissions by 25% by 2020, and  55% by 2030. This is a measured and flexible  approach which will enable a transition from coal  to clean energy in the province.   Nova Scotia’s Renewable Energy  Regulations   In addition to the hard cap on GHG emissions,  Nova Scotia also has a renewable energy  standard for the electricity sector. This standard  established requirements for 25% of electricity  to be sourced from renewable energy by 2015,  and 40% by 2020.    Energy Efficiency   Nova Scotia has Canada’s first energy efficiency  utility, Efficiency Nova Scotia. This independent  organization has achieved an annual reduction in  electricity demand of over 1% since its creation.  It also administers comprehensive energy  efficiency programs for low income and First  Nations Nova Scotians. These efforts reduce  GHG emissions while supporting the growth of  the low carbon economy.   Tidal Energy   The Bay of Fundy and Minas Basin are home to  the highest tides in the world- every day, more  water flows into this bay than the output from all  the rivers in the world combined. Nova Scotia  has been supporting the development of these  tides as a source of clean, predictable and  reliable energy for Nova Scotians and as a clean  technology export. The Fundy Ocean Research  Centre for Energy (FORCE) now has a grid  connected 2MW tidal turbine with plans to  install more in the coming years.   Waste Management   Nova Scotia is also making efforts to reduce GHG  emissions by diverting organic waste from  landfills, recycling and creating a circular  economy. Progress on waste diversion is reflected  in a 30% reduction in greenhouse emissions  from the waste sector since 2002.   These actions are just a snapshot of what Nova  Scotians are doing to reduce GHG emissions and  provide a strong contribution to a comprehensive  pan-Canadian framework.     ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   As part of the pan-Canadian benchmark for  carbon pricing, Nova Scotia has committed to     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    65   implement a cap and trade program in the  province that builds on our early action in the  electricity sector.   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   The Government of Nova Scotia and the  Government of Canada intend to collaborate in  the following priority domains to address climate  change and advance clean growth:   Energy Efficiency   Nova Scotia and the Government of Canada are  committed to partnering to enhance the existing  provincial energy efficiency programs for homes  and businesses with the objective of reducing  energy use and saving energy costs. This could  include expanded energy efficiency programs,  efforts to accelerate the electrification of homes  and businesses through heat pumps and smart  meters, district energy systems, as well as  electric vehicle infrastructure.   Renewable Energy Generation,  Transmission and Storage   Nova Scotia, in partnership with the Government  of Canada, will work together to advance  opportunities for renewable energy generated  from sources such as wind, tidal and solar, as  well as the enabling transmission and storage  infrastructure to ensure growth beyond current  technical limits. Research and development  capacity will continue to be strengthened.     Planning and Implementing Adaptation  Infrastructure   Nova Scotia and the Government of Canada will  work together and invest in projects to make  infrastructure more resilient to a changing  climate, and to help communities increase their  capacity to adapt to a changing climate.   Regional Electricity Grid Connections   Nova Scotia will work with the other Atlantic  provinces and the Government of Canada to  advance opportunities for clean electricity  generation, transmission, storage and demand  management linkages across the region.    This will: improve access to non-emitting  electricity; support the phase-out of coal-fired  electricity generation; improve grid reliability and  energy security; and, consistent with fair market  principles, help provinces access export markets  for clean, non-emitting electricity. This will  contribute to both the Atlantic Growth Strategy  and Canadian Energy Strategy and will build on  existing regional coordination efforts, leading to  an integrated regional electricity strategy.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    66   PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND KEY ACTIONS TO DATE    Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in Prince Edward Island include:    Climate Change Policy Framework   Prince Edward Island’s primary areas of strategic  focus for climate change fall into the themes of  built environment, transportation, agriculture,  conservation and adaptation. Prince Edward  Island is in the process of developing new  climate change strategies that will result in  further actions and initiatives to reduce GHG  emissions across the province, increase our  resilience to a changing climate, and advance  measures to strengthen and grow a prosperous  green economy in the province.   Prince Edward Island does not have a legislated  provincial emissions reduction target but does  contribute to the regional target set by the  Conference of the New England Governors and  Eastern Canadian Premiers (NEG-ECP). The  targets are 10% reductions from 1990 by 2020,  35% - 45% below 1990 levels by 2030, and 75- 85% reduction from 2001 levels by 2050. PEI  has realized a 9% reduction in GHG emissions  since 2005.     PEI Wind Energy   Prince Edward Island is a world leader in  producing clean electricity from wind. Prince  Edward Island boasts the highest penetration of  wind in Canada and 2nd highest in the world  next to Denmark. The Government of Prince  Edward Island has demonstrated a long-term  commitment and investments of $119 million to  wind energy.    The first commercial wind farm in Atlantic  Canada was developed by the PEI Energy  Corporation at North Cape in 2001. North Cape  was expanded in 2003, doubling in size.    In January 2007, the PEI Energy Corporation  commissioned its second wind farm at East  Point. In 2014, the Island's newest wind farm  was commissioned at Hermanville/ Clearspring.  As a result, Prince Edward Island now has a total  installed wind capacity of 78% of peak load,  which supplies almost 25% of the province’s  total electricity requirements.   Biomass   Prince Edward Island is home to Canada’s  longest-running, biomass-fired district heating  system. Operating since the 1980s, the system  has expanded to serve over 125 buildings in the  downtown core of Charlottetown, including the  University of Prince Edward Island and the  Queen Elizabeth Hospital. It has contributed to  the establishment of a local waste-wood fuel- supply market. The system burns approximately  66,000 tons of waste materials annually.    Coastal Erosion   Prince Edward Island has partnered with the  University of Prince Edward Island (UPEI)  Climate Research Lab to study coastal  vulnerability, including the award-winning  Coastal Impacts Visualization Environment  (CLIVE). CLIVE is an innovative 3D platform for  visualizing the potential future impacts of coastal  erosion and coastal flooding at local community  scales, on PEI and elsewhere, using past data  and Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change models.     The province has also invested in UPEI in its  development of an expansive, cutting-edge  coastal erosion monitoring network.  This  research includes the use of drone and GIS  technology to quantify and assess erosion volume  of shoreline disappearance along Prince Edward  Island’s coastline.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    67   Environmental Awareness in Agriculture    As a key industry for Prince Edward Island,  agriculture is of particular consequence for  climate change and green growth. In recent  years, PEI farmers, watershed groups and the  fertilizer industry have been implementing a  4R Nutrient Stewardship program to encourage  the efficient use of fertilizer and help reduce  related emissions.     Island farmers have been making advances in  crop diversification, including testing potato  varieties that require less fertilizer and adding  nitrogen-fixing pulse crops which improve the  environmental sustainability of annual cropping  systems.  The further use of robotics in dairy  farming and food additives in livestock  production is being employed to reduce  methane emissions.    Prince Edward Island is also the first and only  jurisdiction in Canada with a provincially- supported Alternative Land Use Services  program. Currently, the program has converted  almost 4,000 hectares of marginal land from  annual crop production to perennial or  permanent cover.   These actions provide a strong contribution to a  comprehensive pan-Canadian framework and are  helping facilitate the transition to a low-carbon  economy.   ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   Prince Edward Island will introduce a made-in- PEI approach to carbon pricing which positively  contributes to climate change action while  benefitting Prince Edward Islanders and ensures  optimal conditions for continued growth of the  provincial economy. Prince Edward Island will  focus on measures that will meaningfully  decrease our GHG emissions and recognize the  particular elements of our economy.     Our approach will ensure consistent and  competitive alignment with efforts being made   across the country, including mitigation and  price initiatives in all provinces, especially those  in our region.  PEI is committed to an approach  that will directly enhance provincial adaptation  and mitigation efforts.   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   Prince Edward Island and the Government of  Canada intend to collaborate in the following  domains of priority to address climate change  and advance clean growth:   Energy Efficiency   Prince Edward Island, in partnership with the  Government of Canada, will pursue improved  energy efficiency for all sectors in the province as  outlined in the 2016 PEI Energy Strategy. The  Strategy and forthcoming Climate Change Action  Plan are key policy tools in reducing GHGs,  driving economic growth and creating jobs locally  and in the region.    Prince Edward Island is committed to engaging  in incremental actions through solutions for the  built environment, including businesses and  homes, as well as in new building construction.  It has been clearly illustrated by research in the  region that investing in efficiency is one of the  most effective means of delivering jobs and  economic growth widely – across sectors and  regions – while reducing emissions and providing  savings to consumers.     With a predominantly rural population and some  of the highest electricity rates in the country,  particular consideration will be given to low- income Island families, and sectors that may find  the transition to a lower-carbon environment  challenging.    Clean Energy   Energy resilience and security and a move to  greater electrification are key priorities for the  province. Prince Edward Island, in partnership     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    68   with the Government of Canada, will work to  expand its world-class wind resource, invest in  solar, and enable greater integration of renewable  energy through storage. Prince Edward Island will  work with the other Atlantic Provinces and the  Government of Canada to advance opportunities  for clean electricity generation, transmission,  storage and demand management linkages  across the region.    This will: improve access to non-emitting  electricity; support the phase-out of coal-fired  electricity generation; improve grid reliability and  energy security; and, consistent with fair market  principles, help provinces access export markets  for clean, non-emitting electricity. This will  contribute to both the Atlantic Growth Strategy  and Canadian Energy Strategy and will build on  existing regional coordination efforts leading to an  integrated regional electricity strategy.    Adaptation   With its 1100 km of coastline, Prince Edward  Island is uniquely vulnerable to climate impacts  and is positioned to advance innovative solutions  to make infrastructure more resilient to a  changing climate.    Prince Edward Island and the Government of  Canada will work together to act on findings from  disaster risk reduction planning and coastal  infrastructure assessment, and to improve  decision-making capacity to adapt to climate  change through planning, training  and monitoring.    Research and Development   Prince Edward Island and the Government of  Canada will work together to support research  and development on promising practices and  innovation in the areas of agriculture, marine  industries, and smart grid and micro-grid/  storage. Prince Edward Island provides an  ideal demonstration site for development in  these areas.     This research will advance better understanding  of influences on emissions and opportunities for  clean growth in key sectors of the Prince Edward  Island economy.    Transportation   Prince Edward Island relies on exports for  continued economic growth.  The Prince Edward  Island economy is heavily reliant on ground  transportation for the movement of goods to  markets across Canada and around the world,  and the movement of people across the province.   The province has no rail system, large container  ports, or robust public transit.   As the most rural  province in Canada, mitigation in transportation  is a difficult challenge.     Prince Edward Island and the Government of  Canada will work together on methods to support  an eventual move to greater electrification in  transportation, including corresponding work with  other jurisdictions in Canada. Proposed specific  areas of work include installation of public  charging infrastructure across the province and  in collaboration regionally where possible.           Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    69   NEWFOUNDLAND & LABRADOR KEY ACTIONS TO DATE    Newfoundland and Labrador is making significant  investments to increase the use of clean and  renewable hydroelectric power in the province.  The Muskrat Falls hydroelectric development,  with capital costs of over $9 billion, will result   in 98% of electricity consumed in the province  coming from renewable sources by 2020.    Muskrat Falls will facilitate advancing by more  than a decade the  decommissioning of the  largest thermal oil-fired electricity generation  facility in the province, reducing greenhouse   gas (GHG) emissions by about 1.2 Mt annually   (equivalent to more than 10% of the province’s  total emissions in 2015), and assisting other  jurisdictions to meet their GHG reduction targets.     To focus the province’s efforts to tackle climate  change, Newfoundland and Labrador has  adopted GHG emission reduction targets of 10%  below 1990 levels by 2020 and 75-85% below  2001 levels by 2050, and has endorsed, on a  regional basis, the Conference of New England  Governors and Eastern Canadian Premiers’  reduction marker range of at least 35-45% below  1990 levels by 2030.    To make progress towards these targets  Newfoundland and Labrador released a Climate  Change Action Plan in 2011 identifying  75 actions to reduce GHG emissions and adapt  to the adverse impacts of climate change.  Building on this work, Newfoundland and  Labrador passed the Management of Greenhouse  Gas Act in June 2016, creating a legislative  framework for reducing GHGs from large  industry, and has completed public consultations  to inform new provincial actions   on climate change.   These actions provide a strong contribution to a  comprehensive Pan-Canadian Framework.     ACTION ON PRICING   CARBON POLLUTION   The Government of Newfoundland and Labrador  and the Government of Canada continue to  collaborate to ensure that Newfoundland and  Labrador’s climate change plan, including carbon  pricing, is consistent with the goals in the Pan- Canadian Framework to reduce GHG emissions,  improves resilience to climate impacts, and  accelerates innovation and job creation.    This made-in-Newfoundland and Labrador plan  will address the province’s particular social,  economic, and fiscal realities. This includes  sensitivity to the particular circumstances facing  Labrador communities, and the need to consider  impacts on all remote and isolated communities,  vulnerable populations, consumers and trade- exposed industries, as well as the need to take  account of the province’s reliance on marine  transportation and the absence of lower carbon  alternatives.    COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   Newfoundland and Labrador and the Government  of Canada intend to explore collaboration in the  following priority domains to address climate  change and advance clean growth:   Renewable Energy   Newfoundland and Labrador and the Government  of Canada intend to jointly explore opportunities  to develop renewable energy, including such actions  as enhancing hydroelectric capacity, increasing  transmission infrastructure, and offsetting diesel  use in small-scale off-grid electricity systems.    These efforts will also seek to maximize  collaboration with other Atlantic provinces in the     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    70   electricity sector, contributing to both the  Atlantic Growth Strategy and Canadian Energy  Strategy, and will build on existing regional  coordination efforts, leading to an integrated  regional electricity strategy.    Transportation   Newfoundland and Labrador and the Government  of Canada intend to jointly explore opportunities  to reduce GHG emissions in all parts of the  transportation sector, including electric vehicles  and associated infrastructure, on- and off-road  freight and industrial transportation, marine  vessels, and public transit.   Energy Efficiency   Newfoundland and Labrador and the Government  of Canada intend to jointly explore opportunities  to develop energy efficiency programming,  improve energy codes, and support fuel switching  in all sectors reliant on fossil fuels.   Adaptation   Newfoundland and Labrador and the Government  of Canada intend to jointly explore opportunities  to expand climate monitoring and adaptation  product and information development, as well   as best management practices.   Green Innovation   Newfoundland and Labrador and the Government  of Canada intend to jointly explore opportunities  in research and development in green  technology, including fostering innovation  networks and initiation of pilot projects.     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    - 71 -   YUKON KEY ACTIONS TO DATE    Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in Yukon include:    Yukon Government Climate Change  Action Plan    The Yukon government Climate Change Action  Plan has four goals: reducing GHG emissions;  addressing the impacts of climate change;  leading Yukon action on climate change; and  enhancing our knowledge and understanding   of climate change.    KEY ACTIONS   Work to date in achieving Climate Change Action  Plan goals includes:    Reducing GHG emissions (mitigation)   • Setting nine sector-specific targets in the  areas of transportation, heating buildings,  electricity, and industrial operations.    • Completing a study of Yukon’s transportation  sector, and launching a Ride Share program  in partnership with the City of Whitehorse.    • Supporting Yukon homeowners with the  Good Energy Residential Incentives Program,  which provides incentives to purchase high  efficiency wood stoves, boilers and  pellet stoves.   • Carrying out detailed energy audits of  seven high-consumption Yukon  government buildings.    • A Yukon Biomass Strategy to guide the  development of a biomass energy sector in  the territory.   Addressing the impacts of climate change  (adaptation)   • Completing ten adaptation projects in the  areas of permafrost impacts to highways,  buildings, hydrological responses, and  agricultural capacity; flood risk mapping;  forestry implications including the  encroachment of mountain pine beetle  in lodgepole pine forests; and  bioclimate shifts.   • With the Pan-Territorial Adaptation Strategy,  territorial governments are collaborating on  practical adaptation measures for the north.  Permafrost thaw has been a key focus.   Leading Yukon action on climate change   • Participating in international and national  climate change efforts that impact Yukon,  such as the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change Conference   of the Parties (COP) meetings, including a  developmental opportunity for a Yukon  youth ambassador.   • Currently supporting the Yukon College to  develop a climate change policy course to be  offered by Yukon College.    Enhance our knowledge and understanding  of climate change   • Supporting development of the Climate  Change Indicators and Key Findings report,  an important source of independent  information that will guide action and  research on climate change in Yukon.   • Provide ongoing funding for the Northern  Climate Exchange at Yukon College.    These actions provide a strong contribution   to a comprehensive pan-Canadian framework.       Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    - 72 -   ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   The Government of Yukon recognizes the role of  carbon pricing in the pan-Canadian Framework  for Clean Growth and Climate Change.     Given Yukon’s particular circumstances, the  Government of Canada and the Government of  Yukon will work together to assess the  implications of carbon pricing in the territory for  its economy, communities and people including  energy costs, and to develop solutions together.   The Government of Yukon and the Government   of Canada will also work together to assess the  implications of carbon pricing in Canada on the  cost of living in Yukon. This will be an important  consideration for future policy development.   As outlined in the federal government's benchmark,  100% of the revenues from carbon pricing will  be retained by Yukon. Yukon government will  distribute these revenues back to individual  Yukoners and businesses through a rebate.   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   Yukon and the Government of Canada intend to  collaborate in the following domains of priority to  address climate change and advance clean growth:   Advancing Renewable Energy    Yukon government and the Government of  Canada will partner in advancing renewable  energy projects in Yukon. This will improve   the energy infrastructure in Yukon, including  developing new renewable energy sources to  provide clean energy for current and future  electricity needs.    It will also support remote communities in  diminishing their reliance on diesel for electricity  and will support the expanded use of biomass as  a cleaner option for heating in Yukon.    Energy Efficiency   Yukon government, in partnership with the  Government of Canada, will support energy  efficiency through the retrofitting of existing  buildings. Sound investments in retrofits and  new energy efficiency projects will be supported  by expanding the capacity for collecting,  analyzing, and reporting emissions data that will  help identify the areas of greatest opportunity   for reducing emissions.    Adaptation: Building Resilient  Yukon Communities   Canada’s Northern jurisdictions and the  Government of Canada are working together to  develop the Northern Adaptation Strategy. The  Government of Canada will partner with Yukon to  help build climate-resilient Yukon communities.    Research collaboration will build the knowledge  necessary for evidence-based decision-making in  community planning.  Investments in  infrastructure will address known risks such as  infrastructure built on thawing permafrost.     Green Innovation and Technology   Yukon government and the Government of  Canada will partner on new research and pilot  projects that will explore promising areas for  climate action in the north, such as seasonal  energy storage, cleaner transportation options,  and community-level renewable energy  generation.        Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    73   NORTHWEST TERRITORIES KEY ACTIONS TO DATE    NWT Climate Change Strategic Framework   The Government of the Northwest Territories  (GNWT) has committed to develop a climate  change strategy that takes northern energy  demands and the cost of living into account. It  will reflect commitments to reduce greenhouse  gas emissions, explore carbon pricing systems  and how to develop local alternatives such as  hydro, biomass, wind and solar.     NWT Energy Strategy   The GNWT is currently working on a new 10 year  Energy Strategy. The Energy Strategy will focus  on the affordability, reliability and environmental  impacts of energy in the NWT and will promote  energy efficiency, renewable and alternative  energy in the electricity, heating and  transportation sectors.    The GNWT continues to take the following  territorial adaptation actions:   • Support adaptation decision-making with  knowledge, information collection and sharing   • Build capacity to translate adaptation  knowledge into action    • Build climate-resilience through investments  in infrastructure    • Invest in land use planning, management  plans and building adaptation capacity and  expertise   • Support most vulnerable regions, conducting  risk assessments and completing hazard  mapping   • Reduce climate-related hazards and disaster  by developing disaster risk management plans   • Adapt renewable energy options and solutions  for cold regions   The GNWT continues to take the following  territorial emissions mitigation actions:   • Work with our federal, provincial indigenous  partners and others to find solutions to  address diesel use in remote off-grid  communities including to develop the NWT’s  hydroelectricity potential to reduce GHG  emissions in the electricity sector.   • Implement policies to support the adoption   of lower carbon and energy efficient  technologies.    • Implement policies to support industry and  large emitters in the adoption of lower carbon  and energy efficient technologies.   • Continue biomass initiatives and work towards  the development of a local forest and wood  product industry and develop local wood  pellet manufacturing as an alternate local fuel  source.   • Addressing energy use and GHG emissions   in government buildings and operations.   These actions provide a strong contribution   to a comprehensive pan-Canadian framework.     ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   Through the Climate Change Strategic  Framework, the GNWT is exploring potential  impacts and opportunities that may arise from  pursuing different carbon pricing systems in   the territory.    The GNWT recognizes the role of carbon pricing  in the pan-Canadian Framework for Clean Growth  and Climate Change.  Given the NWT’s particular  circumstances, the Government of Canada and  the GNWT will work together to assess the     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    74   implications of carbon pricing in the territory for  its economy, communities and people including  energy costs, and to develop solutions together.   The GNWT and the Government of Canada will  also work together to assess the implications of  carbon pricing in Canada on the cost of living in  the NWT. This will be an important consideration  for future policy development.   As outlined in the federal government's  benchmark, 100% of the revenues from carbon  pricing will be retained by the NWT.    COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   The NWT will work with the Government of  Canada, in collaboration with regional partners,  to advance opportunities for clean electricity  generation, transmission, storage and demand  management linkages across the region.    This will: improve access to non-emitting  electricity; support the phase-out of coal-fired  electricity generation; improve grid reliability and  energy security; and, subject to fair market  principles, help the region access export markets  for clean, non-emitting electricity.   The NWT and the Government of Canada intend  to collaborate in the following priority areas to  address climate change and advance clean growth:   Taltson Hydro Expansion and  Transmission Links   The proposed Taltson hydro expansion is a small  scale run of river hydro project that could be  developed with little environmental impact next  to the existing power plant, on an already  developed river, and combined with a  transmission link to provide a green energy  corridor to our southern neighbours.    The expansion of the Taltson hydro facility would  help reduce Canada’s GHG emissions by  360,000 tonnes annually for 50-plus years.   The 60 MW expansion of the Taltson hydro  facility could be built in partnership with NWT  Indigenous governments, creating economic  opportunities for Indigenous-owned businesses  across the North.  The NWT and Government of  Canada will undertake technical and feasibility  studies as a first step, including the NWT  launching the environment assessment process.   Renewable Solutions for Off-Grid  Diesel Communities    The Government of Canada and the GNWT will  explore opportunities for reducing reliance on  diesel in off-grid communities. For example,  the Inuvik Wind Project could produce between  2 and 4 megawatts of wind energy for the Town  of Inuvik.  The project would reduce GHG  emissions by 4,300 tonnes per year and  eliminate the need for 1.3 million litres of diesel  annually in the largest diesel community in the  NWT, and help reduce the cost of living  for residents.    For other off-grid diesel powered communities of  the NWT, a suite of renewable solutions such as  solar and wind in combination with energy  storage systems and variable generators could  reduce diesel use and emissions by 25 percent,  an annual GHG elimination of nearly  3000 tonnes.   All-Weather Road Infrastructure for  Adapting to Climate Impacts    The safety and reliability of winter roads is being  impacted by climate change. Construction of the  Mackenzie Valley Highway from Wrigley to  Norman Wells would provide safe, secure, and  reliable access into the Sahtu region, helping  decrease the high cost of living in communities  and support the development of resources in  the region.      The Great Bear River is a priority as the seasonal  ice crossing is increasingly vulnerable to impacts  of climate change. Climate change is also     Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    75   limiting access to existing diamond mining  operations in the Slave Geological Province.    Construction of an all-weather Slave Geological  Province Access Corridor would reduce costs for  industry exploration and development in a region  that holds world-class deposits of natural  resources and continues to be a major  contributor to the Canadian and NWT economy.        Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    76   NUNAVUT KEY ACTIONS TO DATE   Some of the key actions taken to date or under  development in Nunavut include:    Energy efficiency upgrades   The Nunavut Energy Retrofit Program was piloted  in Iqaluit in 2007, and addressed all of the  government of Nunavut’s Iqaluit Government of  Nunavut-owned buildings.   The one-time project  investment of $12.8 million has led to annual  savings in excess of $1.6 million and  1,594 tonnes of GHG reductions.     In combination with the conversion of three of  our facilities to residual heat, our GHG reduction  is approximately 4,100 tonnes, which is roughly  20% of those buildings’ total emissions.   Development of a Climate Change and  Adaptation strategy   Upagiaqtavut was developed in 2011 and serves  as a guiding document for the impacts of climate  change in Nunavut  (http://climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/default/files/3154- 315_climate_english_reduced_size_1_0.pdf).   Climate change databank   The Government of Nunavut is developing and  uses information technology to centralize and  increase the access to climate change  information, such as permafrost data and  landscape hazards maps. The information is used  to improve infrastructure planning and help  mitigate the effects of climate change across  Nunavut.   Climate Change Secretariat   The Government of Nunavut is establishing a  Climate Change Secretariat (CCS), which will  be the central point within the government to   address both climate change adaptation and  mitigation issues.    ACTION ON PRICING  CARBON POLLUTION   The Government of Nunavut recognizes the role  of carbon pricing in the pan-Canadian Framework  for Clean Growth and Climate Change.  Given  Nunavut’s particular circumstances, the Government  of Canada and the Government of Nunavut will  work together to assess the implications of  carbon pricing in the territory for its economy,  communities and people including energy costs,  and to develop solutions together.   The Government of Nunavut and the Government  of Canada will also work together to assess the  implications of carbon pricing in Canada on the  cost of living in Nunavut. This will be an important  consideration for future policy development.   As outlined in the federal government's benchmark,  100% of the revenues from carbon pricing will  be retained by Nunavut.   COLLABORATION PARTNERSHIP  OPPORTUNITIES FOR CLEAN  GROWTH AND CLIMATE CHANGE   Nunavut and the Government of Canada   intend to collaborate in the following domains   of priority to address climate change and  advance clean growth:   Nunavut and the Government of Canada will  assess the economic and technical feasibility of  electrification through hybrid power generation in  Nunavut’s communities. Hybrid power generation  would significantly reduce emissions while at the  same time ensure that Nunavut’s isolated  communities have reliable power.   Nunavut and the Government of Canada will work  together to develop a retrofit program to increase  the energy efficiency of public and private   http://climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/default/files/3154-315_climate_english_reduced_size_1_0.pdf http://climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/default/files/3154-315_climate_english_reduced_size_1_0.pdf   Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change    77   housing. Investment in safe and energy efficient  housing is a key component of building strong  resilient communities in the Arctic.     PCF ANNEXES FINAL ENGLISH DEC 15.pdf  British Columbia  Alberta  Ontario  Québec  New Brunswick  Nova Scotia  Prince Edward Island  Newfoundland & Labrador  Yukon  Northwest Territories  Nunavut     