                                            A Residential Guide   to Flood Prevention   and Recovery    Dear resident:  Emergencies, such as flooding, can happen at any time.   Every resident contributes to the overall ability of the City to  bounce back quickly after an emergency, by being prepared.  Our goal is to provide you with information on the most  probable hazards and risks you may face, so that you can  plan ahead, be ready and be able to protect yourself, your  family, your home and your property.  In order to help you prepare for an emergency, we are  providing this resource for you to keep and read before and  in the event of an emergency: A Residential Guide to Flood  Prevention and Recovery. You’ll find important information  about planning ahead, preventing damage to your home,  checklists and local emergency contact numbers.  In the event of an emergency, we will update our website   and coordinate communications with local radio and television  outlets. For additional updates during an emergency,   please sign up to follow us on Twitter @citymississauga.  If you have any questions or would like additional copies  of these materials, please visit mississauga.ca. We are  committed to working together with you to keep the   City of Mississauga a great and safe place to live.  Sincerely,  Bonnie Crombie, Mayor of Mississauga  2    City Council  Stephen Dasko   Ward 1 Councillor  Carolyn Parrish   Ward 5 Councillor   Pat Saito  Ward 9 Councillor  Karen Ras  Ward 2 Councillor  Ron Starr  Ward 6 Councillor  Sue McFadden  Ward 10 Councillor  Chris Fonseca   Ward 3 Councillor  Dipika Damerla  Ward 7 Councillor  George Carlson  Ward 11 Councillor   John Kovac  Ward 4 Councillor  Matt Mahoney  Ward 8 Councillor  3    Flood facts • Floods are one of the most common hazards in Canada.  • A heavy rainfall can result in flooding, particularly when the   ground is still frozen or already saturated from previous storms.  • Severe storms can cause flash flooding with little or   no advance warning.   • All creeks experience flooding at one time or another. The  potential for flood damage is high for houses and businesses  constructed on low-lying, flood-prone lands.   • Over the past 60 years, average temperatures and average  rainfalls in Canada have both increased. Together these have  led to more extreme weather, such as severe storms and floods.  If there is a potential  for flooding or if a  flood occurs, listen  regularly to the   radio or television   or check online for  the latest community  information.  mississauga.ca   @citymississauga   City of Mississauga  The city of Mississauga provides this comprehensive guide for  residents to increase awareness about flooding. This guide  includes what you need to know about flood risks and how to   prepare in order to reduce the impacts of floods to your property.  This guide provides you with information on how to respond  during a flood event and steps you can take to clean up   should you be impacted by a flood, including measures to  protect your health. There is also a valuable checklist at the   end of the booklet to help guide you through the actions you   can take to protect your home, yourself and your family in   the future. For further information, please visit mississauga.ca   or call 311 (905–615–4311 outside city limits)  20 more days of rain in Canada per year  12% RAINFALL  SINCE 1950  $55 billionnatural disasters causedWorldwide in 2011,  in economic losses  $378 BILLION  Extreme weather events that  happened every 40 years in the past are now   happening every 6 years  In 2012, the Federation of Canadian  Municipalities estimated that replacement  costs for Canada’s sewer and stormwater  infrastructure were almost   $1.7 billion 2013 Alberta floods  in insured losses as a result of the  The Challenge  Canadian cities face two crises that are converging  into a perfect storm – a rapid rise in extreme weather  events as a result of climate change combined with a  growing sewer and stormwater infrastructure deficit.  15xSince 1983 the cost of claims payouts due to severe weather has increased by  Canada flood facts from The Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC)  4    Emergency contact information    Inside this booklet   6 Types of flooding &   flooding prevention   14 Before a flood   19 During a flood  22 After a flood   29 Health considerations  33 Repairing your home   34 Flooding checklist  Dial 911 only in case of emergency  City of Mississauga Dial 311 (within Mississauga) and 905–615–4311 (outside city limits)   for updated information and questions or visit mississauga.ca.  For the hearing impaired dial TTY at 905-896-5151.  Dial 311  or 905-615-4311 if  outside city limits for Mississauga  Government Services  Regional  Government Region of Peel  905-791-7800  Peel Public Health   905-799-7700  Community  Support Canadian Red Cross  Mississauga  905-890-0704  Salvation Army   Community Church   Mississauga  905-279-7525  United Way  Mississauga  905-602-3650  For more information about the guide, please contact 905-615-3200 ext. 5348.  Police Peel Regional Police Service   905-453-3311  Local Fire Departments Mississauga  905-615-3777   Utilities Enersource Hydro Mississauga   905-566-2727   Enbridge  1-866-763-5427 (emergency)  1-877-362-7434 (general inquiries)  Hydro One  1-800-434-1235 (emergency)  1-800-664-9376 (general inquiries)  Union Gas  1-877-969-0999 (emergency)  1-888-774-3111 (non-emergency)  Dial 911 for Emergencies  5  Em ergency contact inform  ation    Types of flooding   & flood prevention  Who Owns What?  Mississauga is responsible   for the stormwater system.  Region of Peel is responsible   for the wastewater system.  Homeowners are   responsible for the lateral   pipe connections from their  home to the property line   and ensuring proper  maintenance of water  drainage around the home.  Understanding your home’s two  different water drainage systems Water (both stormwater and wastewater) is collected from   your home and typically drains away through lateral connection   pipes to the stormwater or wastewater systems on your street.   The stormwater system is designed to collect rain and melted  snow (i.e. clear water) from streets and properties and direct this  flow to a nearby pond, creek or lake.   The wastewater system is designed to collect water from  toilets, sinks, showers, laundry facilities and basement floor  drains and direct it to wastewater treatment facilities where   it is thoroughly treated.  Because your basement is below ground, it is most prone  to flooding if there are blockages or backups in either the  stormwater or wastewater systems.  Types of flooding  If you’ve experienced flooding, it’s important  to know what type of water is in the   basement and understand what caused   it so you know what steps to take to help  prevent it from happening again. The main  types of residential flooding are:  1. Overland Flooding (flooding as a result of  creeks or rivers overflowing onto dry land)  2. Foundation Flooding (may be   groundwater or water from roof   drainage entering basement through  cracks in basement walls or foundation  (usally clear with no odour)  3. Wastewater backup (greyish in colour   and typically has an odour)  4. Stormwater sewer backup (can reduce  ability for foundation weeping tiles to   drain (usually clear, may have an odour  www.mississauga.ca/whoownswhat  6  Types of flooding &  flooding prevention    Common sources of   basement Flooding • Stormwater or groundwater seeping into basement cracks   or leaks in home foundation, basement walls, and/or around  basement windows or doors  • Poor lot grading or drainage, or obstructions of drainage   by gardens or landscaping  • Failure of foundation drain or weeping tile system  • Sump pump failure or power loss  • Overflowing eavestroughs and/or leaking or   blocked downspouts  • Surcharged or blocked sanitary wastewater or stormwater  pipes under street backing up into homes  • Blocked wastewater or stormwater lateral connections   from homes to pipes under roadways.   Typical Home drainage  Glossary of Terms   Wastewater lateral: The  pipe through which all the  wastewater from a house   (e.g. toilet, sink, shower,  washing machine, floor drain)  exits the home plumbing  system and enters the  wastewater sewer.  Downspout Disconnection:  The diversion of roof  runoff from a connection  to underground lateral to  stormwater or wastewater  systems to a safe discharge  point on the property where  infiltration can occur. The  discharge point must not  affect home foundations,  neighbouring properties,  sidewalks or driveways.  Weeping tile: A perforated  piping system along the  basement footing. It is  designed to receive water  that has seeped down the  foundation walls and direct   it away from the home.  Sump pump: A mechanical  device installed in a sump pit  to remove water collected by  the weeping tile and pump it   to the ground surface or  drainage system.  Sump pit: A tank or pit in the  basement floor that holds  the sump pump and collects  stormwater drainage from   the weeping tile system.  Continued on Page 8.  road surface  waterproofing  stormwater lateral  downspouts  basement wall  footing  basement windows  floor drain  basement floor  catch basin  stormwater trunk sewer  wastewater trunk sewer  trap wastewater lateral  manhole cover  weeping tile  eavestrough  backfill zone  backwater valve  grade d aw  ay  from  home  graded away from home  7  Types of flooding &  flooding prevention    How can basements flood?  Wastewater Back-up Flooding Wastewater backup flooding typically occurs because of a  blockage in the wastewater lateral leading to the trunk sewer.  Most often the blockage is caused by tree roots. On occasion  it can be due to solidified grease, paper or other items getting  caught in the lateral. On rare occasions, a wastewater backup is  the result of a broken lateral, which can also cause a blockage.  How a wastewater backup can occur  Reduce the risk  • Have a drainage contractor visit your home to inspect your  lateral with a Closed Circuit TV (CCTV).  • Never pour kitchen grease, fats or oils into your house drains  because they may solidify in your plumbing system. Also, do  not put objects down the toilet or drains that your plumbing  system was never intended to handle.  • Consider a sanitary wastewater backflow preventer valve   to reduce the risk of sewage backup into your basement.  • Disconnect roof downspouts, if connected to wastewater  lateral, to reduce flows to the sanitary lateral and the  wastewater sewer.  Kitchen grease,   fats and oils should   be discarded in   your GreenCart.  Although convenient  items such as baby  and toddler training  wipes are labelled   as flushable, they  commonly cause  blockages.  For more information   about items that  should not go into  your sink or toilet   visit peelregion.ca   or dial 905-791-7800.  road surface  downspouts  basement wall  footing  basement windows  floor drain  basement floor  catch basin  stormwater trunk sewer  wastewater trunk sewer  trap wastewaterlateral  manhole cover  weeping tile  eavestrough  backfill zone  grade d aw  ay  from  home  graded away from home  blockage  stormwater lateral  Glossary of Terms  Continued  Backwater valve: A  mechanical device that  prevents wastewater from  an overloaded sewer from  backing up into your home.  The backwater valve allows  wastewater to flow from your  home during normal use.  When properly maintained,  it will close automatically if  wastewater backs up from the  sewer main towards your home  (reversal mode), protecting  your basement from the  potential flooding.  Swale: A grassy, ditch-like  depression used to direct  stormwater flows and   absorbs water.  8  Types of flooding &  flooding prevention    Reduce the risk  • Improve lot grading, making sure that the  ground slopes away from your exterior walls.  • Maintain all original property swales to divert  water away from your home.  • Where possible, disconnect your roof  downspouts and divert the stormwater at   least 2 meters (6ft) away from your home   to a vegetated, safe discharge point away   from adjacent property lines, sidewalks,   or building foundations.  • Check for and reduce leaks in walls, floors   and windows or foundation.  • Ensure that gardens next to your basement  walls do not create dams that retain water   next to the house.  • Clean leaves and other debris from   eaves troughs and downspouts to   ensure proper drainage.  • In winter, shovel ice and snow at least   2 meters (6ft) away from basement walls.  Foundation Flooding and Stormwater Sewer Backup Foundation flooding can occur when heavy  rainfall or significant melting snow is trapped  around the foundation of your home and   seeps in through cracks or window wells.   If your roof downspouts are connected to   your stormwater lateral connection  underground, in heavy rain, this can   cause a back-up around your foundation   that can increase the chance of flooding.   Stormwater sewer backups or surcharges   can be caused by blockages or extreme   rainfall events. This can cause the foundation  weeping tiles to backup and water to seep   into the basement. In severe cases, stormwater  can build up on the road and backup towards  the home.  road surface  stormwater lateral  downspouts  basement wall  footing  basement windows  floor drain  basement floor  catch basin  stormwater trunk sewerwastewater  trunk sewer  trap wastewater lateral  weeping tile  eavestrough  backfill zone  grade d aw  ay  from  home  graded away from home  surcharged stormwater trunk sewer  crack in basement floor  surcharged weeping tile  crack in basement  wall  road surface  downspouts  basement wall  footing  basement windows  floor drain  basement floor  catch basin  stormwater trunk sewer  wastewater trunk sewer  trap wastewater lateral  manhole cover  weeping tile  eavestrough  backfill zone  poor grading  overland flow  open basement window  overland flow  poor grading  stormwater lateral  road surface  stormwater lateral  downspouts  basement wall  footing  basement windows  floor drain  basement floor  catch basin  stormwater trunk sewerwastewater  trunk sewer  trap wastewater lateral  manhole cover  weeping tile  eavestrough  backfill zone  grade d aw  ay  from  home  graded away from home  crack in basement  wall  Poor Grading  Cracks in basement walls and floor  9  Types of flooding &  flooding prevention    road surface  downspouts  basement wall  footing  basement windows  floor drain  basement floor  catch basin  stormwater trunk sewer  wastewater trunk sewer  trap wastewater lateral  manhole cover  weeping tile  eavestrough  backfill zone  poor grading  overland flow  open basement window  overland flow  poor grading  stormwater lateral  Reduce the risk  If your home is located within a regulatory flood plain, contact  your local conservation authority (Credit Valley Conservation,  Toronto and Region Conservation Authority or Conservation  Halton) to learn more about protecting your home from flooding.  Overland Flooding Historically, prior to the determination of regulatory flood plains  by conservation authorities, some homes were built in areas  along creeks and rivers which can be prone to flooding during  extreme rainfall events.  During dry conditions or periods of light rain, water in creeks  and rivers remains confined within the banks of the watercourse.   During high flow conditions, caused by very heavy rain or rapid  spring thaw, water may overtop the banks and swell in to the  flood plain.  During extreme events, homes located within these  areas may be subject to overland flooding.  During extreme conditions, overland flooding can also occur  away from watercourses when the quantity of precipitation  exceeds the capacity of the roadway and overflows onto  private property. Image courtesy of CVC  10  Types of flooding &  flooding prevention    Stormwater and wastewater   systems for homes built during   the 1970’s and 1980’s Prior to the mid-1970’s, it was common practice to connect  weeping tiles or foundation drains and downspouts directly to  the wastewater system. Some of these historic connections still  may exist today in older homes. These connections can overload  the wastewater system and should be updated to help prevent  basement flooding.  In 1975, Ontario’s Building Code was introduced and required  stormwater collected from homes to be discharged to a separate  stormwater system.   Get to know how your home drains stormwater and wastewater  and take the necessary steps to reduce the likelihood of  basement flooding. You can also look for some tips on common  causes of basement flooding on page 7 of this guide.  Visit peelregion.ca  or call 905-791-7800  for more information  about the wastewater  system and to learn  more about what you  can do to prevent  basement flooding   in your home.  Region of Peel’s   Basement Flooding  Prevention Rebate  Programs  Learn more about   these programs at   peelregion.ca/flooding  11  Types of flooding &  flooding prevention      A B   Figure A shows a normally open  backwater valve and Figure B shows  a normally closed backwater valve.  Types of   backwater valves  There are typically two types  of backwater valves, “normally  open” or “normally closed”.   The images below represent  the two types.  Backwater valves A backwater valve is a device that prevents wastewater in an  overloaded sewer (known as surcharging) from backing up into  your basement.  The valve allows wastewater to flow from your home to the  wastewater main during normal use. It will automatically close  if wastewater backs up from the sewer main into your home  (reversal mode), and is designed to protect the basement and  reduce the risk of potential flooding.  The backwater valve  also allows the flow of free air and outflow of wastewater for  normally open valves.  Older backwater valves typically employed the normally closed  type (Figure B). If there is no wastewater produced from a  home, the flapper valve is closed under gravity, preventing  backwater effects. However, these devices have been known  to experience more maintenance issues, such as paper being  caught in the flapper, holding it open. Therefore, this type of  valve is no longer permitted under the Ontario Building Code  for use in homes.  The current option is a normally open backwater valve. These  valves remain open during normal use of water in the home and  typically require less maintenance. Newer devices, such as the  Mainline Fullport unit shown in Figure A, have the additional  benefit of a clear top so that you can view the operation of the  backwater valve. It is also equipped with an easily accessible  cleanout. This is required in case there is a need to clean or  clear your lateral from tree roots or other blockages.  Contact your insurance company for more   information about the impacts of backwater   valves on insurance coverage.  Location of backwater valves Backwater valves are typically found in basements. There are  several key advantages to having a backwater valve located in  the home, including:  • Easy access  • Easier maintenance  • Homeowners can see if surcharging   (wastewater backing up) occurs  • Lower cost to install  • Lower operating and maintenance costs  Figure A (approved type)  Figure B (older—not approved)    A B   Visit peelregion.ca   or call 905-791-7800  for more information   about backwater  valves and to learn  more about what you  can do to prevent  basement flooding   in your home.  12  Flooding Prevention Types of flooding &   flooding prevention    Maintenance Regular maintenance of your home drainage system can  often be the difference between staying dry and being  flooded. It is good practice to evaluate the condition of  your system – inside and out, on a regular basis. If you find  a problem, make fixing it a priority.   Below is a checklist of what to do for backwater valve  maintenance:  • Visually check the valve.  • Open the top and clean out any debris, if needed.  • Check the flapper for free movement up and down.  Remember:  If you are aware of surcharging,  or wastewater backing up from  the sewer main, do not use  your water otherwise you risk  flooding. Once surcharging  has subsided, you may restore  regular water use.  13  Types of flooding &  flooding prevention    Before a flood Emergency planning—Know the risks,   make a plan, get a kit, reduce your flood risk. Are you prepared? It’s never too late. Emergencies can   happen at any time and your best defence is to be prepared.   1  2  3  4  Know the risks  Like any city, Mississauga is vulnerable to a variety   of natural and human- caused hazards. Make sure  you and your family members know what the hazards  and risks are in the area you live. Even if you feel your  community has a low risk of flooding, remember that  anywhere it rains, it can flood. Just because you haven’t  experienced a flood in the past, doesn’t mean you  won’t in the future. Floods occur because of a number  of factors including rainfall, topography, flood-control  measures, creek-flow, old construction practices and  new construction and development.  Make a plan  Make sure everyone in your family knows what to do  before, during and after an emergency such as a flood.  Hold a family meeting to discuss how you can best  prepare for an emergency. Have a plan. If you live alone,  develop a plan for yourself with links to neighbours and  friends. Keep a copy of your plan in a safe place, such as  your Family Emergency Go-Kit. Photocopy your plan and  keep it in your car and/or at work.  Get a kit Assemble a 72 hour Go-Kit to use during an evacuation   of your home or community. Make sure everyone living   in the home knows where to find the Go-Kit.  Reduce your flood risk.  Check for basement flood risk factors on Page 7   and correct those that apply to your home.  A few steps you  can take inside your  home to reduce   flood damage  • Do not store your important  valuables or documents in  the basement. Keep them  at a higher level, protected  from flood damage.  • Keep basement floor drains  clear of obstructions.  • Elevate the furnace, water  heater and other large  appliances, and your  electrical panel in your   home if you live in an area  that is prone to flooding.  Alerts Tracking For public weather alerts,  visit weather.gc.ca/warnings/   or follow @ECAlertON24   on Twitter.  72 HOURS  Are you prepared?  14  Flooding Prevention B  efore a flood    A 72 hour Go-Kit includes:  • Flashlight  • Battery-operated   or crank radio  • Spare batteries (for  flashlight and/or radio)  • First-aid kit  • Candles and   matches/lighter  • Extra car keys and cash  • Important papers   (copies of identification,  insurance policies)  • Non-perishable food   and bottled water   (as much as your family   can manage to carry)  • Items needed to open food  (such as a manual   can opener)  • Clothing and footwear  • Blankets or sleeping bags  • Toilet paper and other  personal hygiene items  • Medication (especially  prescription—72 hours  worth at least)  • Eyewear (glasses/contacts)  • Whistle (to attract  attention, if needed)  • Playing cards (or other  quiet games/toys)  • Paper/pencils/pens  • Map of your community  (for locating shelters)  Always have your   cell phone charged   and in a location   that makes it easy   to grab if you must  evacuate your home.   To prepare for a   flood, you may want  to include some   additional protective  equipment in your  Go-Kit including:   • protective clothing to fully   cover skin  • hard hat  • gloves  • N-95 Masks  • protective eyewear  • rubber boots (puncture-proof  and waterproof are best)  • a copy of this guide  15  B efore a flood    Be Pet Prepared  Make sure your family emergency plan includes   ALL your family members.  Pet Emergency Survival Kit Checklist Prepare a pet emergency survival kit and keep it with your  family kit.  Be sure to check the expiry date of your contents  twice a year.    Food, water, bowls, manual can opener and spoon    Up-to-date ID tags    Current photo of you and your pet    Emergency contact list of pet friendly hotels/motels outside  your area, friends, relatives and your veternarian    Copies of medical records/vaccinations    Information on feeding schedule, medical and/ orbehavioural problems    Medications and first aid kit    Familian bedding, small toy and brush    Leash, collar or harness and muzzle (dogs)    Litter/pan and scooper (cats) or poop n’ scoop bags (dogs)    Carrier large enough to transport and house your pet    Licence and microchip documentation    Emergency kit supplies vary for different kinds of animals.  Please contact your veterinarian or visit ontariospca.ca if   you have any questions.   Mississauga   Animal Services 735 Central Parkway West  Mississauga, ON   L5C 4H4  mypet.info@mississauga.ca   Important   Telephone Numbers Report an injured or   distressed animal /   Report a lost or found pet  3-1-1 or 905-615-4311   Emergencies,   animal rescue  905-896-5858  After hours   905-615-3000  Don’t forget your pets.  For info and tips, visit   mississauga.ca/animalservices   or ontariospca.ca  If it’s too dangerous  for you to stay, it’s  too dangerous for  your pet to stay.  16  B efore a flood    Disaster Recovery   Assistance for   Ontarians A program to help   people affected by   natural disasters get   back on their feet.   Check your eligibility at  ontario.ca/disasterassistance  Insurance considerations Water-related damage from a flood can be extensive and the  subsequent repairs could be very expensive. Water risks can  come from both inside and outside your home. According to  the Insurance Bureau of Canada (IBC), increasingly severe  weather means that basement flooding and water damage are  becoming more common. IBC offers the following tips when  considering your coverage.  • Sudden and accidental bursting of plumbing pipes and  appliances is covered by all residential policies. However,  damage may not be covered when freezing causes the   escape of water.   • In general, water entering a home from overland flooding is  not covered. Overland flooding usually occurs when bodies of  water, such as creeks, dams and other watercourses, overflow  onto dry land and cause damage. Overland flooding and  seepage can’t be covered by home insurance because it is  only a risk for the small percentage of the population who live  in a flood plain. Since the purpose of insurance is to spread  risk among many policyholders, flood insurance for those at  risk would be unaffordable.   • Water damage in a basement due to a sewer backup   is only covered if specific sewer backup coverage has   been purchased.   • In certain circumstances, homeowners who are unable  to return home due to insurable damage are entitled to  additional living expenses (this coverage is generally not  available if an evacuation becomes necessary as a result   of overland flooding).  • If you do experience flood damage, you will need to provide   a list of lost or damaged items as part of your insurance claim.  Review your insurance policy so you understand what items  to list. If you had a household inventory or video before the  disaster, retrieve it for the insurance adjuster.  For more insurance information and helpful how-to videos,   visit getintheknow.ibc.ca.  Take a household   inventory or video so   you can use it as part   of your insurance  claim if you ever   experience flood   or other damage   in your home.   Talk to your insurance   representative to  make sure you have  appropriate coverage,  because basement  flooding and water  damage are becoming  more common.   17  B efore a flood    Home and Business insurance policies  regarding water damage in your home can  differ among insurance companies, so be sure  to talk to your insurance representative about  your specific coverage details.   If you have concerns regarding the handling  of your insurance claim, the Insurance Bureau  of Canada is the National industry association  representing Canada’s private home, car and  business insurers. They can assist in providing  answers or assistance with insurance questions.   They can be contacted via the IBC Ontario  Consumer Information Centres at:   1-800-387-2880   Email: gtaflood@ibc.ca  or visit the IBC’s web site ibc.ca.  The Ombudsman is an independent office of  the Legislature who investigates complaints  from the public about Ontario Government  services.  If you would like to file a complaint  with the Office of the Insurance Ombudsman  please visit their website at fsco.gov.on.ca  Insurance Coverage  1. Damage to your home resulting from  overland flooding is not covered by home  insurance policies in Canada.  2. Sudden and accidental bursting of plumbing  pipes and appliances is usually covered by  home insurance policies.  3. Water damage resulting from sewer backup  is only covered if specific sewer backup  coverage has been purchased.  4. Some policies may provide coverage for  additional living expenses for homeowners  who are unable to return home due to an  insurable loss.  How to file a claim for   Water Damage to your home   1.  Contact your insurance representative to  report the loss as quickly as possible and  discuss insurance coverage available to you  under your homeowner’s insurance policy.  2. Your Insurance representative will assign   an insurance adjuster to assist with damage  clean up.  3. Take steps necessary to prevent   further damage.   4. Prepare your notice of claim in writing, and  ensure it contains the following information:  •  The name, mailing address, and telephone  number of the person making the claim.  • The address where damage has  occurred, the date and approximate   time of the damage.  • A description of what happened including  a list of damaged items and photographs  of the damage.  • The name of any contractor involved   or retained.  5. Submit all evidence in writing in a timely  manner to your insurance representative  who will commence coordination   of any possible recovery.   6. Gather any original purchase invoices or  quotes for the damaged property and items.  7. Request any communications or denial  of your claim from the insurer be made  in writing with a full explanation as to the  justification for the decision.  8. Review your policy wording and  endorsements with your insurance  representative to verify exactly what the  insurer has committed to covering.  18  Flooding Prevention B  efore a flood    During a flood What to do during a flood Flooding can sometimes happen quickly and  may affect just a few or many homes. Monitor  your local news for weather updates and  special announcements from local officials. You  can also check mississauga.ca or follow us on  Twitter or Facebook.  Reducing the Risk   of Flood Damage If heavy rains are forecasted for your area and  the potential for flooding exists, the following  actions can help reduce property damage to  your home:  • Clear drains, gutters and downspouts of   dead leaves and other debris.  • Move furniture, electronics and items of  sentimental value out of basements and  lower levels of the home or raise them off   the floor.  • To reduce the chances of rugs getting wet,  roll them up and if possible, store them on  higher floors.  • Ensure sump pumps and backwater valves  are working properly. If a sump pump has a  battery backup, ensure the batteries are fresh  and replace the batteries as required.  • Make sure basement windows are closed.   • Ensure that generators, hoses and portable  pumps are maintained and accessible should  they be required.   • Always operate gas powered equipment in   a well ventilated outdoor area.  Potential hazards in   flooding conditions Flooding conditions can create hazardous  situations both in and around your home.   Here are some potential hazards to be   aware of:  • Standing water may be electrically   charged by indoor electrical systems   and underground or downed power lines.   Keep yourself, children and pets away from  standing water and downed power lines.   • Floodwaters can move quickly and pose a  risk of drowning. Protect your safety and   do not drive or walk through floodwaters.  • Building structures can be affected and  become unsafe. Leave your home if there  are any signs of potential foundation and  structural damage, including to porch roofs  and overhangs.   • Floodwaters often erode roads and  walkways. Roads may have weakened and  could collapse under the weight of a car.   Do not travel in flood impacted areas.  • Flood waters can contain sewage (may  contain bacteria, viruses or parasites),  chemicals and debris like broken glass.  Keep yourself, family and pets away from  flood waters. Do not enter a flood area  unless wearing appropriate personal  protective equipment and clothing.  19  D uring a flood    Sign up for   Mississauga weather  alerts. Get the latest  forecasts and   hazardous weather  conditions at   weather.gc.ca.  Evacuation For your protection, you may decide it is necessary for   you to evacuate your home or an area impacted by flooding.   You may also be officially notified to evacuate. This notification  may occur in several ways including:   • a weather alert  • social media  • local media  • officials going door-to-door  If you expect you might need to evacuate during an emergency,  keep phone lines open for use by emergency workers and  monitor local radio, TV, and the Internet for emergency  instructions and current information. Also be sure to follow  instructions from officials and evacuate immediately if asked.  Travel only on routes specified by officials—a shortcut could  take you to a blocked or dangerous area. If you have time and  can do so safely:  • Take your Go-Kit (refer to Before a Flood for more details),  medications, and needed supplies with you in the event of   an extended evacuation.  • If it is safe to do so, shut off water, gas and electricity in your  home. If not, evacuate your home but do not go back inside  until a utility company has confirmed it is safe.   • Check to see if your neighbours require assistance.  Emergency Evacuation Centres In some cases, an emergency evacuation centre may be   set up to provide shelter and food to people affected by   the flood. If so:  • Leave a note if you have time (in a mailbox if you have one)  telling others when you left and where you went.   • If you are evacuated, register with the authorities at the  evacuation or reception centre so you can be contacted   and reunited with your family and loved ones.  • If you are going somewhere other than a designated centre,  register with the centre, notifying them of your whereabouts.  This helps to create an accurate record of flood victims.   Keep up-to-date   with the latest   information:   mississauga.ca   @citymississauga   City of Mississauga  20  Flooding Prevention D  uring a flood    If you remain in your home Remember that flooding can affect your safety and possibly  your health. Take precautions to prevent illness and injury  before you enter any area that has been flooded.   Helpful hints:  • Assume that everything touched by floodwaters is  contaminated. Stay clear unless your skin is covered and   you are wearing protective clothing such as coveralls,   rubber boots, gloves and masks.  • Keep children and pets away from flooded areas   and contaminated items.  • Before entering your home, check for foundation and  structural damage and make sure all porch roofs and  overhangs are supported. If you suspect any damage, leave  your home until a professional such as a building inspector   or structural engineer has confirmed it is safe to re-enter.  • If you notice any gas odours, evacuate your home and   contact the gas company or fire department.  • Flood waters can contain sewage (may contain bacteria,  viruses or parasites), chemicals and debris like broken glass.  Keep yourself, family and pets away from flood waters.   Do not enter a flood area unless wearing appropriate   personal protective equipment and clothing.  • Only if it is safe to do so, turn off electricity in your home   at the main breaker or fuse box.   21  D uring a flood    How to locate flood  damage restoration  companies  Institute of Inspection  Cleaning and Restoration  Certification   iicrc.org   Better Business Bureau  Central Ontario   bbb.org  Search for “fire and water  damage” in the accredited  business directory.   Yellow Pages Directory  yp.ca/business  Search for “flood damage”  after you enter your  municipality.   Ontario College of Trades   collegeoftrades.ca  Find out the qualifications  and standings of trade  professionals who are  members of the College.    After a flood What to do first • Report your flood by dialing 311 or 905-615-4311 if outside    city limits.   • Call your insurance company as soon as possible. Report any  damage caused by the flooding. They will also advise you on  how to proceed.  • Call in professionals such as a damage restoration company   to have the area cleaned properly.  • Where possible, take measures to dry your home quickly   to prevent further damage and mould growth. Use fans   and dehumidifiers.  Initial safety precautions  Flooding can affect your safety and your health.   Take precautions to prevent illness and injury.  • If you had to evacuate your home, stay tuned to your   local radio or television station or dial 311 or 905-615-4311   if outside city limits to find out when it is safe to return home.  You can also visit mississauga.ca for updates.   • You will be notified if the municipal drinking water   is unsafe to drink.  • Don’t drive or walk through floodwaters.  • Stay away from downed powerlines.  • Assume that everything touched by floodwaters   is contaminated.  • Keep children and pets away from flooded areas   and contaminated items.  • When you do return home, go with someone else   and carry a cell phone.  Before re-entering your home after a flood • Check for foundation and structural damage. Check that all   porch roofs and overhangs are supported.  • If you are unsure about the safety of your home, do not   go inside. Contact a qualified home inspector or structural  engineer for advice.   • Do not attempt to reconnect the electricity, natural gas,  telephone or TV cable yourself. Call your service provider   for assistance.  22  Flooding Prevention A  fter a flood    Clean up  Before you clean up Flood waters can contain sewage, chemicals and debris like  broken glass. Wear clothing that covers your skin along with  appropriate personal protective equipment including:  • hard hat • gloves • N-95 or equivalent masks  • protective eyewear • rubber boots (puncture-proof   and waterproof are best)   If it is safe to do so, turn off the electricity at the main breaker   or fuse box using a dry piece of wood. If you cannot, do not  enter the space and contact your hydro company for assistance.   Do not use electrical appliances that are wet or may have   been affected by flood water until a qualified electrician has  inspected them.  Do not use anything requiring water in your home (e.g. toilets,  showers, washing machine and sinks) until the flood water from  your house has been removed.  Cleaning up a home that has experienced extensive water   damage or has been flooded with sewage-contaminated waters  may require a qualified flood damage restoration company.   Refer to page 19 for information on how to locate one.  First steps Take measures to prevent further damage to your home   and belongings:  • Remove standing water. Remove standing water with pumps  or pails, a wet/dry vacuum and rags and/or towels. If you  experience severe water levels in your basement, contact a  professional damage restoration company to help drain the  water slowly to prevent structural damage.  • Make decisions about what to keep and what to throw away.  Remove as much as you can out of the rooms that were flooded  as quickly as possible to help prevent water damage and mould.  Some belongings, especially those that are contaminated with  sewage, or those that cannot be quickly dried and effectively  cleaned, may not be salvageable.   • Remove soaked and dirty building materials and debris,  including wet insulation and drywall.   • Quickly and thoroughly dry and dehumidify your home.  Ventilating the area with outdoor air and fans will help. A  dehumidifier will work to remove moisture from the home.   For homes on private  septic systems  Depending on the extent of  flooding to your property,   you should consider having  your septic system inspected  by a licensed contractor prior  to reuse.  23  A fter a flood    Check product labels  before use.  Surface cleaning • Clean all surfaces and belongings. Wipe or scrub away dirt    and debris using a solution of unscented detergent and water.  • Disinfect all surfaces and belongings. Be sure they have  already been thoroughly cleaned. Use a disinfectant such as  household bleach and carefully follow the directions for use  on the product label. Be sure to wear appropriate personal  protective equipment and ventilate the area.   What to do with household items  Items that have been contaminated by sewage or that have   been wet for a long time and cannot be washed and disinfected  should be discarded. Refer to page 23 for information on flood  waste disposal.  Carpets and upholstered furniture that can be salvaged may  need to be professionally cleaned and dried. If these items are  sewage-soaked, they should be discarded.   Wet drywall and insulation should be removed to allow   studding to dry.   Washable clothes can be salvaged.  Salvage books, photographs and papers by slow, careful drying.  Appliances  • A qualified service technician should verify the safety    of any appliance that has been affected by flood water   before it is used.   • Thoroughly clean and disinfect appliances that can be salvaged.   • Appliances that cannot be salvaged should be discarded.  Medicines, cosmetics and other toiletries  Discard these items if they have been in contact with flood water.   Visit peelregion.ca/waste for proper disposal.  Documentation  • Store all valuable papers that have been damaged in a freezer   until they are needed. After your clean-up, consult your lawyer  to determine whether flood-damaged documents, or just the  information in them, must be retained.   • Record details of flood damage by photograph or video   if possible.   • Register the amount of damage to your home with your  insurance agent.   24  Flooding Prevention A  fter a flood    Frequently wash   your hands with soap  and clean water,   especially after being   in contact with flood  water, sewage or  items that have   been contaminated   by either.  Food Safety   If in doubt,   throw it out.  Do not consume   food products prior   to consulting with  health authorities   or family doctor.  Contact Peel   Public Health at   905-799-7700 for  more information.  Food safety The following foods should be considered unsafe   and discarded:  • Food in boxes, bags, paper and plastic wrap   • Food and drinks in bottles, plastic containers and jars,  including home preserves (the area beneath the lid cannot   be properly cleaned and disinfected)  • Fresh foods such as meats, fruits, vegetables, and eggs  Commercially canned food without dents, leaks and bulges   are considered safe if properly cleaned and disinfected.   Thoroughly clean and then disinfect dishes, eating and cooking  utensils and food contact surfaces. Use a disinfectant that  is non-toxic and safe for food contact surfaces. Follow the  directions for use on the product label.   Discard any eating utensils, cutting boards and other   food contact surfaces that cannot be properly cleaned   and disinfected.   If you have been without power, food in your refrigerator and  freezer may be at risk. Follow these tips to reduce the risk of  food-borne illness:  • Avoid opening the refrigerator and freezer doors. If the door  is kept closed, refrigerators will normally keep foods cool for  four hours. A full freezer without power will normally keep  food frozen for approximately two days, and a half-full freezer  will normally keep food frozen for one day.  • Add bags of ice or ice packs to help keep the food cooler   for a longer period of time.  • Consider using coolers or ice chests with a supply of ice   for food storage.  • Throw out perishable foods such as meat, fish, poultry,   eggs and leftovers that have been at temperatures above   4°C (40°F) for more than two hours.   • Throw out food items that have come into contact with   raw meat juices.  25  A fter a flood    When placing regular  waste or bulk waste at  your curbside, please  ensure that collection  crews have safe access  and that parked cars  are not blocking the  waste material.  Check   peelregion.ca/waste  for updates concerning  flood waste disposal  following major flood  events.   Mississauga’s Waste  Fewster Community  Recycling Centre 1126 Fewster Dr.  Mississauga  Battleford Community   Recycling Centre 2255 Battleford Rd.  Mississauga  Fees may apply.  Discarding of materials • Visit peelregion.ca/waste for information about what disposal   methods are available for all your waste.  • Dispose of non-salvageable items and building materials.  • Bag items that are considered regular waste and place at   the curb on your regularly scheduled waste collection day.   Bags or containers of garbage are not to exceed 23 kg (50 lb).  • Flooring, including carpet and underpadding, must be  bundled in maximum two-by-four foot lengths.  • Schedule collection of metal and appliances by dialing 311   or visit peelregion.ca/waste  • Unsafe food can be placed in your GreenCart.  • Contaminated boxes, cans, bottles and paper should be  placed in a garbage bag at the curb. Do not place these items  in the Blue Box as they no longer meet recycling standards.  Items NOT accepted as regular waste and  bulk waste The following items are not accepted as regular waste.   Please visit peelregion.ca/waste for proper disposal:  • Electronics   • Household hazardous waste, e.g. solvents, garden chemicals,  home cleaning products  • Metal and appliances  Mould Mould can grow on wet surfaces in as little as 48 hours and   any growth over time indicates a continuing moisture problem.  If you begin to notice mould growth anywhere in your home  after the flood, it is important to remove the source of moisture  and clean the affected area.  Exposure to mould does not always have negative health  effects, but some individuals may be more sensitive or  vulnerable to exposures  Getting rid of mould The size of the affected area will determine whether you should  clean and remediate the area yourself or hire a professional:  Yourself: small areas no more than one square metre.  Professional: large areas greater than one square metre.  26  A fter a flood    How to locate a  mould removal   professional   Yellow Pages Directory  yp.ca  Search “mould removal   and control”.   Flood damage restoration  companies may also have  experience in mould removal.    For more information  on mould, how to  prevent it and how  to get rid of it visit  peelregion.ca or   dial 905-791-7800.  Protect yourself and others   when cleaning mould  • Wear a disposable particulate mask (for example, 3M 8210   or equivalent N95 mask), unvented safety goggles and  household rubber gloves.   • Consider isolating the room to protect infants, pregnant  women, the elderly or those with existing health problems  such as respiratory disease or a weakened immune system.   • Use an exhaust fan blowing to the outside to help prevent  contamination of other areas of the house, as well as to  provide ventilation.   Cleaning mould from building materials,  furnishings and other items Washable surfaces, such as tile or glass   • Wipe or scrub surfaces using a damp cloth and a solution   of water and unscented detergent. Check the product label   for instructions.  • Sponge with a clean damp cloth.  • Dry quickly and thoroughly.  • Once dry, vacuum the cleaned surfaces   as well as surrounding surfaces with a HEPA   (high-efficiency particulate air) vacuum cleaner.  Drywall   • Wipe the surface of the wall using a damp cloth and a   solution of water and unscented detergent. Check the   product label for instructions.  • Dry quickly and vacuum with a HEPA vacuum cleaner.   • If you are unable to wipe away the mould, it is best to   replace the drywall.   Carpets and upholstered furniture   If these materials were affected by flood water and mould   is visible, they will likely need to be professionally cleaned   or discarded.   Any mouldy material or item that cannot be effectively  cleaned should be sealed in plastic and disposed of.    Sponges used for cleaning mould should   be discarded after use.  A fter a flood  27    If your home is  damaged by water,  gather up any  documents or   items that can be  salvaged and put  them in a package  to protect them  from further  damage; they  may be useful for  claim or reference  purposes.  Replacing documents and money  Birth, marriage and   death certificates  Health card  Driver’s licence and   vehicle registration  1-800-267-8097  ontario.ca/serviceontario  Employment Insurance   Social Insurance (SIN) card   Canada Pension Plan papers  Old Age Security card  servicecanada.gc.ca  Insurance policies   Your insurance agent  Citizenship papers  Citizenship and   Immigration Canada   1-888-242-2100  Permanent Resident Card   Citizenship and   Immigration Canada   1-800-255-4541  Passports   Local passport office  passport.gc.ca  Income tax records  Canada Revenue Agency  Wills  Your lawyer   Medical records   Your family doctor  Land titles   Provincial Land Titles office  Animal permits/licences  City of Mississauga   311 or 905-615-4311   if outside city limits  Bank books   Your bank  Money   (partially or completely  destroyed)  1-800-303-1282   bankofcanada.ca  Canada Savings Bonds  (partially or completely  destroyed)   1-800-575-5151   Credit cards   Issuing companies  Divorce papers   Court office where the   divorce was filed  Stocks   Issuing company or   your lawyer  Military discharge papers   Library and Archives Canada   1-866-578-7777  Adapted from One Step at a Time: A Guide to Disaster Recovery, Emergency  Management British Columbia.  Visit   servicecanada.gc.ca   for useful information  on replacing   identification.  28  Flooding Prevention A  fter a flood    Health  considerations Stay safe while addressing a flood in your home. Below is some  important health information, along with tips and considerations  to keep in mind while you are managing clean up and repairs.   First and foremost, wear appropriate personal protective  equipment, wash hands frequently with soap and clean water   and protect open sores with waterproof coverings.  Potential health risks  Contaminated flood waters can pose a   risk to your health Ingestion of disease-causing bacteria, viruses and other germs  found in sewage can cause gastrointestinal (GI) illness. Ingestion  occurs from eating contaminated foods, drinking contaminated  water or accidentally touching your mouth with contaminated  hands. Vomiting and diarrhea are common symptoms of GI illness.   Skin contact with contaminated flood water can cause skin rashes  and infection in open sores.   Indoor air quality During clean up and over time, indoor air quality can be affected,  such as:  • Dust created during clean-up activities can become airborne.  Close off the flooded areas during clean up and repair to prevent  dust spreading to other rooms in the house. Also, keep rooms  well ventilated while working.   • Use of cleaners and disinfectants can release vapours. Keep  rooms well ventilated. Wear protective clothing such as gloves  and masks and keep children away from the area when using  these cleaning solutions.    • Mould can grow on wet building materials and belongings.  Discard contaminated items and dry remaining items as quickly  as possible (i.e. within 48 hours).  If you are   experiencing   health effects   or are injured,   seek appropriate  medical attention.  H ealth considerations  29    Mould • Moulds are found both outdoors and in homes and    buildings, and can grow on practically anything that   collects dust and holds moisture.  • Excessive dampness and mould growth on building   materials and belongings can pose potential health risks.   • Most types of mould are not a health concern for healthy  individuals, but some individuals may experience   respiratory symptoms such as asthma, sore throat   and allergy-like symptoms.   • Indoor air testing for mould is generally not recommended   as results can be difficult to interpret.  Health effects related to mould depend on:   • the type of mould   • the amount of mould   • the production of certain substances by the mould   • the degree of exposure   • the health condition of the person exposed  Some people who may be more at risk of having health  effects when exposed to mould include:   • pregnant women   • infants   • the elderly   • those with existing health problems such as respiratory disease  or a weakened immune system  30  Flooding Prevention H  ealth considerations    Signs that stress   may be becoming   an issue:  • Strained relationships   with family and friends  • Changes in appetite   and sleep patterns  • Inability to concentrate   on work or school  • Replaying the event in   your mind  • Avoiding places that   remind you of the event  • Increased alcohol or drug  use—i.e. turning to unhelpful  coping strategies  • Feelings of sadness lasting  more than two weeks  • Excessive guilt  • Isolating yourself  • Thoughts of harming others  or yourself including suicide  Coping after a crisis You may experience strong feelings of stress immediately or  weeks after a flood or significant weather-related event. Stress  can change how you feel and act. Acknowledging how you  feel can help you manage stress. It is normal to have feelings of  anxiety, grief, sadness, helplessness and anger after a significant  event. Everyone has different methods of coping, and it will take  time before you start to feel better.   Stress Stress is a normal response to good and bad life events but can  become a problem when it affects how you cope or manage in  daily life.  Some tips to help cope:  • Talk about your feelings with family, friends,   neighbours and co-workers.  • Set a schedule and follow a normal routine as much as  possible. It will take time before your life returns to normal.  • Eat healthy meals.  • Try to get regular sleep.  • Exercise and stay active.  • Accept help from your community.  • Offer to help in your community.  • Establish a family emergency plan in case of future events.  • Be compassionate with yourself and others.  Talking to children It is important to be aware of your children’s reactions in the  aftermath of a significant event. Changes in their behaviour   may indicate they are under significant stress. For example,  young children might start thumb-sucking or bed-wetting,  develop aches and pain, become clingy or fearful. Children  might withdraw and try to be brave, when they really need   your reassurance.   After a community  crisis situation,   crisis and outreach  programs often   arrange emergency  assistance services— listen to media   resources to find   out more. You   can also visit   mississauga.ca   or dial 311 or   905-615-4311 if   outside city limits.  H ealth considerations  31    Where to go for help  24 Hour Crisis Hospital emergency   department   Counselling/Therapy  Services One-Link  Telephone: 416-521-4131  Fax: 905-338-2878  Trillium Health Partners –  Physician referral for patients  to Mental Health Services at  Trillium Health Partners can  be made through completing  the One-Link referral form.  One-Link is a single point  of access for referrals to 10  Addiction and Mental Health  Service Providers funded by  the Mississauga Halton Local  Health Integration Network.   More information can be  found about one-Link at   one-Link.ca.   Family Services of Peel  905-270-2250  Associated Youth   Services of Peel  Telephone (Toll Free):  1-800-762-8377  Telephone:   905-890-5222  United Way Mississauga   905-602-3650  Talk about what has happened to help get  yourself and your family back on track.   Some suggestions when talking to children  • Encourage children to express themselves and ask   questions. They may want to do this by drawing or   playing instead of talking.  • Take their fears seriously. Reassure them and   give them additional attention.   • Let children know they are not to blame when   bad things happen.   • Admit to them that you also felt afraid and may   still be experiencing some feelings of fear or anxiety,   but that with time and possibly some outside help   you will work it out together.  • Tell children what you know about the situation.   Be honest but gentle. Talk to them about the disaster.  • Keep children with you whenever it is possible, even if it   seems easier to look for housing or help on your own.   At a time like this, it’s important for the whole family   to stay together.  • Expect regressive behaviour and be tolerant of it.  • Give them a real task to do, something that gets the   family back on its feet and let them help in planning  something to remember the loss.  • Watch for health problems and signs of stress, such   as nightmares and depression, in you or your family.   Seek help if you need it. Many organizations in your  community can provide counselling and other supports.  • Model self-care and continue with regular routines (teeth  brushing, bedtime stories) and chores (picking out their   own clothes to wear, etc.). Get enough sleep and exercise.  • Avoid or minimize watching news reports of   frightening events.  Adapted from One Step at a Time, the Canadian Red Cross Society.  32  Flooding Prevention H  ealth considerations    Repairing your  home Tips and considerations when you are   repairing your home • Do not attempt to reconnect the electricity, natural gas,   telephone or TV cable yourself. Contact your service  provider to reconnect it for you.  • A qualified service technician should verify the safety of   any electrical system or appliance that has been affected   by flood water before it is used.   • Contact your local heating repair company to inspect your  furnace and chimney.  • Professional companies can help you with cleaning and  repairing your home. If you are making an insurance claim,  your insurance adjuster may help you find a contractor.   • Arrange for any necessary inspections and building permits.  Your contractor may take care of these for you. If not,   contact your Local Municipality to find out what steps   you need to take.  • Consider installing basement flooding prevention devices   such as a backwater valve or sump pump.   Tips for hiring   contractors  When repairing your home, be  sure to work with a reputable  contractor. Here are some  helpful tips:  • Visit the Better Business  Bureau at bbb.org. Search  “Contractor – Remodel and  repair” after you enter your  city and province.  • Get three quotes.  • Check references.  • Sign a written contract   for the work.  R epairing your hom  e  33    Flooding checklist  Flooding prevention   Disconnect roof downspouts and divert   runoff at least 2 metres (6ft) away from  your home and away from sidewalks,  driveways and neighbouring properties.    Ensure that sump pumps are working  properly and have a backup power supply  in case of power outage.    Do not drain or flush grease, oil and   other materials not meant for the  plumbing system.    Ensure weeping tile system   is disconnected from the   wastewater system.     Improve your lot grading to make sure the  ground slopes away from your home.  When a flood happens   Contact Mississauga at 311 or    905-615-4311 if outside city limits   to report your flood.    Call your insurance company as soon   as possible.    After the water has been safely removed,  dry your home as quickly as possible to  prevent mould growth.    If damage is extensive, find a reputable  restoration company and or contractor   to help with clean up and repair.   Visit bbb.org.  Health and safety   Seek help if you or your children   experience strong feelings of stress  following a flood or significant   weather-related event.    Wash hands frequently with soap   and clean water.    Wear protective clothing before   cleaning contaminated areas.    Clean contaminated surfaces   first before disinfecting.    Carefully follow directions on   disinfectants before using.    Have an exhaust fan to help   dry areas quickly.    Discard contaminated food items.  Emergency preparedness   Know where to get updated emergency   information in your area.    Create and understand your emergency  plan (e.g. what to do and where to go).    Assemble a 72-hour Go-Kit.    Keep copies of important documentation  and items of sentimental value out of   the basement.  Reference:  • A Guide to Flooding Prevention and Recovery, Halton  • City of Mississauga Flood Response Plan, May 2015  • Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment, Mississauga, 2015  • City of Mississauga, Stormwater web pages  Flooding checklist  34    35  N otes    Our commitment is to provide you with information and services that are   high quality, professional, consistent, informative and friendly.  For more information about Mississauga’s two   drainage systems or to learn more about what you  can do to prevent basement flooding in your home,   visit mississauga.ca/flooding or dial 311   or 905-615-4311 if outside city limits  19232  mississauga.ca   