                                                 adapt_bulletin-adapt1-eng.pdf   Climate Change and Health  Adaptation Bulletin NUMBER 1  ISSN 1920-2709  NOVEMBER 2009  The Urban Heat Island Effect:  Causes, Health Impacts and Mitigation Strategies  What is an Urban Heat Island (UHI)? The term “heat island” describes built-up areas that are hotter than  nearby rural areas. The average air temperature of a city with 1 million  people or more can be 1 to 3°C warmer than its surroundings. In the  evening, the air temperature difference can be as high as 12°C (Oke,  1987).   About 80% of Canadians live in cities where the urban atmosphere  is strongly affected by the design and density of buildings and by  man-made changes to the urban environment. Urbanization negatively  impacts the environment by the covering of the soil surface, the  modifi cation of the physical and chemical properties of the atmosphere  (smog), and by the production of pollution being emitted from high  road traffi c.  Heat islands can form over any built-up area, but especially occur over  large cities where surfaces have a tendency to absorb large quantities  of solar radiation during the day for later release at night.  What are UHI causes?  Natural surfaces, like vegetation, absorb a relatively large proportion  of solar energy and use it through an evaporation process (release  of water vapour) that helps to cool the air in the neighbourhood.  By contrast, built surfaces are largely made up of non-refl ective and  waterproof construction materials. Consequently, they tend to absorb  a signifi cant proportion of the solar radiation, which is then released  as heat.  When natural land cover, such as parks, is decreased and replaced by  buildings, the cooling process through evaporation is reduced. As well,  when rural areas that surround cities are urbanized, the atmospheric  circulation systems that carry cooler air to city centres are restricted.  These atmospheric cooling systems are normally generated by the  temperature differences which exist between cool rural and warm  urban environments.  © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of  Health, 2009  Revised December 2010  Albedo (or solar refl ectance) is the measure of a material’s ability  to refl ect sunlight on a scale of 0 to 1. For example, a low albedo  material indicates that its surface absorbs most of the solar radiation.  Courtesy of J. Forkes, 2009  Furthermore, the arrangement and size of buildings along narrow  streets forms a so-called urban canyon that inhibits the release of the  refl ected radiation from urban surfaces back to space. This radiation  becomes absorbed by the building walls. Paved roads, concrete  sidewalks and parking lots also have a high tendency to absorb solar  radiation and release it as heat.   Additional factors have been recognized as potential causes of the UHI  effect, such as atmospheric pollutants that intercept, absorb and re- radiate the solar radiation in the lower atmosphere, and the production  of waste heat from air conditioning, industrial processes and vehicles.    illustrated in the map above). This information could be used as a basis  for strategic implementation of UHI mitigation measures. However, the  localization of these “hot spots” should be combined with information  related to building characteristics and socio-economic factors to better  protect at-risk populations by increasing their resiliency to heat.  UHI mitigation strategies There are two main UHI reduction strategies: fi rst, to increase surface  refl ectivity, in order to reduce radiation absorption of urban surfaces  (i.e., achieve high albedo); and second, to increase vegetation cover,  mainly in the form of urban forests and parks, in order to maximize  the various vegetation benefi ts in controlling temperature rises.  Increasing the refl ectivity of surfaces can be accomplished either  by using lightly coloured construction materials or by covering the  construction material surface with a white membrane. Both techniques  have been applied mainly on roofs and paved surfaces. Currently, few  Canadian communities have implemented policies or programs that will  increase the use of high albedo materials in order to mitigate the UHI  (Forkes et al., 2009).    Increasing vegetation cover is mainly focused on planting trees around  residential and commercial buildings. Strategically placing trees in front  of windows and on the sunniest sides of houses can maximize energy  savings. Trees placed on the east and west sides of buildings are most  effective because they block the sun both in the morning and the  afternoon. Several Canadian communities have established Tree Planting  Programs, for example, in Hamilton, Ontario, 2,100 trees have been  planted on city streets since 2006; in Kelowna, British Columbia, from  600 to 1,400 trees are planted annually; and London, Ontario plans to  have a tree in front of every home (Forkes et al., 2009).   Also, emphasis is being placed on roof top gardens (i.e., green roofs),  in order to achieve the same result as lighter-coloured roofs. Recently,  the City of Toronto, Ontario adopted a bylaw to require and govern the  construction of green roofs on all new developments above 2,000 m2  of Gross Floor Area.  The success and the effi ciency of these mitigation measures depend  strongly on the engagement and collaboration of a variety of  partnerships such as municipal governments, public health authorities  and provincial and federal governments. Awareness and outreach to a  wide range of stakeholders, including the public, is a key element in the  reduction of UHI effects.  References:  Forkes, J., Penney, J., Dickinson, T., and Duggan, C. 2009. Urban Heat  Island Mitigation in Canadian Communities. Draft report, Clean Air  Partnership. 132 p.  Luber, G., Sanchez, C., and Conklin, L. 2006. Heat-Related Deaths  – United States, 1999–2003. Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.  Vol. 55(29): 610–613.  Oke, T.R. 1987. Boundary Layer Climates. New York, Routledge.  Urban Heat Islands, www.urbanheatislands.com  For further information please contact: climatinfo@hc-sc.gc.ca  Greater Toronto Area— Surface temperature map (2008-09-03)  Source: Natural Resources Canada, Earth Sciences Sector  Contact:  Matthew Maloley, Natural Resources Canada  UHI health impacts Extreme heat events (EHE), which can be defi ned as periods of  abnormally hot and often humid weather, are dangerous to some and  can result in increased rates of heat-related mortality and morbidity.  The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that in the  United States from 1979 to 2003, excessive heat exposure contributed  to more than 8,000 premature deaths. This fi gure exceeds the number  of mortalities resulting from hurricanes, lightning, tornadoes, fl oods,  and earthquakes combined (Luber, et al., 2006).  By increasing day-time temperatures and reducing night-time cooling,  heat islands can exacerbate the impact of EHEs. Populations who  are vulnerable to heat, such as children, seniors, and people with  chronic illness, are at particular risk of general discomfort, respiratory  diffi culties, heat cramps, exhaustion, heat stroke, and heat-related  mortality. UHI also affects indoor thermal characteristics (such as air  temperature, humidity and air movement), especially in buildings where  air conditioners and mechanical ventilation systems are not available.  Measuring and localizing UHIs UHI effects can be measured by two methods: (1) direct measurement  of surface and/or air temperatures using sensors at fi xed or mobile  observation sites; and (2) indirect remote measurement using satellite  and aerial sensors that detect radiation emitted by surfaces.  The surface urban heat island effect is observed as a temperature  difference between surfaces such as roofs and tree canopies or  open fi elds and parking lots. Satellite thermal images can be used to  determine the location of “hot spots” in the urban environment (as    