                                            Natalia Moudrak and Dr. Blair Feltmate Intact Centre On Climate Adaptation  AHEAD OF  THE  STORM SUPPORTED BY:  Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance  for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate  October 2019    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate2  AHEAD OF  THE  STORM    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 3  About the Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation  The Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation (Intact Centre) is   an applied research centre at the University of  Waterloo.   The Intact Centre was founded in 2015 with a gift from Intact  Financial Corporation, Canada’s largest property and casualty  insurer. The Intact Centre helps homeowners, communities  and businesses to reduce risks associated with climate change  and extreme weather events. For additional information, visit:   www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca.  About the University of  Waterloo  The University of  Waterloo is Canada’s top innovation  university. With more than 36,000 students, the university  is home to the world’s largest co-operative education system  of  its kind. The university’s unmatched entrepreneurial  culture, combined with an intensive focus on research, powers  one of  the top innovation hubs in the world. For additional  information, visit: www.uwaterloo.ca.  About REALPAC   The Real Property Association of  Canada (“REALPAC”) is  Canada’s senior industry association for owners and managers  of  investment real estate. Our members include publicly  traded real estate companies, real estate investment trusts  (“REIT”s), private companies, pension funds, fund managers,  banks, and life insurance companies, with cumulative real  estate assets under management between $600 Billion and  $1 Trillion CAD. The association is further supported by  large owner/occupiers and pension fund advisors as well  as individually selected investment dealers and real estate  brokerages. For additional information, visit: www.realpac.ca.  About BOMA Canada  Comprised of  over 3,100 members, BOMA Canada is  Canada’s oldest commercial real estate industry association.   It’s members own and/or manage over 2.1 billion square feet  of  commercial space in Canada and include building owners,  managers, developers, facilities managers, asset managers,  leasing agents, brokers, investors, vendors and service  providers. Together with its eleven chapters, BOMA Canada  represents the Canadian commercial real estate industry on  matters of  national and international concern and provides  industry-leading programs such as www.bomabest.org, Canada’s  principal sustainability certification for commercial real estate.  For additional information, visit: www.bomacanada.ca.  About Intact Financial Corporation  Intact Financial Corporation (TSX: IFC) is the largest  provider of  property and casualty (P&C) insurance in Canada  and a leading provider of  specialty insurance in North  America, with over $10 billion in total annual premiums.  The Company has approximately 14,000 full- and part-time  employees who serve more than five million personal, business  and public-sector clients through offices in Canada and the  U.S. In Canada, Intact distributes insurance under the Intact  Insurance brand through a wide network of  brokers, including  its wholly-owned subsidiary BrokerLink, and directly to  consumers through belairdirect. In the U.S., OneBeacon  Insurance Group, a wholly-owned subsidiary, provides  specialty insurance products through independent agencies,  brokers, wholesalers and managing general agencies. For  additional information, visit: www.intactfc.com.  Citation  Moudrak, N.; Feltmate, B. 2019. Ahead of  the Storm: Developing  Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate.  Prepared for REALPAC and BOMA Canada. Intact Centre  on Climate Adaptation, University of  Waterloo.  For information about this  report, contact Natalia Moudrak:  nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca  Disclaimer: The information stated in this report has, to the best  of  our knowledge, been collected and verified as much as possible.  The Intact Centre cannot make any guarantees of  any kind, as  to the completeness, accuracy, suitability or reliability of  the data  provided in the report. This report has been prepared for general  guidance on matters of  interest only and does not constitute  professional advice. You should not act upon the information  contained in this publication without obtaining specific professional  advice. No representation or warranty (express or implied) is given  as to the accuracy or completeness of  the information contained  in this publication, and Intact Centre employees and affiliates do  not accept or assume any liability, responsibility or duty of  care for  any consequences to you or anyone else acting, or refraining to act,  in reliance on the information contained in this report or for any  decision based upon it.  http://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca. http://www.uwaterloo.ca http://www.realpac.ca http://www.bomacanada.ca http://www.intactfc.com mailto:nmoudrak%40uwaterloo.ca?subject=Information%20Request%20%E2%80%93%20Flood%20Resilience%20Guide   Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate4  Susan Ancel, Director Stormwater  Strategies, EPCOR Water Services  Alireza Anvari, Director, Facility  Management, Evergreen    Clifford Ayling, Director, Elevating  Devices, PCL Constructors Canada Inc.  Scott Beckman, Director,  Sustainability, PCL Constructors  Canada Inc.   Philippe Bernier, Vice President,  Innovation & Sustainability, Triovest  Realty Advisors Inc.  David Bowcott, Global Director,  Growth, Innovation & Insight,   Global Construction and Infrastructure  Group, Aon  Dr. Michael Brooks, Chief  Executive  Officer, REALPAC  Robert Campanelli, National  Director, Corporate Sustainability,  GWL Realty Advisors Inc.  Chris Corcoran, VP and Senior Risk  Control Consultant, Commercial Risk  Services, Aon  Jillian Curley, Corporate  Environmental Specialist, Climate  Change and Environment,   City of  Calgary  Alice Dixon, Resilience Analyst,  Asset and Contract Management,  Infrastructure Ontario   Jon Douglas, Director of   Sustainability, Menkes Property  Management Services Ltd.  Meirav Even-Har, Sustainability  Manager, Office East, QuadReal  Property Group  Marlene Farias, Senior Vice  President, Property Management,  Central Region, Triovest Realty  Advisors Inc.  William Fender, SVP, Commercial  Property Portfolios, FirstOnSite  Restoration Ltd.  Geoffrey Fudurich, Sustainability  Consultant, Quinn & Partners Inc.  Chris Greene, Senior Associate, Data  Analytics, Construction Services Group,  National Practice Group, Aon    David Hewitt, Director, Professional  Services, BGIS  Dr. Ted Kesik, Professor of  Building  Science, Daniels Faculty of  Architecture,  Landscape and Design, University of   Toronto  Kris Kolenc, Manager, Research &  Sustainability, REALPAC  Dr. Pratish Mahtani, Director,  Performance Analytics, CBRE Group  Joe Markling, Managing Director,  Head of  Real Estate Operations,   USAA Real Estate Company  Neil Mathews, Manager, Emergency  Management, Oxford Properties Group  Darryl Neate, Director, Sustainability,  Oxford Properties Group  Steven Pacifico, Director of   Sustainability and Innovation,   Epic Investment Services  Victoria Papp, Program Coordinator,  Environmental Standards, BOMA  Canada  Terry Patterson, SVP, Public Sector,  Commercial Risk Solutions, Aon  Chris Pyke, Senior Vice President,  Product, ArcSkoru  Francisca Quinn, President,   Quinn & Partners Inc.  Ramez Riad, Director, Technical  Services, GWL Realty Advisors Inc.  Michael Rizzello, Senior Portfolio  Manager, Real Estate Investments,  Canada Post Corporation  Ingrid Robinson, Principal &  Managing Director, Enterprise Risk  Management, BGIS   Dale Sands, President, The Village   of  Deer Park, Illinois  John Sankey, Director, Property,  Ontario Claims, Intact Insurance  Graham Sidders, Senior Operations  Manager, Triovest Realty Advisors Inc.  Imrana Shamji, Director, Service  Excellence, BGIS  Benjamin Shinewald, President   and Chief  Executive Officer,   BOMA Canada  Michael Parker, Marketing and  Communications Consultant, BOMA  Canada  Regan Smith, Director, Sustainability,  Real Estate, Manulife Investment  Management  Sharon Sproxton, Director, Corporate  Commercial Lines, Ontario and Atlantic  Divisions, Intact Insurance  Oraska Tam, Manager, Asset  Management, Fiera Properties Limited  Bofa Udisi, Project Coordinator,  MV&T, Smart Buildings & Energy  Management, Facilities Management,  Toronto Community Housing  Claudia Verno, Director, Policy,  Natural Catastrophe and Climate  Change, Strategic Initiatives, Insurance  Bureau of  Canada  Adrian Wang, Director, Innovation  and Sustainability, Tridel  Benjamin Welch, Sustainability  Coordinator, Triovest Realty Advisors Inc.  Jane Welsh, Project Manager,  Environmental Planning, Strategic  Initiatives, City Planning,   City of  Toronto  Christine Wickett, Manager,   Corporate Sustainability and  Responsibility, Morguard   Investments Ltd.  Acknowledgments The Intact Centre thanks Intact Financial Corporation, Real Property Association  of  Canada (REALPAC) and the Building Owners and Managers Association of   Canada (BOMA Canada) for funding this report. We also thank subject matter  experts, who contributed to the development of  this report, for their time and   advice, including:    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 5  REALPAC and BOMA Canada are pleased to sponsor the Intact Centre  on Climate Adaptation’s “Ahead of  the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience  Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate.”  This is Canada’s first guideline for improving the   flood-resilience of  commercial buildings. REALPAC   and BOMA Canada’s collective membership represent  the vast majority of  large Canadian commercial real  estate companies, which face increasing risk due to  climate change.   Extreme weather has become the new normal. As  we have seen in recent years, flooding, heat waves,  extreme heat, and extreme cold events are increasing  in frequency and intensity across Canada. Insured  losses related to extreme weather averaged $1.8 billion  annually between 2009 and 2018. Of  these, flooding  was the most costly and impactful.   We recognize that climate and resilience are major  risk and business issues. Buildings, which persevere  through flooding events can eliminate or mitigate risks  of  physical damage, disrupted business operations and  occupant danger. It is therefore imperative that senior  leaders recognize the importance of  making their  buildings as flood-resilient as possible to avoid major  future challenges.    Our industry needs to deepen its embrace of  proactive  adaptation to climate change, rather than simple  reaction to the next extreme weather event. This  guideline attempts to do just that: equip building owners  and managers with best practices they can use to make  their buildings more flood-resilient. In doing so, the  Intact Centre has consulted numerous stakeholders   and experts, including REALPAC and BOMA Canada  members, to ensure that this guideline’s contents and its  recommendations are the most relevant and impactful  to industry. We thank the Intact Centre for its leadership  in creating this guideline and all stakeholders who  contributed to it.  We hope that this document is shared across  organizations, from senior leaders to building operators.  Resilience needs to be implemented not only in our  buildings, but throughout our industry mindset and  culture. REALPAC and BOMA Canada look forward  to continuing to support the Canadian commercial real  estate industry in strengthening its resilience so that our  built environment can continue to prosper.     Sincerely,  Dr. Michael Brooks  Chief  Executive Officer  REALPAC     Benjamin L. Shinewald  President and Chief  Executive Officer  BOMA Canada  FOREWORD    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate6  Letter from Charles Brindamour, Chief  Executive Officer, Intact Financial  Corporation  Climate change is an environmental and societal issue,  as well as an economic challenge. We see the impacts of   climate change on our customers and communities every  day, which is why Intact is focused on finding practical  solutions to build a more climate-resilient society.   Flooding continues to be a pervasive challenge – it’s the  costliest natural disaster impacting Canadians. Beyond  the economic costs of  property damage and business  disruptions, it takes an emotional toll on those affected.  “Ahead of  the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience  Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate” is a  practical tool for commercial real estate owners and  managers to protect people and their assets.   Thank you to the University of  Waterloo, REALPAC  and BOMA Canada for your leadership, and to the  technical advisors for your expertise in building this  critical tool.   Charles Brindamour  Chief  Executive Officer  Intact Financial Corporation  Flooding continues to be a pervasive challenge – it’s the   costliest natural disaster impacting Canadians.” “    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 7  Foreword 5  Executive Summary 8  Chapter 1. Introduction:  10  The Need for Flood-Resilience across   Commercial Real Estate Properties in Canada  1.1 Escalating Costs of  Natural  11  Disasters in Canada  1.2 Flooding Impacts CRE Tenants 14  1.3 Flooding Impacts CRE Insurance 14   Rates and Availability  1.4 Flooding Gives Rise to Lawsuits 14  1.5 Flooding Impacts Credit Ratings 15  1.6 Investors’ Attention to Climate Risk  17  and Adaptation  1.7 Canada’s Commitment to Respond to  17  Climate Change, Reduce Flood Risk  Chapter 2: Flood-Resilience Measures for  18  Existing CRE Properties in Canada  2.1 Measures to Enact Before the Flood 19  2.1.1 Plans and Procedures 19  2.1.2 Equipment and Supplies 20  2.1.3 Major Retrofits 20  2.2 Measures to Enact During the Flood 21  2.3 Measures to Enact Immediately After  22  the Flood  2.4 Engagement with Local Governments  24  on Climate Resilience  Chapter 3: Examples of  Flood-Resilience  25  Measures Implemented  BGIS: Flood-Resilience Retrofit  25   for a Financial Client  Evergreen Brick Works: Flood Management  26   by Design and by Protocol  Fiera Properties: Addressing  28   Flood-Resilience at an Office Complex  FirstOnSite: Emergency Preparedness  29   for Critical Telecommunications Sites  FirstOnSite: Flood Retrofit for a  29   Condominium Complex  Healthcare of  Ontario Pension Plan:  29   Climate Risk and Resilience Assessment  Infrastructure Ontario / CBRE:  30   Weather Service Predictor  Infrastructure Ontario: Computer Rooms  30   Flood Protection  Menkes: Social Media Tenant  30   Outreach Strategy  Tridel: Preparing Property Managers to  31   Respond to Flood Emergencies  Triovest: Flood-Resilience Retrofits  31   Following a Major Flood Event  Chapter 4: Conclusion and Next Steps 32  Appendix A: Aon Flood & Water  33   Damage Resilience Technology Profiles  References 46  Table of Contents    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate8  Flooding has emerged as the costliest natural disaster in  Canada. According to Public Safety Canada, the cost of   the federal Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements  (DFAA) program, which provides funding support to  provinces and territories for major natural disasters, will  approach one billion dollars annually. Approximately  75% of  this cost is attributable to flood events.i Flooding  is also the lead driver in rising catastrophic insurable  losses for the property and casualty insurance sectors in  Canada, which experienced over $1.8 billion annually  in insured losses from 2009 to 2018, compared to $405  million annually from 1983 to 2008 (this data reflects an  adjustment for inflation and wealth accumulation).ii   Commercial real estate owners and managers are  not immune to the impacts of  flooding in Canada.  In addition to property damages, their tenants are  becoming increasingly concerned with potential business  disruptions and loss of  life during flood events. This is  not surprising – following the 2013 floods in Alberta,  between 150,000 to 180,000 people could not access  office buildings located in downtown Calgary for  approximately two weeks. This resulted in 5.1 million  lost work hours, equivalent to half  a billion dollars in  GDP loss to the province.iii In August 2018, when a flash  flood occurred in Toronto, Ontario, two individuals  almost lost their lives as they got trapped in an elevator  of  a commercial building and nearly drowned as the  elevator was stuck at the basement level, full of  water.iv     As the commercial real estate industry strives to  minimize its exposure to flood risk, this report provides a  concise list of  flood-resilience measures that can reduce  the potential for property damage, business disruptions  and potential flood-related injury and loss of  life   stemming from extreme rain events (Table 1).   These measures were developed by a consortium of   individuals that reflected a diverse range of  flood  risk expertise, with support from Intact Financial  Corporation, the Real Property Association of  Canada  (REALPAC) and the Building Owners and Managers  Association of  Canada (BOMA Canada).   Based on a national consultation with commercial  real estate owners, managers, institutional investors,  asset management consultants, insurance industry  representatives and others, these measures are deemed  broadly applicable for implementation across office  towers in Canada, with some measures equally  applicable to multi-unit residential towers and other  commercial and institutional buildings. As such, these  measures should be integrated into risk assessment  checklists and acquisition and investment questionnaires  used by property managers, owners and institutional  investors, respectively.  As the National Building Code of  Canada is being  revised to incorporate climate change impacts, some  measures outlined in this report, such as water sensors  that prevent elevators from proceeding to flood- inundated levels, should be prioritized for inclusion in  code revisions.   The timely deployment of  best practices to mitigate  flood risk cannot be overstated. The upward curve  in insurable losses in Canada, combined with steep  increases in DFAA payments, collectively illustrate that  if  left unattended, the flood risk profile of  commercial  real estate will increase unless stakeholders adopt the  practices profiled in this report.     EXECUTIVE  SUMMARY    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 9  Table 1: Key Flood-Resilience Measures for Commercial Real Estate (Office Towers), Canada  Plans and Procedures  PP1. Emergency plans: emergency  preparedness and response plans are in place  and include flood event procedures.  PP2. Practice drills: building operations  staff are trained on flood event procedures.  Annually, practice drills are performed with  tenants and procedures are updated as required.   PP3. Emergency funds: dedicated funds are  available for emergency operations, including  flood events. Designated staff have access to  both credit cards and sufficient amounts of   cash to be used for emergency operations.  PP4. Tenant communication channels:  tenant and stakeholder communication  channels have been established for  emergency situations, including flood events.  Tenant contact details are regularly updated.  PP5. Emergency operations centres:  designated space is available for building  operations staff to use as emergency operations  centres. This space is equipped with water,  non-perishable food supplies and emergency  kits and is located above expected flood levels.  PP6. Emergency response supply  contracts: standing orders are in place with  fuel suppliers, restoration and landscaping  companies to provide goods and services at  pre-arranged prices, under set terms and  conditions, as required for flood events.  PP7. Emergency contact information:  contact information of  risk management  personnel, insurance adjusters and insurance  brokers is maintained and current.  PP8. Insurance documentation:  documentation to access business  interruption insurance (e.g., financial  statements, lease agreements and inventory  counts) is regularly updated, backed-up  electronically and stored offsite.  Equipment & Supplies  ES1. Critical equipment and supplies:  critical equipment and supplies are available  onsite to respond to flood emergencies, (e.g.,  sandbags, sump pumps, portable generators,  fuel, portable lights, extension cords,  dehumidifiers, protective clothing, etc.).  ES2. Portable flood barriers and  sandbags: for buildings with critical  operations (e.g., buildings housing data  centers), portable flood barriers and  sandbags are available to protect the building  from overland flooding.  ES3. Back-up generation: onsite back-up  generation equipment and fuel are available  and have the capacity to provide electrical  power to at least one elevator, all building  sump pumps, heat pumps, boiler, smoke  evacuation fans, fire sprinkler and fire alarm  systems, stairwell pressurization systems, and  emergency lighting equipment for 24-72 hours.  ES4. Emergency lighting: battery- operated emergency lighting is available in  critical mechanical and electrical rooms,  as well as in emergency exit stairwells  for building evacuations, should back- up generation equipment malfunction.  A process is in place to regularly test all  battery-operated lighting and systems.  ES5. Elevator water sensors: elevators are  equipped with water sensors that prevent them  from proceeding to flood-inundated levels.   ES6. Backwater valves: backwater valves  have been installed on storm and sanitary  sewer pipes.  ES7. Hazardous materials storage:  hazardous materials are protected from  flooding (e.g., chemicals used in building  operations are stored in sealed containers,  or in inflammable cabinets located above  expected flood levels). Where hazardous  materials are stored, floor drains are  protected from spills.  Major Retrofits*  MR1. Elevating and flood-proofing  critical equipment: heating, cooling,  ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC)  equipment; electrical transformers,  switchgear and service panels, as well as  communication systems are elevated above  expected flood levels. If  not feasible to  elevate, these systems are flood-proofed (e.g.,  with equipment elevated off the ground and  drains at the lowest points on the floor).   MR2. Protecting server rooms:  server rooms are located on higher floors,  preferably on a raised platform, with a sump  pump installed at the lowest point. Water  sensors are installed for leak detection.  MR3. Protecting high-voltage and  telecommunication pull rooms:   high-voltage and telecommunication pull  rooms are waterproofed and equipped   with drainage.  MR4. Isolating electrical circuits: for  multi-level parkades, electrical circuits have  been isolated for each parking level.  MR5. Electrical panel upgrades:  electrical panels are equipped with WIFI  enabled breakers to allow for remote shut off.  *  These retrofits may be cost-prohibitive to implement post-construction, but they may be warranted for critical sites.    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate10  Extreme weather events are on the rise in Canada, bringing   ever-increasing cost and disruption to governments, businesses,   and ultimately all Canadians.v  In the past decade, flooding emerged   as the most pervasive and costly natural disaster in the country,  causing financial and mental distress to those impacted.  To limit the impacts of  flooding, all levels of  government  (Federal, provincial, territorial, municipal and Indigenous  governments) are making new infrastructure investments  and implementing flood risk reduction strategies.   Flood risk reduction requires a whole of  society  approach – and this report outlines flood-resilience  measures that can be implemented in Canada by  commercial real estate (CRE) owners and managers.  While the development of  this report focused on  measures applicable to office towers (high-rise   structures, over five stories), many also apply to   multi-unit residential towers, retail, industrial,  institutional properties and other asset classes.  The report is organized as follows:  • Chapter 1 examines the need for climate adaptation  and presents key drivers for implementing flood- resilience measures across CRE properties in Canada;  • Chapter 2 outlines flood-resilience measures that  should be implemented for existing CRE properties   in Canada to reduce the potential for property  damage, business disruptions and flood-related loss   of  life;  • Chapter 3 provides examples of  flood-resilience  measures implemented by CRE owners and managers  in Canada; and   • Chapter 4 provides concluding remarks and next steps.  Introduction  The Need for Flood-Resilience across Commercial   Real Estate Properties in Canada  CH AP  TE R   1    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 11  According to Public Safety Canada, the number of   natural disasters for which provinces and territories  required and obtained federal assistance under the  Disaster Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA)  increased nearly tenfold between 2005 and 2014,  compared to the previous decade. Over this 10-year  period, the total loss from floods amounted to just over  $12.5 billion, the largest expense for the DFAA. Going  forward, the annual costs of  the DFAA program are  expected to average $902 million, with $673 million  attributable to flood events. This substantially exceeds  the $100 million nominal program budget (Figure 1).vi   Figure 1: Estimate of  the Average Annual Cost for Disaster  Financial Assistance Arrangements (DFAA) due to Weather  Events in Canada  Annual costs of the DFAA   program are expected to   average $902 million.”  DFAA ANNUAL BUDGET 2016  $100 million  $900 million  75% Attributable to flooding  ESTIMATED ACTUAL  DFAA ANNUAL COST  Source: Parliamentary Budget Officer of  Canada. 2016.  Estimate of  the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial  Assistance Arrangements due to Weather Events.  1.1 Escalating Costs of Natural Disasters in Canada  “    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate12  Catastrophic insurable losses1 in Canada are also on  the rise. According to the Insurance Bureau of  Canada  (IBC), property and casualty insurance payouts from  extreme weather averaged $405 million annually from  1983 to 2008 and over $1.8 billion annually from 2009   to 2018 (Figure 2).vii  Water damage from flooding is the  key driver behind these growing costs.  Figure 2: Insured Catastrophic Losses for Property and Casualty  Insurance Sector, Canada (1983-2018)  Source: IBC Facts Book, PCS, CatIQ , Swiss Re, Munich Re & Deloitte. Values are in 2018$ CAN; total natural catastrophe losses  normalized by inflation and per-capita wealth accumulation.  5.5  5.0  4.5  4.0  $C AD   B ill  io ns  3.5  3.0  2.5  2.0  1.5  1.0  0.5  0.0  19 83  19 84  19 85  19 86  19 87  19 88  19 89  19 90  19 91  19 92  19 93  19 94  19 95  19 96  19 97  19 98  19 99  20 00  20 01  20 02  20 03  20 04  20 05  20 06  20 07  20 08  20 09  20 10  20 11  20 12  20 13  20 14  20 15  20 16  20 17  20 18  Quebec Floods  Ontario Wind & Rain  Slave Lake Fire  Alberta & Toronto Floods  Fort McMurray Fire  Eastern Ice Storm  Loss & Loss Adjustment Expenses  Estimated Trend   1 Insured losses for a given disaster are catastrophic when they total $25 million or more per event.    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 13  Source: Catastrophe Indices and Quantification Inc. (CatIQ). Values for annual commercial loss and loss adjusted expenses, adjusted  for inflation to 2018 $CAD.  0.02  0  0.04  0.06  0.08  0.1  0.12  1.3  $C AD   B ill  io ns  1.32  1.34  1.36  1.38  1.4  2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018  Figure 3 illustrates catastrophic insured losses associated  with flood events in Canada that occurred at the level  of  commercial properties (from 2009 to 2018). There  is a spike in losses that occurred in 2013, attributable  to $1.37 billion in insured damages associated with the  summer floods in Southern Alberta and in the Greater  Toronto Area.  In 2018, catastrophic insured losses for severe weather  events across Canada exceeded $2 billion, according to  IBC. Relative to commercial real estate losses that year,  August 2018 flooding in Toronto contributed   $113 million in catastrophic insured losses.viii  Figure 3: Insured Catastrophic Losses for Commercial Properties, Property and Casualty Insurance Sector, Flood Events,   Canada (2009-2018)  In 2018, catastrophic insured losses for severe  weather events across Canada exceeded $2 billion,   according to IBC.”  “    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate14  Flooding is not a new phenomenon for CRE tenants  in Canada and it is well known that it leads to property  damage, business interruptions and lost work hours.  For example, following the June 2013 floods in Alberta,  between 150,000 to 180,000 people could not access  office buildings, located in downtown Calgary, for  approximately two weeks. This resulted in 5.1 million  lost work hours, equivalent to half  a billion dollars in  GDP loss to the province.ix  More recently, the August 2018 flood in Toronto  disrupted business in several buildings including   City Hall, Scotia Bank Arena, Union Station, and  Rogers Centre. x Even more concerning, two tenants  were trapped in an elevator of  a commercial building  and nearly drowned as the elevator was stuck at the  basement level, full of  water.xi  As the number of  severe flood events rises, in concert  with changing climate, tenants are beginning to ask  building managers if  their buildings are prepared for  extreme weather, and some owners are asking the same  of  their third-party managers.xii  1.3 Flooding Impacts CRE Insurance  Rates and Availability In February 2019, the Office of  the Superintendent of   Financial Institutions (OSFI) noted that climate change  in Canada poses physical, investment and liability  risks. It stated that while the insurance industry is “well  positioned to manage physical risks in the medium-term,  there is growing concern about the potential longer- term impact of  climate change. A continued increase in  the frequency and magnitude of  weather-related claims  can create price-setting issues for insurance products.”xiii  OSFI stated that it wants all insurers to quantify their  exposure and develop strategic approaches for managing  climate risk.xiv  Already in some residential areas in Canada, where  repeated flooding has occurred, home flood insurance   has become more expensive, or the coverage is limited/ no longer available.   “ The industry average premium for  homeowner insurance has risen by   20-25% over the past five years in Canada.  More than half  of  this increase is directly  attributable to water damage and other  extreme weather events. The remainder is  due to the increase in insured values.”  –  Patrick Barbeau, Senior Vice President, Claims   at Intact Insurance, March 2019.  This is a warning sign for CRE owners and managers–  even when properties are insurable, premium increases,  higher deductibles, and coverage caps may mean that  the total amount of  potential damage covered by insurance  will decline in concert with growing flood risk.xv  1.4 Flooding Gives Rise to Lawsuits Flood-related lawsuits involving homeowners,  developers, local governments, Indigenous communities,  provinces, and private businesses, are on the rise in  Canada. CRE owners and managers are equally  exposed to the legal risk associated with flood damages.  For example, following a 2009 flood (caused by a  leaking pipe) in the building complex now known as  Brookfield Place in Toronto, Marsh Canada and other  tenants affected by the flood, filed and settled a lawsuit  against Centennial Plumbing and Heating Limited.  Consequently, Centennial Plumbing sought to be  reimbursed by Brookfield Properties Limited, responsible  for management of  the property, claiming the damage  was a result of  Brookfield’s negligence. While it was  ruled that Brookfield was not liable to reimburse  Centennial Plumbing in 2017, this case illustrates the  potential for lawsuits to arise when flooding impacts  commercial tenants.xvi  1.2 Flooding Impacts CRE Tenants    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 15  In Canada, where flooding is the most common and  costly extreme weather risk impacting properties, it is  prudent for CRE owners and managers to investigate  the degree of  flood-preparedness in the cities and  provinces they operate. If  the creditworthiness of   the city is falling due to flood exposure or lack of   preparedness to withstand flood events, so might the  property values and tenancy rates.   Indeed, global credit rating agencies, including DBRS,  Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s are beginning to  examine climate change risks and potential impacts on  ratings of  tradable assets, including municipal bonds.xvii  In November 2017, Moody’s Investors Service outlined  four key credit risks associated with climate change that  its analysts consider when examining local and state  government risks:  1. Economic disruption (e.g., property loss/damage;  lower revenues; business interruption; increased debt;  and higher insurance costs);  2. Physical damage (e.g., property loss/damage; loss of   utilities, transportation and communication networks);  3. Health and public safety (e.g., loss of  life, mental  distress, jeopardized critical emergency service  provisions); and  4. Population displacement (e.g., short-term displacements  and longer-term population migration).xviii   Notably, flood risks also comprise a significant focus  for climate risk assessment metrics for Moody’s, where  points three and five below relate directly to flood risk:  1. GDP Coastal Counties per Total State GDP, 2016;  2. Tropical Cyclone Damage (1980–2017) per   State GDP, 2016;  3. Coastal Dwelling Units in 100/500 Year Floodplains  per Total Coastal Dwelling Units;  4. Damage from Non-Tropical Cyclone Weather Events  (1980-2017) per State GDP, 2016;  5. Non-Coastal Dwelling Units in 100/500 Year  Floodplains per Total Non-Coastal Dwelling Units; and  6. Agricultural, Forestry, Fishing and Hunting per   Total State GDP, 2016.xix  1.5 Flooding Impacts Credit Ratings    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate16    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 17  1.6 Investors’ Attention to Climate Risk  and Adaptation In 2017, the Financial Stability Board’s Task Force  on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD)  provided recommendations for companies to disclose  their climate-related financial risk to investors, lenders,  insurers and other stakeholders.xx TCFD disclosures are  voluntary and include physical, liability and transition  risks associated with climate change, which would be  material to investors.   In 2018, GRESB, the leading environmental, social, and  governance global benchmark for real assets, added a  Resilience Module to its long-standing Real Estate and  Infrastructure Assessments. The Resilience Module was  broadly aligned with TCFD recommendations. As noted  by GRESB, “real asset investors are particularly exposed  to weather-related disaster issues, as the value of  their  long-term, often illiquid physical assets is intrinsically  linked to energy systems, transportation infrastructure,  and social and environmental circumstances.” xxi  In Canada, Canadian Securities Administrators (CSA)  issued a CSA Staff Notice 51-333, Environmental  Reporting Guidance in 2010. The notice stipulated that  issuers must disclose material information pertaining  to environmental matters. As per CSA, “information  relating to environmental matters is likely material if  a  reasonable investor’s decision whether or not to buy, sell  or hold securities of  the issuer would likely be influenced  or changed if  the information was omitted or misstated.” xxii  A subsequent study by CSA conduced in 2018 (CSA  Staff Notice 51-354: Report on Climate Change-Related  Disclosure Project), examined climate change-related  risk disclosure provided by Canadian issuers. It found  that 90% of  Canadian issuers disclosed regulatory,  policy or legal risks associated with climate change (e.g.,  impacts of  carbon tax on profitability), 43% disclosed  physical risks and 33%, 31% and 18% disclosed market,  reputation and technology risks, respectively. xxiii  With extreme weather events projected to become  more severe and frequent, disclosure of  physical risks  by Canadian issuers will grow in concert with the new  climate reality. Pension funds in particular, which take a   long view on their real estate investments, are beginning  to pay attention to how extreme weather risks may  affect returns. For real estate assets located in flood-prone  areas, disclosure regarding flood protection and resiliency  measures implemented will likely be deemed material.  1.7 Canada’s Commitment to Respond to  Climate Change, Reduce Flood Risk Canada has made a number of  commitments to respond  to the challenge of  climate change and to reduce disaster  risk, including signing the Paris Agreement xxiv and the  United Nations’ Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction  (DRR).xxv It also established the Pan-Canadian Framework  on Clean Growth and Climate Change (PCF), which  aims to both mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and build  resilience to extreme weather impacts.  For example, under the PCF, Infrastructure Canada  launched the Climate-Resilient Buildings and Core  Public Infrastructure (CRBCPI) Project that aims  to integrate climate resiliency into building and  infrastructure design, guides and codes. xxvi As part of   this initiative, the Government of  Canada invested   $42.5 million into research regarding how to factor  climate resilience into the design of  buildings, roads,  bridges, water systems and rail transit in Canada.xxvii  Specific to buildings, the National Research Council’s  Codes Canada division is developing new climate design  datasets to incorporate climate change impacts into the  National Building Code requirements, including new  requirements for building loads from rain, wind and  snow due to extreme weather. xxviii  Concurrently, the Standards Council of  Canada (SCC)  identified existing standards referenced in National Model  Construction Codes, Provincial and Territorial Regulations  and Master Building Specification that need to be updated  to include climate change considerations. It also supported  the development of  new National Standards of  Canada  that address flood risk reduction at the level of  homes and  new and existing communities in Canada. xxiv  xxx    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate18  This chapter outlines flood-resilience measures that can be   implemented by CRE owners and managers to better plan,   prepare and respond to flood events. The scope of  these   measures is outlined in Table 2.   Flood-Resilience Measures for Existing CRE   Properties in Canada  CH AP  TE R   2  * Some flood-resilience measures identified for CRE properties may also apply to industrial, institutional, MURB properties and other asset classes.  Table 2: Scope of  Flood-Resilience Approaches for Existing Commercial Real Estate Properties in Canada  In Scope Out of Scope  Property-Level Measures: • Emergency response procedures • Flood preparedness activities • Physical building improvements  • Climate risk assessments • Broader resilience plans  Geography: • All of  Canada  Geography: • Permafrost communities  Flood Hazards: • Riverine  • Overland • Sanitary sewer back up • Storm sewer back up  Flood Hazards: • Water damage due to burst pipes, sink overflows,    fire system failures • Storm surge and sea level rise • Tidal flooding, dam failures and other unique flood   hazards Property Types:   • Commercial (primary focus is on office towers) Property Types: • Industrial, institutional and multi-unit residential   buildings (MURB)*    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 19  Notably, the assumption made in this report is that CRE  property owners and managers would use the results of   climate risk assessments to identify properties that are  the most vulnerable to flooding and have the greatest  need of  flood protection (e.g., high value properties,  critical facilities, heritage sites and properties housing  vulnerable populations).  Climate risk assessments can be conducted internally, or  through utilizing external expertise. Guidance documents,  such as BOMA Canada’s Resilience Brief xxxi and the Urban  Land Institute’s Guide for Assessing Climate Change Risk xxxii  can aid with internal assessments. External assessments  can be provided by insurance and re-insurance  companies (e.g., AON, MunichRE and SwissRE),  engineering firms (e.g., AECOM, Stantec, WOOD), risk  modelling and advisory firms (e.g., Bloomberg, DNVGL,  Four Twenty Seven, JBA, Mantle314, Quinn & Partners  Inc., Risk Nexus, RMS, WSP, XDI) and others.  Relative to flood, risk assessments typically include  determining property-level exposure to fluvial (i.e.,  riverine) and pluvial (i.e., urban) flood hazards to  understand what flood levels are probable (e.g., 100-year  flood) and what flood levels are possible (e.g., 500-year  flood). These risk assessments should take into account  current and future climate projections.  The flood-resilience measures outlined in Section  2.1.1 and 2.1.2 are broadly applicable and should be  considered for implementation across all CRE properties  in Canada. Detailed, site-specific analysis is required  to determine relevant major flood-resilience retrofits  outlined in Section 2.1.3.  2.1 Measures to Enact Before the Flood 2.1.1 Plans and Procedures  1. Emergency plans: emergency preparedness and  response plans are in place and include flood event  procedures.  2. Practice drills: building operations staff are trained   on flood event procedures. Annually, practice drills  are performed with tenants, and procedures are  updated as required.   3. Emergency funds: dedicated funds are available  for emergency operations, including flood events.  Designated staff have access to both credit cards   and sufficient amounts of  cash to be used for  emergency operations.  4. Tenant communication channels: tenant and  stakeholder communication channels (mass notification  systems and social media channels) have been  established for emergency situations, including flood  events. Tenant contact details are regularly updated.  5. Emergency operations centres: designated space  is available for building operations staff to use as  emergency operations centres. This space is equipped  with water, non-perishable food supplies and emergency  kits and is located above expected flood levels.  6. Emergency response supply contracts: standing  orders are in place with fuel suppliers, restoration and  landscaping companies to provide goods and services  at pre-arranged prices, under set terms and conditions,  as required for flood events. Consideration should be  given to developing a list of  secondary suppliers, if  the  primary suppliers are not available.   7. Emergency contact information: contact  information of  risk management personnel,  insurance adjusters and insurance brokers is  maintained and current.  8. Insurance documentation: documentation to  access business interruption insurance (e.g., financial  statements, lease agreements, inventory counts, etc.)  is regularly updated, backed-up electronically and  stored offsite.  Climate risk assessments can be   conducted internally, or through    utilizing external expertise.”  “    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate20  2.1.2 Equipment and Supplies  1. Critical equipment and supplies: critical  equipment and supplies are available onsite to  respond to flood emergencies, such as reusable  sandbags, submersible sump pumps, portable  generators, fuel, portable lights, extension cords, air  dryers, air moisture sensors, dehumidifiers, protective  clothing, two-way radios, batteries and medical  supplies. A satellite phone is available in the event of   internet and cell tower outage.  2. Portable flood barriers and sandbags: for  buildings with critical operations, portable flood  barriers and sandbags are available to protect the  building from overland flooding.  3. Back-up generation: onsite back-up generation  equipment and fuel are available and have the  capacity to provide electrical power to at least one  elevator, all building sump pumps, heat pumps,  boiler, smoke evacuation fans, fire sprinkler and fire  alarm systems, stairwell pressurization system, and  emergency lighting equipment for 24-72 hours.  4. Emergency lighting: battery-operated emergency  lighting is available in critical mechanical and  electrical rooms, as well as in emergency exit  stairwells for building evacuations, should back-up  generation equipment malfunction. A process is in  place to regularly test all battery-operated lighting  and systems.  5. Elevator water sensors: elevators are equipped  with water sensors that prevent them from proceeding  to flood-inundated building levels.   6. Backwater valves: backwater valves have been  installed on storm and sanitary sewer pipes.  7. Hazardous materials storage: hazardous  materials are protected from flooding (e.g., chemicals  used in building operations are stored in sealed  containers, or in inflammable cabinets located above  expected flood levels). Where hazardous materials are  stored, floor drains are protected from spills.  2.1.3 Major Retrofits  While most measures below may be cost-prohibitive to  implement post-construction, they may be warranted for  critical sites, or during major building retrofits:  1. Elevating and flood-proofing critical equipment:  heating, cooling, ventilation, and air conditioning  (HVAC) equipment; electrical transformers, switchgear  and service panels, as well as communication systems  are elevated above expected flood levels. If  not feasible  to elevate, these systems are flood-proofed (e.g., with  equipment elevated off the ground and drains at the  lowest points on the floor).   2. Protecting server rooms: server rooms are located  on higher floors, preferably on a raised platform, with  a sump pump installed at the lowest point. Water  sensors are installed for leak detection.  3. Protecting high-voltage and  telecommunication pull rooms: high-voltage  and telecommunication pull rooms are waterproofed  and equipped with drainage.  4. Isolating electrical circuits: for multi-level  parkades, electrical circuits have been isolated for  each parking level.  5. Electrical panel upgrades: electrical panels are  equipped with WIFI enabled breakers to allow for  remote shut off.  It is also important to note how site design  considerations can be critical for property-level flood- resilience. For example, a major issue for CRE properties  during flash flood events is overland water entering  underground parking lots through intake and exhaust  vents. Accordingly, when designing a new site, it is  critical to elevate parking garage intakes and exhaust  vents above grade and cover them with a canopy, where  possible. Similarly, landscape design features such as  berms, swales, rain gardens and permeable pavements  can provide a range of  benefits, including flood  attenuation, biodiversity improvements and aesthetic  benefits. The SITES framework and certification system  can guide landscape architects, designers, engineers,  planners, developers and others to align land development     Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 21  with sustainable design considerations.xxxiii Care should  be taken to ensure that such features do not present an  obstacle to the disabled. The Rick Hansen Foundation  Accessibility Certification can guide professionals in this  regard.xxxiv    Although the focus of  this report was on identifying  preventative measures to reduce flood risk, some  examples of  what needs to be done “during” and  “immediately after” flood events are also provided   on the next page.   2.2 Measures to Enact During the Flood  • Follow emergency procedures and instructions from  local authorities. If  evacuation orders are issued, all  tenants and building operation staff must leave the  premises immediately.  • Prohibit tenants and building operations staff from  entering floodwaters (one foot of  water can sweep  away a vehicle and hazardous materials can enter the  water easily)  • Procedures are in place to shutdown equipment that  may be affected by the flood. This includes shutting  off electrical equipment and flammable liquid lines at   the source (except for emergency generators and fire  pumps). Do not energize until a licensed electrician  inspects this equipment for damage.  • Fill up fuel tanks for emergency generators and   fire pumps.  • Protect building doors and windows from overland  flooding and debris damage (e.g., by setting up boards  and sandbags).  • Protect onsite waste disposal and collection facilities  from floodwater entry (e.g., through locking waste  disposal bins).  • Secure outdoor items (e.g., outdoor furniture landscape  items, waste containers and other equipment) that can  be swept away by the flood waters.  • Move machinery, equipment and valuables to higher  levels (above expected inundation).  • Take photos of  impacted areas for insurance claims  process.  • Provide regular updates to tenants and building  operation staff.    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate22  2.3 Measures to Enact Immediately After the  Flood  Once the flood waters subside, the following steps should  be considered:  • Check for downed power lines and fuel spills caused  by the storm, report damages to the utility providers.  • Engage qualified gas fitters and boiler service  technicians to restart boilers, advising jurisdictional  authorities as necessary.  • Extract water from premises as soon as possible to  reduce damage and contamination.  • Remove damaged contents and furniture; disposing  of  it in accordance with regulations.  • Assess structural damage through visual inspections,  moisture meters, and thermal imaging to detect all  moisture.  • Check for contamination to determine the  required levels of  cleaning and sanitation (typically  this assessment is performed by an external  environmental consultant).  • Clean and sanitize the property, once dried, to  industry standards and scope provided by an external  environmental consultant.  • Initiate drying and dehumidification process and  keep daily moisture logs to measure progress.  • Test electrical, mechanical, fire protection, alarms  and other building systems; repair as required.  It should be noted that there could be a wide range of   illness and injury due to floods. These adverse health  effects include “physical injuries such as cuts and  abrasions; infections due to contact with contaminated  flood water and contaminated surfaces; exposure to non- biological contaminants such as carbon monoxide, heavy  metals, and pesticides, which can lead to health impacts;  allergic or asthmatic episodes triggered by exposures  to mold; and emotional trauma and post-traumatic  stress.” xxxv  Accordingly, careful attention needs to be  paid as buildings go through clean up and restoration  phases following flood events.     Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 23  Elevator flooding is usually a reportable  event in most provinces in Canada. This  typically means once a flood occurs, the  Authority Having Jurisdiction (AHJ) must  be notified to ensure the elevator(s)   affected are inspected by the AHJ prior   to returning to service.   There are two common types of  elevators used at   CRE buildings in Canada: traction elevators and  hydraulic elevators.   Traction elevators function with the help of  a rope that  passes over an electrically-powered pulley or wheel. xxxvi  This wheel is attached to an electric motor and when  the motor is powered, the wheel is set in motion, pulling  the rope and in turn lifting the elevator car to the desired  floors. xxxvii The wheel is usually placed in the machine  room, constructed on the highest floor of  the building. xxxviii   Hydraulic elevators utilize a piston, placed at  the bottom of  the elevator and controlled by an  electrically-powered pump. Hydraulic elevators are  typically used in smaller buildings (5-6 stores high),  serving a vertical rise of  up to 60 feet. The elevator  pump, oil tank and controls are housed within a  common space, usually located at the bottom landing  served by the hydraulic elevator.  Flood-resilience measures that are applicable to both  traction and hydraulic elevators include:  • Installing a back-flow preventer in the drain line between  the sump pit and the elevator pit to reduce the risk of   elevator pit flooding if  the sump pump fails;  • Ensuring that the elevator sump pumps are  provided with emergency power so they can remain  operational during power outages; and  • Waterproofing elevator lobby vestibule doors to  reduce floodwater incursion into the hoistway.  Flood-resilience measures that are specific to traction  elevators include:  • Installing water sensors that trigger the elevator  operations program to move elevator cars to a level  high enough in the building to ensure that critical  elevator equipment (e.g., travelling cables, car  safeties, car bottom roller guides, wiring junction  boxes, etc.) are above the water line.  In buildings where an elevator pit does not have a  drain:  • Securing portable pumps and required equipment  (e.g., extension cords) to be deployed in a flood  event.  • Installing water sensors in the elevator pit and  connecting these to the central alarm system or  BMS to provide immediate notification to building  operators of  a flood occurring within the elevator’s  pit space.  • Retrofitting electrical components in the elevator  pit to meet National Electrical Manufacturers  Association (NEMA) 4 protection requirements  (including waterproofing of  elevator receptacles,  switches and light fixtures).  Flood-resilience measures that are specific to hydraulic  elevators include:  Sealing the borehole’s annulus space to prevent  groundwater seeping up into the elevator pit through  this unprotected opening. This is particularly  important for properties located in areas with  seasonally high water tables.  Prepared by: Clifford Ayling, Director, Elevating Devices, PCL  Constructors Canada Inc.  ELEVATORS: An In-Depth Look At Flood-Resilience Measures    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate24  If the local governments and provinces do not step up   to the challenge to prepare and respond to climate    change and flood threats proactively, the risk is   passed on to everyone else.”   “  Although CRE owners and managers should make   every effort to improve flood-resilience of  their  properties, this could be negatively impacted if  the  underlying infrastructure to service these properties fails.  As noted in the 2019 study Climate Risk and Real Estate  Investment Decision-Making by the Urban Land Institute  (ULI) and Heitman, it is critical for CRE owners and  managers to investigate the degree to which local  governments are proactive in mitigating climate risks.   ULI and Heitman surveyed global real estate investors  and managers and found that “local governments’  preparedness for climate change influenced their  decisions regarding whether to invest long-term in those  markets.” xxxix Some CRE investment managers surveyed  by ULI and Heitman noted that they meet with elected  city officials to discuss climate resilience plans and to  signal to them that major asset owners are thinking  about this issue and want to see action taken. xl  The Intact Centre notes the following areas as critical  to assessing relative to local and provincial/territorial  government flood preparedness:  • Availability of  updated and forward-looking flood  risk mapping;   • Land use planning guidance, which takes into  account current and future climate projections;  • Proactive maintenance of  drainage, storm, water and  wastewater infrastructure systems; and  • Emergency preparedness and response including  coordination with agencies in charge of   transportation and electricity supply to remain  functional during flood emergencies.xli   As it relates to ageing infrastructure, large water main  breaks can cause localized floods, leading to property  damage and building closures. Some cities and utilities  have begun to implement monitoring solutions, such  as installing acoustic fiber optic cables to continuously  monitor the integrity of  pipes and provide notifications  to trained personnel if  potential problems are detected,  helping prevent major pipe bursts. xlii CRE owners and  managers need to take note of  these broader efforts that  local governments make to manage flood risk, as they  affect property-level resilience.  If  the local governments and provinces are not stepping  up to the challenge to prepare and respond to climate  change and flood threats proactively, the risk is passed  on to everyone else. CRE industry is well positioned to  drive adaptation efforts within jurisdictions where they  operate. As noted by the ULI survey respondents, a  good place to start is to have a conversation with elected  officials regarding their climate risk management plans.  2.4 Engagement with Local Governments on Climate Resilience    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 25  This chapter presents case studies of  flood-resilience measures   implemented at CRE properties across Canada to illustrate the  practicality of  measures outlined in Chapter 2. While the databank  of  flood-resilience case studies in Canada is a “work in progress”,   in the US, ULI’s report Returns on Resilience: The Business Case,   highlights real estate development projects that employ best practices in resilient  design (including flood-resilience) and show demonstrable returns on investment. xl  BGIS: Flood-Resilience Retrofit for a  Financial Client In 2018, BGIS worked with a financial client to identify  and implement flood-resilience measures for select  branch locations across Canada exposed to urban flood  risk. Based on the assessment conducted by BGIS, the  following measures were implemented to help the client  limit flood damage from severe precipitation events and  plumbing failures:  • Installation of  sump pump alarms to trigger  notification alerts in case sump pits are at risk of   overflow (estimated cost of  alarm installation is  $1,000, annual alarm monitoring fee is $500);  • Installation of  backflow valves to reduce the risk of   sewer back-up flooding (estimated cost of  installation  is $3,500);  • Installation of  water sensors in server rooms  (estimated cost of  installation is $10,000 or higher,  depending on the room size and monitoring  equipment); and  • Installation of  heat tracers on interior and exterior  water pipes to keep them from freezing and  subsequently bursting (estimated cost of  installation is  $1,000 or higher, depending on the required length).  In addition, BGIS team biannually (in the spring and  in the fall) cleans out roof  drains and downspouts at the  branch properties to avoid water pooling on the roof,  which can cause leaks and damage.    Examples of Flood-Resilience   Measures Implemented  CH AP  TE R   3    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate26  Evergreen Brick Works: Flood Management   by Design and by Protocol  Evergreen Brick Works is a hub – a place where the  world can experience sustainable practices that enable  flourishing cities of  the future. In 2010, Evergreen  transformed a collection of  deteriorating heritage  buildings into a global showcase for green design and  an award-winning public space. Open year-round,  Evergreen Brick Works welcomes more than 500,000  visitors annually to experience its public markets,  participate in conferences and events, enjoy outdoor  learning and nature play, and explore public art in the  heart of  Toronto’s ravine system.  As an organization, Evergreen Brick Works  acknowledges that “Flooding at Evergreen Brick Works Is  Not a Matter of  If, It Is a Matter of  When.” Therefore,  Evergreen Brick Works embeds flood resiliency  knowledge and education into its work culture in   all of  its day to day activities and operations.  Unlike many other CRE properties, Evergreen Brick  Works faces a unique set of  various activities that make  dealing with flood emergencies complicated. Evergreen  Brick Works has tenants, who operate within normal  office hours, but also hosts events, programs and  community engagement functions that happen after  hours, on weekends and holidays.   At any point of  time, Evergreen Brick Works could  have a large number of  people on site. This makes flood  risk management a paramount priority. In particular,  evacuation procedures and communication protocols are  critical to have in place in instances where the facilities  staff may need to shut down a high-profile function due  to a flood emergency.   Since 2013, Evergreen Brick Works has experienced three  major riverine flood events. Each event has turned the  11 acre site into a lake. By developing a comprehensive  flood management plan, Evergreen Brick Works managed  to reduce the recovery time and cost significantly from  millions of  dollars to below one hundred thousand dollars.  Evergreen Brick Works has a goal to reduce future flood  recovery costs to below $30,000.  Evergreen Brick Works is located in the flood plains of  the Don River in Toronto, Ontario.    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 27  To achieve flood-resiliency, Evergreen Brick Works has  focused its efforts on an approach that was coined “Flood  Management by Design & by Protocol”.  Relating to “Flood Management by Design”, Evergreen  Brick Works has implemented the following actions:  • Installed all electrical outlets above the 10-year flood line  • Located all major electrical and mechanical rooms on  the 2nd floor or higher  • Ensured new walls and floors are made of  solid dense  concrete to be easily washable and resistant to mold  • Across locations where a framed wall needed to be  installed, removable cement boards have been used to  be easily washed and dried  • Reprogrammed elevators to park on the 2nd floor  when not in use  • Used hollow plastic structures called “Cupolex” to  raise the floor above 10-year floodline while reducing  the quantity of  required concrete  • Installed flood gates at all entry points around   the buildings perimeter  • Installed permeable concrete pavement to reduce  water runoff from parking lots  • Installed green roofs to reduce water runoff from roofs  • Built cages and platforms for merchandise display in  retail stores, so that the items are always displayed  above the 10-year flood line  • At the children’s program area, built closets and  benches for placing backpacks and other items above  the 10-year flood line  • Installed 14 rain water cisterns that each retain  approximately 20,000 liters of  water, or more than  250,000 liters of  rainwater that could be used for  pressure washing after the flood  Relating to “Flood Management by Protocol,”  Evergreen Brick Works implemented the following  actions:  • Developed a comprehensive flood management plan,  which includes procedures for weather watch, flood  watch, flood alerting, evacuation and recovery  • Developed a customized weather widget with  centralized weather information and flood gauges  that pulls the data from available sources in a central  location for analysis and action by facilities staff  • Integrated flood preparation checklist into daily  standing orders for each activity taking place at  Evergreen Brick Works  • Implemented “flood walk” program to communicate  key findings about the status of  flood readiness of   various spaces to staff and tenants  • Procured an inventory of  flood equipment (e.g., sump  pumps, hoses, pressure washers, sanitizer sprays and  large fans)  • Designated a place of  refuge on higher floors,  equipped with drinking water and food  • Partnered with a nearby church in higher elevation  up the adjacent hill to shelter children and others if   necessary  • Developed a confidential staff and tenants phone tree  as well as critical contacts  • Developed Flood Management, Flood Response and  Floor Recovery teams including volunteers  • Established partnerships with watershed authorities  (TRCA) and their flood duty officers  • Included a flood risk clause in the tenants’  agreements, as well as third party events’ agreements  to ensure they are aware of  the risk and they take  their own measures in addition to the site’s efforts  • Informed every new hire about the site’s flood risk  and their possible engagement in flood recovery  and provided online and in-person health and  safety training for cleanup assistance as part of  the  orientation package    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate28  Fiera Properties: Addressing   Flood-Resilience at an Office Complex The City of  Richmond in British Columbia is situated  below sea level and relies on pumping stations to reduce  and maintain seawater levels. Seasonally, the city is exposed  to extreme high tides (i.e., “king tides”) and, at times, city  storm drains are over capacity and storm drains located in  low-lying areas backflow.  The Office Complex, managed by Fiera Properties, is  comprised of  13 buildings that span 707,000 square feet,  located on a 35-acre land parcel. Portions of  the parcel  are located in the designated flood plain. Three of  these  buildings are particularly vulnerable to flooding, as they  have parking and service rooms (including main electrical  services and telecommunications data rooms) located on the  ground floor, where storm drains are below the elevation  of  the city storm drains. There is no ability to relocate or  elevate critical equipment located in these rooms.  To address flood-resilience, Fiera Properties implemented  the following property-level protocols across the three most  vulnerable buildings:  • Installed automatically-activated sump systems to reduce  rising water levels;   • Installed two gas-powered pumps and secured fuel  supplies for emergency response;  • Set up an “incident command center”, which is  equipped with a first aid room, emergency tools and  supplies;   • Trained onsite staff and mobile security on emergency  response procedures, including flood response; and  • Instructed the onsite staff and mobile security to  inspect low elevation levels for flooding during high  precipitation events.  Fiera Properties further plans to enhance flood-resilience at  the Office Complex through implementing the following  measures:  • Inspect all buildings for the presence of  backwater valves  to reduce potential storm and sanitary backflow events /  where backwater valves are missing initiate installation;  • Ensure City of  Richmond and water pumping  trucks (McRaes Environmental) emergency contact  information are readily available for emergency  response teams;  • Ensure all emergency equipment (e.g., utility hole cover  removal tools, hoses, pumps, extra fuel, electrical cords,  etc.) are properly stored and are ready for use;  • Stockpile sand on site for sandbags if  required for a  flooding event;   • Develop emergency shut down procedures for main  electrical service in catastrophic flooding events; and  • Revisit tenant communications / evacuation protocols  to exercise for flood events.  The incident command centre is   equipped with a first aid room,   emergency tools and supplies.”  “    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 29  FirstOnSite: Emergency Preparedness   for Critical Telecommunications Sites Several critical telecommunications sites are at risk of   flooding in Western Canada. These sites are impractical  to relocate or redesign. Accordingly, flood tube barriers  and pumps have been purchased for rapid deployment  in the event of  overland flooding. Standby generators  and diesel tanks have been raised. The estimated cost  of  implementing these measures was $175,000 per site.  Notably, natural gas has been approved as a fuel source  for emergency standby power in many jurisdictions  where these sites are located. Costs to retrofit vary,  however the benefits of  using natural gas for emergency  standby power include:  • Reliable fuel source without the need to resupply  diesel tanks;  • No risk of  diesel spills;  • Lower emissions;  • Less maintenance required than diesel;  • Extended run times; and  • Natural gas does not have to be stored so it does not  degrade over time.   FirstOnSite: Flood Retrofit for a   Condominium Complex A 180-unit condominium complex in High River,  Alberta, which was heavily damaged by the floods in  2013, elevated all the hot water tanks and furnaces from  grade upon replacement. The estimated cost of  this  retrofit was $20,000, with retrofit work conducted by   a local HVAC contractor.   Healthcare of Ontario Pension Plan:   Climate Risk and Resilience Assessment In collaboration with Quinn & Partners and AON,  the Healthcare of  Ontario Pension Plan (HOOPP)  undertook a climate change risk and resilience  assessment on its global $14 billion commercial real  estate portfolio. HOOPP used historical extreme  weather and flood risk data, predicted climate change  risk parameters and a property survey to inform the  creation of  a risk and resilience matrix. The matrix  helps HOOPP to identify properties at a high risk of   extreme weather events and relates this risk information  to a property’s degree of  preparedness (resilience).   The climate change risk and resilience assessment  clarified that for HOOPP’s real estate portfolio the  main climate risk is flooding. HOOPP is now focusing  its flood-resilience planning and flood-protection  investments on high-risk properties. HOOPP is also  including property-level resilience practices in their  investment and asset management checklists to reduce  climate change-related risks.   Across HOOPP’s 190-property portfolio, the cost of   the climate change risk and resilience assessment was  approximately $500 per property. This cost included  access to forward-looking climate risk data, resilience  survey, analysis and development of  recommendations.  “  The climate change risk and resilience assessment clarified that for   HOOPP’s real estate portfolio the main climate risk is flooding.”“    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate30  Infrastructure Ontario / CBRE: Weather  Service Predictor To make provincial buildings more resilient to extreme  weather, automated warnings based on forecasted  weather and Environment Canada Public Weather  Alerts go out to any impacted buildings within the  Infrastructure Ontario portfolio. An extreme weather  event may be a heavy snowfall, intense rain, high winds,  or a period of  extreme heat or cold. A set of  prescriptive  measures appropriate to the type of  weather event  are sent to field staff. Measures can include validating  building systems and supplies, communicating with staff  and tenants, or checking building access points. Sending  these alerts to field staff in advance of  the weather event  allows them to take precautionary measures to mitigate  risks of  incidents impacting the building.    Infrastructure Ontario: Computer Rooms  Flood Protection In its Design Guidelines (which must be followed for the  commissioning of  any building retrofit), Infrastructure  Ontario specifies that water detection sensors should  be installed under the raised floor of  a computer room,  whenever air conditioners are being installed. If  flooding  occurs, sensors will trigger the water leak detection  alarm. The Building Automation System (BAS) sends  alarm notifications, by email or other means, to the  building operators/facility managers. The building  operators can then decide what measures need to be  taken to ensure occupant and building equipment safety.   Menkes: Social Media Tenant Outreach  Strategy As a way to engage occupants in an influential way,  Menkes departed from traditional CRE industry  methods, such as posters and flyers, and used social  media to form the basis of  its outreach strategy. Using  platforms like Twitter, Facebook, and Instagram,  Menkes leveraged its diversified social media presence    as a direct channel to engage building occupants.  Various messages are posted on these accounts, including  flood warnings and emergency communication.  Building Instagram Twitter  One York  Street   @OneYorkStreet @OneYorkStreet  25 York Street @25YorkStreet @25YorkStreet   4711 Yonge @4711Yonge @4711Yonge  Aero Centre @AeroCentre @AeroCentre_GTA   Menkes realized the benefits of  having a direct channel  to communicate with building occupants during several  events in Toronto. For example, in 2018 there was a  daylong power outage caused by a Toronto Hydro  equipment failure at a Menkes managed property.  As occupants did not have access to their emails and  company servers were down, traditional tenant email  notifications were not getting through to the occupants.  However, the occupants were able to follow live updates  about the power outage on the social media channels.  These live updates were also critical during the April 23,  2018 North York City Centre van attack, as occupants  needed safety information, as well as information about  road closures and building operating schedules.  Sending these alerts to field  staff in advance of the    weather event allows them to  take precautionary measures  to mitigate risks of incidents    impacting the building.”  “    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 31  Tridel: Preparing Property Managers to  Respond to Flood Emergencies Tridel, the largest builder of  condominiums in the  Toronto area, provides property management staff  (e.g., superintendents, concierges and cleaners) with  emergency management training, emergency kits and  ladders. As part of  the training, property management  staff are instructed on flood response, with a significant  focus on leak containment. The staff are trained on  reading valve charts and drawings, which indicate valve  locations and which water flows each valve controls  (e.g., domestic water supply systems, hydronic systems  used for heating and cooling, fire protection systems and  storm and sanitary sewer systems). In case of  a leak, the  staff are able to perform shut off procedures, reducing  property damage. Emergency kits that are provided  to staff include screwdrivers, drywall knives, garbage  bags, gloves, goggles, flashlights, adjustable wrenches,  duct tape, clamps, pens, note pads, etc. Tridel conducts  emergency drills annually with the onsite property  management staff. An emergency drill log is maintained,  listing the type of  drill, the time conducted and any  additional training required.   Triovest: Flood-Resilience Retrofits   Following a Major Flood Event Following 2013 Alberta floods, Triovest set up a  permanent flood room at the Keynote Office Tower  in Calgary. The room stores critical equipment and  supplies, including portable flood barriers, sand bags,  submersible sump pumps, portable generators, fuel,  portable lights, extension cords, protective clothing, etc.   As well, Triovest purchased the Watergate flood  barrier system, which can be set up in less than  an hour and covers the perimeter of  the city  block where the tower is located. The Watergate  flood barrier system (with sections of  it spanning from  0.6 to 1 meter in height) cost approximately $165,000.   It is stored in movable carts located in the flood room.   Triovest also worked with Fujitec Canada to retrofit  elevators with water sensors in its four-story Customs  House building in Calgary, Alberta. Fujitec specialists  installed water sensors at the bottom of  the building’s  elevator pits. The sensors automatically return elevators  to ground or higher floors should there be flooding in  the basement of  the building (i.e., if  the elevator pit is  full of  water). The cost of  retrofit, including equipment  and labour, was approximately $5,000 per elevator.    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate32  Relative to commercial real estate assets, flood-resilience  measures outlined in this report can reduce the potential  for property damage, business disruption and flood- related loss of  life stemming from extreme precipitation  events. The focus of  these measures is on proactive  planning and preparedness activities that can be  executed across office towers in Canada.    It is important to acknowledge that flood damage can  arise in the absence of  extreme precipitation events, for  example due to city infrastructure failures (e.g., water  main breaks), domestic water and hydronic system  leaks. Appendix A, prepared by Global Construction  and Infrastructure Group, Aon Risk Solutions, outlines  emerging technologies that can help address these  broader water-related challenges.  To be effective, many of  the flood-resilience measures  outlined in this report rely on regular maintenance   activities. To this end, inspections, testing and  documentation processes comprise an important part of   risk management activities. Qualified professionals who  are responsible for inspections and testing must therefore  receive training on flood risk assessment and resilience  measures, such as the ones outlined in this report.  The commendable leadership of  REALPAC and  BOMA Canada to establish the flood mitigation  practices presented in this report is self-evident.  The next step for commercial real estate  – the formidability of  which should not be  underestimated – will be the timely deployment  of  these practices in anticipation of  bigger  storms that have yet to come.   Climate change and extreme weather events will continue to   challenge the stability of  returns from real estate investments.   As noted in this report, the time is now for institutional investors  and commercial real estate owners and managers to revisit their  risk assessment models and to assess their exposure to the most   costly natural disaster in Canada – flooding.  Conclusion and Next Steps  CH AP  TE R   4    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 33  Aon Flood & Water Damage Resilience   Technology Profiles  AP PE  ND IX   A    Company Profile  Doxel  3250 Ash Street  Palo Alto, CA, USA  CEO: Saurabah Ladha  Category: Artificial Intelligence, Scanning/ Reality Capture  Website: www.doxel.ai/  Location: North America  Doxel is an artificial intelligence solution for construction productivity. It uses autonomous  devices to monitor a site every day, both outdoors and indoors, with LIDAR and HD cameras.  Their proprietary artificial intelligence algorithm then processes the data, inspects installation  quality, and quantifies how much material has been installed correctly.   Their cloud-based dashboard then provides project managers with real-time feedback on  productivity, as well as how actual costs and time spent are comparing to the original budget  and schedule. As a result, managers can better control outcomes and keep their projects on  time and on budget. Benefits include:  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk  Doxel's autonomous robots scans and captures images of the asset as it is being built and is  able to detect defects, inspect quality and measure progress through a robust artificial  intelligence system. This enables Doxel to identify micro issues that could turn into macro  flood and water damage events.    Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Budget   Schedule  Quality  AI measures installed quantities  and calculates earned value for  thousands of line items, telling  you exactly how much you owe  for a day’s work.  Doxel keeps you updated with  real-time progress reports,  measured production rates and  project completion forecasts.  Doxel detects errors with  superhuman accuracy through  their AI engine, instantly letting  you know if field installations are  installed per the plan.  Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by the Doxel  system include:  Defects   (design/  workmanship)  1 Loss in   Productivity  (construction)  2  Contractor  Default  3  Schedule  & Cost   Overrun  6  Property  Damage   (own, others)  4  Bodily  Injury    (own, others)  5  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &  Infrastructure Group    Company Profile  Site 1001  1001 Locust Street, 4th Floor,  Kansas City, MO 64106  CEO:  Cleve Adams  Category: Smart Buildings  Website: https://site1001.com/  Location: Global  A cloud-based software platform that combines a building’s core information (design models,  floorplans, asset details, warranty information, etc.), its maintenance and service records, and  live data feeds from building systems, sub-sensors, and IoT devices, to create a continuously  updated record of the building’s operational health and performance. Building owners,  operators and managers enjoy the following benefits of Site 1001:  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk  Site 1001's comprehensive building platform combines the use of sensors, IoT devices and  AI to stop leaks, flooding and monitor the overall health of the building before there is a  chance of a risk occuring.   Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Budget   Quality  Operations &  Maintenance   Continuously monitors building  comfort, safety, and performance,  while creating a continuously  updated record of the state of the  building for all in the building’s  ecosystem.  Reduce costs associated with  maintenance and repair delays by  delivering diagnostics, parts and  maintenance details at the point  of service.  Helps identify operational  anomalies and prevent building  system failures. Mitigates risks  from previously unnoticed and  undetected issues such as mold  and water leaks by automatically  detecting and notifying before  the issue becomes a problem.  Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by the Site 1001  system include:  Property Damage   (resultant damage,   own, others)  1  Delays in   claims    discover  4  Brand   Impact  5  Bodily Injury   (own, others)  2  Defects   (design   workmanship)  3  Warranty 6  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &  Infrastructure Group    Company Profile  Upbrella  9160 boulevard Leduc, Bureau  310,Brossard, QC, Canada, J4Y 0E3  CEO/Founder:  Joey Larouche  Category: Engineering Solutions  Website: www.upbrella.com  Location: North America  Upbrella works to bring sheltered conditions to high-rise construction projects by using  roof-lifting technology that envelops the structure and provides a protective enclosure that  supports the floor-by-floor construction of high buildings.  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk With Upbrella’s innovative way to construct high-rise buildings, many of the  traditional risks of water damage are eliminated due to its sheltered construction  method and best practices.  Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Budget   Schedule  Safety  Offers direct costs savings by  eliminating lost time and  productivity due to weather as  well as temporary set ups and  reduces waste management.  Faster delivery vs traditional  construction can reduce project  schedule by 20% - 25%.   Industry leading worker health  and safety environment due to  weather sheltered enclosure that  allows 80% of the work to be  performed at worker’s height  with no tower cranes required.   Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by Upbrella include:  Bodily  Injury    (own, others)  1  Weather  4  Property  Damage   (resultant damage,  own, others)  2  Defect  (workmanship)  3  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group    Company Profile  Arx Pax Labs, Inc.   20 S. Santa Cruz Avenue, Suite  102, Los Gatos, California 95030  CEO/Founder:  Greg Henderson, AIA   Category:  Construction Technology,  Resiliency  Website:  www.arxpax.com  Location:  California HQ, Global solution  Arx Pax unlocks “unbuildable” land. The SAFE (Self Adjusting Floating Environment) Foundation  System is a modular, pre-cast concrete foundation system that provides a consistent building surface  regardless of site location. SAFE adapts and integrates well proven technology to provide a scalable,  repeatable foundation ideal for poor soils, flood and earthquake hazards. Ultimately, SAFE provides  greater margins and less risk per unit of development and will disrupt real estate development  models worldwide. Instead of spending billions on rebuilding after disasters, we can now build  responsibly and sustainably to last for generations. Benefits include:   How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk Arx Pax’s Self Adjusting Floating Environment (SAFE) Foundation System provides a  consistent building surface regardless of site location. It provides scalable, repeatable  foundations ideal for poor soils, floods and earthquake hazards.  Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Budget  Schedule  Safety  The cost of SAFE is comparable to  traditional pier-based foundation  systems required in poor soils.  Land price is significantly reduced  therefore reducing overall  development cost.  Known SAFE Foundation System  structural load capacity allows for the  predesign of buildings independent of  site geotechnical conditions allowing  building predesign or structural  duplication.   To protect people, property and  communities from natural disasters  is our mission. Factory production of  foundations will increase worker safety  and reduce jobsite hazards.  Risks Treated Key Risks mitigated by the ArxPax   system include:  Property  Damage     (resultant damage,  own, others)  1  Loss in  Productivity    (operations)  3 Bodily   Injury  (own)  4  Weather  2  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group    Company Profile  ClimaCell 280 Summer Street Boston, MA 02210  CEO/Founder Shimon Elkabetz (CEO, co-founder),  Rei Goffer (Chief Strategy Officer,  Co-founder), Itai Zlotnik (Chief  Customer Officer)  Category IoT Wireless sensors,   Machine Learning   Website https://www.climacell.co/  Location We are a global company with  offices in the US (Boston, MA and  Boulder, CO) and Tel Aviv, Israel  ClimaCell is pioneering an approach we call the “Weather of Things” — where we use existing  infrastructure like cell signal interference, connected cars and airplane sensors to generate millions   of proprietary weather observations around the globe, each day. By assimilating these IoT data  points into proprietary forecasting models and combining them with traditional weather sources  like government radars, we output street-level, highly granular nowcasts and forecasts, updated  minute-by-minute. We call this MicroWeather — which we deliver to operations-focused clients  through a web-based user interface (HyperCast) and to data-focused clients via API.  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk   Using the “Weather of Things” approach, ClimaCell is innovating the way we forecast  weather. Through new and exciting methods of providing weather nowcasts and forecasts,  weather risks can be mitigated and managed more efficiently to reduce risk exposure.  Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Risks Treated Key risks impacted by ClimaCell include:  Property  Damage   (resultant damage,  own, others)  1  Weather  5  Bodily Injury   (own, other)  2  Loss in  Productivity  (construction,   operations)  4  Schedule &  Cost Overrun  3  Labor makes up 20–30% of  project costs, which can be  stretched into significant overrun  due to delays. HyperCast gives  the granularity to make binary  “go-no go” shift decisions,  avoiding mistaken cancellations  and minimizing missed shifts due  to faulty forecasts.   Budget  Lightning, high winds,  precipitation and extreme  temperatures can create job-site  hazards for crews and equipment.  ClimaCell’s weather alerting  system helps operators mitigate  and manage these risks with  advance warnings at the site level.   Safety  Automatic logging of weather  conditions into the daily log via  ClimaCell’s API saves a manual  task and functions as the one  source of weather truth across  projects, for example in solving  Liquidated Damages disputes.  Productivity    Company Profile  Reconstruct, Inc.  Development Headquarters:     Champaign, Illinois  Business Headquarters:   Menlo Park, California  CEO/Founder: Zak MacRunnels   Category: Visual Command Centers for  Construction Projects & Their 3D  Timelines; Augmented Reality;  Robotics; Artificial Intelligence;  Remote Connectivity; Scanning/ Reality Capture; Virtual Reality  Website: www.reconstructinc.com   Location: US, North America, Global   Reconstruct provides a visual command center for construction projects and their 3D timelines.  By integrating schedules, building information models (BIM), and reality capture into a single  unified view, Reconstruct creates actionable insights for all stakeholders including owners,  project executives, project managers, superintendents, field engineers, and trade  forepersons. Reconstruct’s quantified and visual analytics enable proactive, strategic  decisions. The Wall Street Journal describes Reconstruct as a ‘time machine’ that  reconstructs the past while simultaneously predicting future risk. Benefits Include:  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk Reconstruct provides a visual command center for construction projects and their 3D  timelines. By integrating schedules, building information models (BIM) and reality  capture into a single platform, Reconstruct enables proactive and actionable insights  for all stakeholders through quantified and visual analytics.   Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Enlighten   Anticipate  Collaborate  Reconstruct’s web platform  overlays 3D reality with BIM and  schedule to keep everyone on the  same page with a single version  of the truth.   Reconstruct’s predictive analytics  identify work locations most at  risk for future delays so that  project teams can fix problems  before they occur.     With integrated progress reports,  at-risk reports, weekly reports,  and visuals as-built reports  project teams coordinate to  maximize the project execution  efficiency, safety, and profitability.    Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by the Reconstruct   system include:  Defects   (design,   workmanship)  1 Loss in   Productivity  (construction)  2  Contractor  Default  3  Schedule  & Cost   Overrun  6  Property  Damage   (own, others)  4  Bodily  Injury    (own, others)  5  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group    Company Profile  Pillar Technologies  335 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10017  CEO:  Alex Schwarzkopf   Category: IoT/Wireless Sensors  Website: http://pillar.tech/  Location: North America  Wirelessly connected, battery powered sensors that monitor key metrics like temperature,  pressure, humidity, smoke and dust.  Once in place Pillar’s sensor technology and  monitoring platform provides multiple benefits to all project stakeholders including:  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk  Pillar’s moisture sensing technology can identify early stage water incidents,  thereby mitigating potential for greater damage.  Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Budget   Productivity:   Safety  It can reduce insurance claims  and deductibles by pushing alerts  that allow contractors to pinpoint  problem areas before damage  occurs. Also Pillar helps gain  insight into what did happen  during construction that may  have led to post construction  defect claims.  Pillar provides site wide data to  gain improved insight into what is  happening on the job site in real  time, providing a construction  site nervous system that improves  productivity and risk management.  The sensors provide real time,  constant protection of the job site  helps prevent events such as fire  and water damage. Also, it acts as  an early warning system to all  stakeholders and can also link  emergency response resources.  Risks Treated Key risks impacted by Pillar Technologies  system include:  Property  damage    (own, others)  1  Weather  4  Defects   (design/  workmanship)  2  Delays in   Claims   Discovery  3    Product Description Eddy Solutions is committed to empowering property owners with Intelligent Water  Management tools that identify issues, monitor usage and mitigate water damage. Eddy’s  comprehensive, award-winning technology provides real time data and insights and enables  remote and automatic water shutoff when necessary to protect and control water in all  property types. Eddy’s system includes IoT enabled sensors, smart meters and shutoff valves,  all connecting to a Homeowner App or Property Management dashboard to protect against  water damage and improve overall risk management.  Benefits 3 key benefits associated with   Eddy Solutions include:  Eddy Solutions  5255 Yonge Street  Suite 900  Toronto, ON M2N 6P4   CEO and President  Travis Allan   Category IoT/Wireless Sensors,   Remote Connectivity  Website www.eddysolutions.com  Location Canada and the US  Company Profile  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk Eddy Solutions is an innovative manufacturer of smart water metering products and  related technologies. Their intelligent suite of products continually track and monitor the  water environments of buildings and homes to identify issues, monitor usage, and ensure  that water damage is mitigated.  Aon Flood & Water   Resilience Technology Profile  Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by Eddy   Solutions include:  Property  Damage  (resultant damage,  own)  1  Delays in   Claims    Discovery  4  Brand Impact  6  Loss in  Productivity  (operations)  2  Warranty  5  Ability to   Prove Impact   Costs  3  Protection Protection against water damage  that originates within a structure  – internal plumbing leaks, burst  pipes, appliance failures, heating  and cooling issues, and bathroom  fixture leaks.  Data Real time data – The Eddy system  collects, normalizes, and analyzes  data on water damage and end  user consumption habits on an  individual and aggregate level.  24/7 Monitoring Eddy’s highly trained experts have   a deep understanding of water  usage for each profile and provide  remediation coordination.    Company Profile  FullStack Modular LLC   63 Flushing Avenue-Unit # 63;  Brooklyn, NY 11205  CEO:  Roger Krulak  Category:  Full Volumetric Modular Design,  Manufacture and Construct  Website:  www.fullstackmodular.com  Location:  U.S.  FullStack Modular seeks to revolutionize the building process through manufacturing pre-fabricated  components for high-rise multifamily, hospitality and student housing sectors. Their fully integrated  modular solution for design, manufacturing and construction enables a higher level of control,  predictability and scalability for development projects.   How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk FullStack’s fully integrated modular solution for design, manufacturing and  construction offers an efficient, quality driven alternative to traditional construction.  With complete weather protection, 80% of construction occurs off-site and at   ground level, resulting in fewer deliveries, safer working conditions and reduced  weather impact.  Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Fire  Water  Safety  There is no welding or sweating of   pipes on site. All connections are   bolted, press fit or Victaulic connections   and the sprinkler standpipe can be  extended within 1 hour in the stairwells  which get stacked alongside the mods.   The facades are installed in the factory  and checked with aerospace accuracy  to ensure perfect seal on site.  Additionally, all mods are temporarily  weather wrapped and receive a  temporary EPDM roof to protect mod  during transport and stacking.  All the SMEP including connection  pieces are shipped in the mods from  the factory, no other deliveries are  made to the site. Eliminates the need  for scaffolding and our solution allows  us to use the elevator shaft for people  transport, eliminating the need for an  exterior hoist.   Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by the  FullStack Modular include:  Bodily Injury  (own, others)  1  Weather  5  Property  Damage     (resultant damage,  own, others)  2  Warranty  6  Defects   (design,   workmanship)  3 Loss in   Productivity  (construction)  4  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group    Company Profile  MegaSecur   940A Pierre-Roux East Blvd, Victoriaville (QC) G6T 2H6  President & Founder:  Daniel Dery   Category: Public Safety/First Response in  Security Environment; Product  Manufacturing  Websites: www.megasecur.com www.water-gate.com   Locations: Global  The MegaSecur Water-Gate Barrier allows for the rapid, reliable and safe deployment of a water  containment barrier that can be used in emergency situations. The concept of the Water-Gate is  simple: it’s the weight of the water that stops the water. Its simple and unique design makes it  possible for the FM certified polymer canvas to collect excess water, while instantaneously  stabilizing the barrier to protect against water related emergencies. The Water-Gate Barrier can  be used for short or long durations of time without impacting its efficiency and durability, as it is  resistant to corrosion and toxic materials.  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk  The MegaSecur Water-Gate barrier is a turnkey solution that was designed to  provide a rapid, reliable and safe solution in an emergency situation. Built for  flooding, cofferdams, spill, fire water reservoirs and submerged areas, the Water- Gate water barrier is made out of a polymer canvas that automatically expands open  as it collects excess water.  Product Description  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Budget   The Water-Gate Barrier eliminates  the need to use and dispose of  hazardous sandbags, which are  expensive to get rid of and can  have a negative effect on the  environment.  The Water-Gate Barrier is made  from materials that are FM  certified, flexible, durable and  environmentally friendly.  MegaSecur allows for the safe  and rapid deployment of water  containment barriers. Its simple,  unique design collects excess  water, while instantaneously  stabilizing the barrier.  Risks Treated Key risks impacted by MegaSecur include:  Property  Damage   (resultant damage,  own, others)  1  Weather  5  Bodily Injury   (own, other)  2  Loss in  Productivity  (construction,   operations)  4  Safety  Schedule &  Cost Overrun  3  Quality     Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &  Infrastructure Group  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk  The Tiger Dam™ system is a specifically placed flood containment system that  enables the control of large volumes of flood water. To avoid business interruption  and mass flooding, the Tiger Dam™ system was designed to act as a temporary  emergency rapid deployment system that consists of elongated flexible tubes that  can be virtually any length and take any shape.  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile  Tiger Dam  #300, 530 8th Ave SW   Calgary, Alberta  CEO and President  Paul Vickers   Category Flood Mitigation, Oil Spill  Containment, Wildfire Applications,  Emergency Response  Website www.canadafloodcontrol.com  Location Global  Company Profile  Product Description The Tiger Dam System is a rapid deployable and re-usable containment bladder that is  used in overland and flash flooding, oil spill containment and wildfire applications. Tiger  Dam alleviates the need to use and dispose of hazardous sandbags, which are dangerous  to the environment and expensive to get rid of. When deployed properly, the Tiger  Dam System may divert up to 100% of floodwaters. Having your community or business  equipped with a certified and engineered Tiger Dam for their next emergency is key, as it’s  not a matter of if, but when.  Quality Tiger Dams are designed to take  any shape and are the only  engineered system that can be  joined from sections into dams  hundreds of miles long.  Safety Tiger Dam is FM approved with  a platinum level certification   (top level) for flood abatement.  Budget Tiger Dams are 1/5 the overall cost  of sandbags on their first use. Each  dam replaces 500 sandbags.  Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by the  Tiger Dam System include:  Property  Damage  (resultant damage,  own, others)  1  Loss in  Productivity (construction,   operations)  4  Bodily Injury (own, others)  2  Weather  5  Schedule &  Cost Overrun  3    Product Description Pontarolo Engineering®, with its patented Cupolex structural void space technologies and  applications, converts risk-driving impervious spaces into resilient assets. By manipulating  the geometry of concrete through Cupolex’s form-based approach, Pontarolo Engineering’s  design and engineering approach brings a unique set of additional performance functions  to any construction project with limitless applications. Next to cost-benefits for our clients,  Cupolex projects bring a set of ecological, social and municipal benefits by integrating risk- reducing functions, such as storm water capture and management, structural soil cells for  flood mitigation and green infrastructure to combat urban heat. Pontarolo Engineering Inc.   55 Administration Rd.   Concord, ON  Canada L4k 4G9  CEO/Founder  William J. Cannizzaro   Category Engineering Solutions  Website www.cupolex.com  Location Global  Company Profile  Urban Resilience Pontarolo Engineering converts  impervious spaces into resilient  assets. From parking lots to plazas,  sidewalks to highways, Pontarolo  gives these spaces additional  resilient performance qualities.  Resilient Infrastructure Pontarolo Engineering reduces risk  of transportation assets (LRT,  airports and BRT, bike lanes), by  integrating Cupolex in lines, streets,  parking areas and sidewalks.  Sustainable Construction Cupolex structural void space  construction solutions bring  significant cost savings by using less  concrete, gravel and aggregates,  reduces GHGs emissions and  increase implementation times.  Risks Treated Key risks mitigated by Pontarolo’s  Cupolex solutions include:  Property  Damage  (resultant damage,  own, others)  1  Schedule &  Cost Overrun  4  Loss in  Productivity (construction,   operations)  2  Brand Impact  5  Weather  3  Aon’s Commercial  Risk Solutions Global Construction &   Infrastructure Group  How this technology prevents and mitigates flood and water damage risk  Pontarolo’s Cupolex solution bring projects a set of ecological, social and municipal benefits  by integrating risk-reducing functions, such as storm water capture and management,  structural soil cells for flood mitigation and green infrastructure to combat urban heat.  Aon Flood & Water Resilience  Technology Profile    Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate46  References  i  Parliamentary Budget Officer of  Canada. 2016. Estimate of   the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial Assistance  Arrangements due to Weather Events. Accessed at: www. pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/ DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf  ii  Insurance Bureau of  Canada. 2019. Facts of  the Property and  Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada. Accessed at: http:// assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/ IBC-2019-Facts.pdf  iii  Government of  Alberta. 2013. Economic Commentary:  Impact of  Southern Alberta Flooding on Hours Worked and  GDP. Accessed at: https://www.albertacanada.com/files/ albertacanada/SP-Commentary_09-06-13.pdf    iv  CBC. 2018. Police Rescue Two Men from Water-filled Elevator  during Toronto Flooding. Accessed at: www.cbc.ca/news/ canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News.  2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood  ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at:  https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue- elevator/   v  Office of  the Auditor General of  Canada. 2017.  Report 2—Adapting to the Impacts of  Climate Change.  Accessed at: www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_ cesd_201710_02_e_42490.html   vi  Parliamentary Budget Officer of  Canada. 2016. Estimate of   the Average Annual Cost for Disaster Financial Assistance  Arrangements due to Weather Events. Accessed at: www. pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/ DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf  vii  Insurance Bureau of  Canada. 2019. Facts of  the Property and  Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada. Accessed at: http:// assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/ IBC-2019-Facts.pdf  viii  Canadian Underwriter. 2019. Two Weird Things about   the 2018 Catastrophe Season. Accessed at:   www.canadianunderwriter.ca/catastrophes/why-2018-was- unusual-from-a-cat-perspective-1004159387/   ix  Government of  Alberta. 2013. Economic Commentary:  Impact of  Southern Alberta Flooding on Hours Worked and  GDP. Accessed at: https://www.albertacanada.com/files/ albertacanada/SP-Commentary_09-06-13.pdf    x  Insurance Bureau Canada. 2018. Toronto Flood Causes over  $80 Million in Insured Damage. Accessed at: http://www.ibc. ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/toronto-flood- causes-over-80-million-in-insured-damage   xi  CBC. 2018. Police Rescue Two Men from Water-filled Elevator  during Toronto Flooding. Accessed at: www.cbc.ca/news/ canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News.  2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood  ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at:  https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue- elevator/   xii   BOMA Canada. 2019 Resilience Brief. Accessed at:   http://bomacanada.ca/resources/resilience-brief/   xiii   The Office of  the Superintendent of  Financial Institutions.  2019 The OSFI Pillar. Accessed at: www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/Eng/ Docs/pl201902.pdf    xiv   Ibid.  xv  Urban Resilience Program. 2014. What the Real Estate Industry  Needs to Know about the Insurance Industry and Climate  Change. Accessed at: http://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI- Documents/Insurance-White-Paper-FINAL.pdf    xvi   Meckbach, G. 2017. The Curious Case of  Who Pays  for a Building Flood Claim. Accessed at: https://www. canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/curious-case-pays-building- flood-claim-1004124542/   xvi   Moody’s Investors Service. 2017. Environmental Risks –  Evaluating the Impact of  Climate Change. Accessed at:  www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on- US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf    Standards & Poor’s Ratings Services. 2015. How Environmental  and Climate Risks Factor into Global Corporate Ratings.  Accessed at: www.environmental-finance.com/assets/files/ How%20Environmental%20And%20Climate%20Risks%20 Factor%20Into%20Global%20Corporate%20Ratings%20 Oct%2021%202015%20(2).pdf    xvii   Moody’s Investors Service. 2017. Environmental Risks –  Evaluating the Impact of  Climate Change. Accessed at:  www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/ uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on- US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf    xix  Ibid.  xx   Financial Stability Board. Task Force on Climate-related  Financial Disclosures. Accessed at: www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/   http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf  http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf  http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf  https://www.albertacanada.com/files/albertacanada/SP-Commentary_09-06-13.pdf https://www.albertacanada.com/files/albertacanada/SP-Commentary_09-06-13.pdf http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_cesd_201710_02_e_42490.html http://www.oag-bvg.gc.ca/internet/English/parl_cesd_201710_02_e_42490.html http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf http://www.pbo-dpb.gc.ca/web/default/files/Documents/Reports/2016/DFAA/DFAA_EN.pdf http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf http://assets.ibc.ca/Documents/Facts%20Book/Facts_Book/2019/IBC-2019-Facts.pdf http://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/catastrophes/why-2018-was-unusual-from-a-cat-perspective-1004159387/ http://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/catastrophes/why-2018-was-unusual-from-a-cat-perspective-1004159387/ https://www.albertacanada.com/files/albertacanada/SP-Commentary_09-06-13.pdf https://www.albertacanada.com/files/albertacanada/SP-Commentary_09-06-13.pdf http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/toronto-flood-causes-over-80-million-in-insured-damage http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/toronto-flood-causes-over-80-million-in-insured-damage http://www.ibc.ca/on/resources/media-centre/media-releases/toronto-flood-causes-over-80-million-in-insured-damage http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/toronto/heavy-showers-1.4777111; Global News. 2018. Men Trapped in Toronto Elevator During Flash Flood ‘Prayed,’ Vowed to Get Out ‘No Matter What’. Accessed at: https://globalnews.ca/news/4375978/toronto-flooding-rescue-elevator/ http://bomacanada.ca/resources/resilience-brief/ http://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/Eng/Docs/pl201902.pdf http://www.osfi-bsif.gc.ca/Eng/Docs/pl201902.pdf http://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI-Documents/Insurance-White-Paper-FINAL.pdf http://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI-Documents/Insurance-White-Paper-FINAL.pdf https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/curious-case-pays-building-flood-claim-1004124542/ https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/curious-case-pays-building-flood-claim-1004124542/ https://www.canadianunderwriter.ca/insurance/curious-case-pays-building-flood-claim-1004124542/ http://www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf http://www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf http://www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf http://www.environmental-finance.com/assets/files/How%20Environmental%20And%20Climate%20Risks%20Factor%20Into%20Global%20Corporate%20Ratings%20Oct%2021%202015%20(2).pdf http://www.environmental-finance.com/assets/files/How%20Environmental%20And%20Climate%20Risks%20Factor%20Into%20Global%20Corporate%20Ratings%20Oct%2021%202015%20(2).pdf http://www.environmental-finance.com/assets/files/How%20Environmental%20And%20Climate%20Risks%20Factor%20Into%20Global%20Corporate%20Ratings%20Oct%2021%202015%20(2).pdf http://www.environmental-finance.com/assets/files/How%20Environmental%20And%20Climate%20Risks%20Factor%20Into%20Global%20Corporate%20Ratings%20Oct%2021%202015%20(2).pdf http://www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf http://www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf http://www.southeastfloridaclimatecompact.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Evaluating-the-impact-of-climate-change-on-US-state-and-local-issuers-11-28-17.pdf http://www.fsb-tcfd.org/about/   Ahead of the Storm: Developing Flood-Resilience Guidance for Canada’s Commercial Real Estate 47  xxi   Chris Pyke. GRESB. Resilience & Real Assets: Special  Report. Accessed at: gresb-public.s3.amazonaws.com/2018/ Documents/Resilience_Report.pdf    xxii   Canadian Securities Administrators. 2010. CSA Staff Notice  51-333, Environmental Reporting Guidance. Accessed at:  www.osc.gov.on.ca/documents/en/Securities-Category5/ csa_20101027_51-333_environmental-reporting.pdf    xxiii   Canadian Securities Administrators. 2018. CSA Staff Notice  51-354: Report on Climate Change-Related Disclosure  Project. Accessed at: www.osc.gov.on.ca/en/SecuritiesLaw_ csa_20180405_51-354_disclosure-project.htm   xxiv   Government of  Canada. 2016. Canada’s Way Forward on  Climate Change: The Paris Agreement. Accessed at: www. climatechange.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=24700154-1  xxv   Government of  Canada. 2017. Sendai Framework for Disaster  Risk Reduction (DRR) 2015–2030. Accessed at: www. publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/ pltfrm-dsstr-rsk-rdctn/snd-frmwrk-en.aspx   xxvi   Government of  Canada. 2019. Climate-Resilient Buildings  and Core Public Infrastructure Initiative. Accessed at: www. infrastructure.gc.ca/plan/crbcpi-irccipb-eng.html   xxivii   Ibid.  xxviii   Ibid.  xxix   CSA Group. Z800-18: Guideline on basement flood protection  and risk reduction. Accessed at: https://store.csagroup.org/ ccrz__ProductDetails?sku=Z800-18   xxx   CSA Group. W204. Flood Resilient Design for New Residential  Communities. Accessed at: www.scc.ca/en/standards/ notices-of-intent/csa/flood-resilient-design-for-new-residential- communities   xxxi   BOMA Canada. 2019. Resilience Brief. Accessed at: http:// bomacanada.ca/resources/resilience-brief/  xxxii   Urban Land Institute. 2015. A Guide for Assessing Climate  Change Risk. Accessed at: https://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ ULI-Documents/ULI-A-Guide-for-Assessesing-Climate- Change-Risk-final.pdf  xxxiii   SITES. Accessed at: http://www.sustainablesites.org/  xxxiv   The Rick Hansen Foundation Accessibility Certification.  Accessed at: www.rickhansen.com/become-accessible/rating- certification   xxxv   Terry Brennan and Gene Cole. Camroden Associates.   Prepared for the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency  (EPA): https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-08/ documents/flood-related_cleaning_report.pdf    xxxvi   Science Struck. Different Types of  Elevators. Accessed at:  https://sciencestruck.com/different-types-of-elevators   xxxvii   Ibid  xxxviii   Ibid  xxxix   Urban Land Institute and Heitman. 2019. Climate Risk  and Real Estate Investment Decision-Making. Accessed at:  https://www.heitman.com/news/climate-risk-and-real-estate- investment-decision-making/  xl   Ibid  xli Moudrak, M. and Feltmate, B. 2016. Climate Change  and the Preparedness of  Canadian Provinces and Yukon  to Limit Potential Flood Damage. Accessed at: https:// www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/ uploads/2016/10/Intact-Centre-Climate-Change-and-the- Preparedness-of-Canadian-Provinces-and-Yukon-Oct-2016.pdf    xlii   The Washington Suburban Sanitary Commission. 2018.  Acoustic Fiber Optic Monitoring System. Accessed at:   https://www.wsscwater.com/afo   xliii   Urban Land Institute. 2016. Returns on Resilience: The  Business Case. Accessed at: http://americas.uli.org/wp- content/uploads/sites/125/ULI-Documents/Returns-on- Resilience-The-Business-Case.pdf    http://gresb-public.s3.amazonaws.com/2018/Documents/Resilience_Report.pdf http://gresb-public.s3.amazonaws.com/2018/Documents/Resilience_Report.pdf http://www.osc.gov.on.ca/documents/en/Securities-Category5/csa_20101027_51-333_environmental-reporting.pdf http://www.osc.gov.on.ca/documents/en/Securities-Category5/csa_20101027_51-333_environmental-reporting.pdf http://www.osc.gov.on.ca/en/SecuritiesLaw_csa_20180405_51-354_disclosure-project.htm http://www.osc.gov.on.ca/en/SecuritiesLaw_csa_20180405_51-354_disclosure-project.htm http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=24700154-1 http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=24700154-1 http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/pltfrm-dsstr-rsk-rdctn/snd-frmwrk-en.aspx http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/pltfrm-dsstr-rsk-rdctn/snd-frmwrk-en.aspx http://www.publicsafety.gc.ca/cnt/mrgnc-mngmnt/dsstr-prvntn-mtgtn/pltfrm-dsstr-rsk-rdctn/snd-frmwrk-en.aspx http://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/plan/crbcpi-irccipb-eng.html http://www.infrastructure.gc.ca/plan/crbcpi-irccipb-eng.html https://store.csagroup.org/ccrz__ProductDetails?sku=Z800-18 https://store.csagroup.org/ccrz__ProductDetails?sku=Z800-18 http://www.scc.ca/en/standards/notices-of-intent/csa/flood-resilient-design-for-new-residential-communities http://www.scc.ca/en/standards/notices-of-intent/csa/flood-resilient-design-for-new-residential-communities http://www.scc.ca/en/standards/notices-of-intent/csa/flood-resilient-design-for-new-residential-communities http://bomacanada.ca/resources/resilience-brief/ http://bomacanada.ca/resources/resilience-brief/ https://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI-Documents/ULI-A-Guide-for-Assessesing-Climate-Change-Risk-final.pdf https://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI-Documents/ULI-A-Guide-for-Assessesing-Climate-Change-Risk-final.pdf https://uli.org/wp-content/uploads/ULI-Documents/ULI-A-Guide-for-Assessesing-Climate-Change-Risk-final.pdf http://www.sustainablesites.org/ http://www.rickhansen.com/become-accessible/rating-certification http://www.rickhansen.com/become-accessible/rating-certification https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-08/documents/flood-related_cleaning_report.pdf https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2014-08/documents/flood-related_cleaning_report.pdf https://sciencestruck.com/different-types-of-elevators https://www.heitman.com/news/climate-risk-and-real-estate-investment-decision-making/ https://www.heitman.com/news/climate-risk-and-real-estate-investment-decision-making/ https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Intact-Centre-Climate-Change-and-the-Preparedness-of-Canadian-Provinces-and-Yukon-Oct-2016.pdf https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Intact-Centre-Climate-Change-and-the-Preparedness-of-Canadian-Provinces-and-Yukon-Oct-2016.pdf https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Intact-Centre-Climate-Change-and-the-Preparedness-of-Canadian-Provinces-and-Yukon-Oct-2016.pdf https://www.intactcentreclimateadaptation.ca/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/Intact-Centre-Climate-Change-and-the-Preparedness-of-Canadian-Provinces-and-Yukon-Oct-2016.pdf https://www.wsscwater.com/afo http://americas.uli.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/125/ULI-Documents/Returns-on-Resilience-The-Business-Case.pdf http://americas.uli.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/125/ULI-Documents/Returns-on-Resilience-The-Business-Case.pdf http://americas.uli.org/wp-content/uploads/sites/125/ULI-Documents/Returns-on-Resilience-The-Business-Case.pdf   For further information about the report, please contact:  Natalia Moudrak Intact Centre on Climate Adaptation Faculty of  Environment, University of  Waterloo EV3 4334 – 200 University Avenue West Waterloo, ON, Canada  N2L 3G1 nmoudrak@uwaterloo.ca  mailto:nmoudrak%40uwaterloo.ca?subject=Information%20Request  