                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Climate Change  Research Plan for California   1Climate Change Research Plan for California: Chapter Title & Section  February 2015  Climate Change  Research Plan for   California      3Climate Change Research Plan for California: Chapter Title & Section  Climate Action Team  Climate Change Research  Plan for California  Edmund G. Brown Jr.  Governor  Matthew Rodriquez  Secretary for Environmental Protection     4 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Table of Contents  Table of Contents      Executive Summary 1  Need for a Climate Change Research Plan 1  California’s Climate-related Research Priorities 1  Integration and Implementation of the Research Plan 2  Chapter 1: Introduction 3  California Climate Policy Framework 3  Figure 1. EGPR: Vision and Crosscutting Goals 4   Scope of the Research Plan 5  Organization of the Research Plan 6  Chapter 2: Supporting Regional Climate Change Science in California: A Historical Perspective 7  Chapter 3: Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling 10  Introduction and Policy-relevant Questions 10  Summary of Past Research 10  Figure 2. Comparison of global climate model... 10  Figure 3. Data from NOAA showing an atmospheric river... 12  Research Agenda for the Next Five Years 12   Monitoring 12   Climate Projections 13   Support for Reducing GHG Emissions and Risks from Climate Change  13  Figure 4. Conceptual diagram suggesting how quasi-probabilistic climate projections    could be derived from available climate simulations 14  Chapter 4: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Safeguarding California... 15  Introduction and Policy-relevant Questions 15  Greenhouse Gas Emissions Accounting in California and Research Needs 16  Figure 5. California’s 2012 GHG emissions by economic sector 16  Agriculture 18  Biodiversity and Habitat  19  Emergency Management 20  Energy Services: Electricity and Natural Gas 21  Industry 23  Natural and Working Lands 24   Forestry 24   Wetlands 25   Rangeland 26  Ocean and Coastal Ecosystem and Resources 27  Public Health 28  Transportation, Land Use, Fuels, and Infrastructure 29  Waste Management 31  Water 31    5Climate Change Research Plan for California: Table of Contents  Chapter 5: Crosscutting Issues 34  The Economics of Climate Change 34  Environmental Justice 34  Barriers to Adaptation 35  Extreme Events 35  Indicators of Climate Change, Impacts, and Actions 35  The Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta 36  Figure 6. Transportation, water, and energy infrastructure in the Delta 36  Climate-smart Choices and Civic Engagement 36  Urban, Suburban, and Exurban Growth and Climate Change 37  Green Buildings 37  Wildfire and Other Ecosystem Disturbances 38  Ecosystem Services and Green Infrastructure 38  Urban Forests 39  Water-energy-food Nexus 39  Climate Impacts Outside California Affecting our State 39  Local and Regional Issues 40  Figure 7. Simulated percent increase in household electricity consumption by ZIP Code    from 2080-2099 relative to 1961-1990. A2 global emission scenario 40  Chapter 6: Integration and Implementation 43  Past Integration Efforts 43  Figure 8. Integrated study of economic impacts to the agricultural sector considering    adaptation: Conceptual framework used in California Climate Change Assessments. 44  Future Integration Efforts 44  Figure 9. Conceptual illustration of climate change research integration: mitigation    and adaptation studies will inform each other to ensure that they are mutually    consistent, and development of scenarios will iteratively guide and be guided by    results from adaptation and mitigation research. 45  Implementation 45  Concluding Remarks 46  Glossary of Abbreviations 48  References 50  Appendix A: Acknowledgements 54  Appendix B: Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling 58  Appendix C: GHG Emissions Accounting Methods and Research Needs 59  Appendix D: Reducing GHG Emissions in California 60  Appendix E: Safeguarding California from Climate Risks 61  Appendix F: Crosscutting Issues 62    1Climate Change Research Plan for California: Executive Summary  Executive Summary      Over the past 25 years, the State of California has demonstrated national and international  leadership in understanding regional climate change impacts, developing strategies for  reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, and developing knowledge to support adaptation to  projected impacts. Successfully negotiating climate change challenges will require integrating  a sound scientific basis for climate preparedness into local planning, resource management,  infrastructure, and public health, as well as introducing new strategies to reduce GHG emissions  or increase carbon sequestration into nearly every sector of California’s economy. This Climate  Change Research Plan (hereafter the Research Plan) presents a strategy for developing the  requisite knowledge through a targeted body of policy-relevant, California-specific research.   Need for a Climate Change Research Plan The Research Plan continues support for climate policy and enhances statewide research  collaboration. For the first time, it outlines statewide research priorities. It further demonstrates  state agency coordination. Nearly 50 authors representing 16 state agencies were involved in  authoring the Research Plan, which delineates California’s most critical climate-related research  gaps. This is an unprecedented effort resulting in the first comprehensive climate change  research plan developed by any state.  California-sponsored research informs climate policy issues of unique importance to California.  For example, State-sponsored research resulting from the First California Climate Assessment  offered new California-specific scientific insights that were not available in 2006 from federal  research products and that were instrumental to the passage of AB 32. The recent enhanced  support for actionable climate research at the federal level also represents an excellent  opportunity to develop a plan that aligns with the national research plan developed by the U.S.  Global Change Research Program and contributes to the continuing dialogue with our federal  partners. The research needs identified in California’s Research Plan address gaps in knowledge  that will help inform the State’s ongoing activities to address climate change without duplicating  federal research activities.  California’s Climate-related Research Priorities The Research Plan presents research gaps that should be tackled over the next three to five  years to help identify, evaluate, refine, and implement successful mitigation and preparedness  measures in California. The Research Plan will be complemented by more detailed research plans  developed by different state agencies. Major research areas include:  Monitoring: Improve methods and indicators for monitoring to better inform policy makers  and stakeholders about how California’s climate is changing and the associated impacts.  Climate projections: Continue improving methods to “downscale” global climate  projections to a scale appropriate for assessments and policies. Convert the large  number of projections into probabilities that support risk assessments and into a set of  representative projections to support vulnerability assessments and adaptation planning at  state, regional, and local scales.  GHG accounting: Refine emissions accounting methods, especially for short-lived climate  pollutants with high potential for warming the atmosphere and for difficult-to-quantify  sectors such as agriculture, waste management, and forestry.    2 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Executive Summary  Reducing GHG emissions: Investigate the multiple pathways that could achieve climate  goals related to emissions reductions from the energy, transportation, agriculture, water,  waste management, and industrial sectors. Special attention should be paid to the option of  electrification of energy services and provision of a low- or no-carbon electricity grid as a  cornerstone. This research will advance both innovative technologies and understanding of  consumer behavior. Prudent management of natural and working lands to sink carbon and  preserve their health, without which their ability to sequester carbon will be compromised,  is also a priority.  Preparing for a changing climate: Incorporate new climate science into a risk assessment  framework using probabilistic climate and sea-level projections. Identify robust adaptation  strategies that would fare well under multiple potential climate scenarios. Vulnerability to  extreme events is a particularly critical research gap and it should be explored from local to  statewide levels.  Socio-economic effects of climate impacts and policy responses: Analyze the effects  of climate change and potential responses in important crosscutting areas, such as  economics and jobs, consumer choice, and environmental justice. The State must continue  to assess the impacts of climate change and related policies on all of California’s diverse  communities, including those most impacted by climate change.  Synergies of reducing emissions and climate risk: Give priority to research that would  concurrently reduce emissions and make California more resilient to climate change, while  providing other co-benefits. Identify situations where these two climate strategies might  work at cross-purposes.  In addition to consideration of gaps in individual sectors, the Research Plan identifies  crosscutting research areas that will require integration across sectors and coordinated support  from multiple state agencies. For example, preparing for extreme events will require extensive  coordination between public and private sectors as well as between local governments and state  agencies. Similarly, analysis and projections of urban growth have implications for strategies to  reduce GHG emissions in several sectors (e.g., transportation, built environment) as well as the  vulnerability of communities to extreme events and vulnerability of species to habitat loss.  Integration and Implementation of the Research Plan State agencies are aligned in their efforts to address climate change according to the best and  latest science. Individual agencies will be responsible for implementing the Research Plan.  Although few agencies have funds dedicated to climate change research, all agencies have  climate-related activities that support actionable climate science. The Climate Action Team’s  Research Working Group will continue to facilitate coordination among agencies and with  external groups including federal agencies, the international community, and private entities.  The Research Plan advances a comprehensive research portfolio to support the climate goals  articulated by the Environmental Goals and Policy Report, the AB 32 Scoping Plan (and the  First Update to the Climate Change Scoping Plan), and Safeguarding California. The Fourth  California Climate Assessment, to be completed in 2017, will be the first major, cross-sectoral  effort to implement parts of this Research Plan and will be guided by the needs identified in the  Safeguarding California report as well as ongoing interactions of the Research Working Group.    3Climate Change Research Plan for California: Introduction  Introduction      Climate change is the biggest environmental challenge of our time. California has long been a  global leader in addressing climate-related issues through cutting-edge research and innovative  climate policies. Governor Brown recently joined more than 500 world-renowned researchers and  scientists in releasing a groundbreaking call to action on climate change and other global threats  to humanity.1 The 20-page consensus statement was produced at Governor Brown’s request and  has been signed by scientists from over 40 countries. The consensus statement connects key  scientific findings from different fields into a clear warning and a call for immediate, substantial,  and sustained action to preserve humanity’s life support systems. The science in the consensus  statement is confirmed in the October 2013 report of scientific findings by the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The IPCC report states that “[h]uman influence has been  detected in warming of the atmosphere and the ocean, in changes in the global water cycle,  in reductions in snow and ice, in global mean sea-level rise, and in changes in some climate  extremes.” The IPCC further concludes that “human influence has been the dominant cause of  the observed warming since the mid-20th century” (IPCC 2013).  As shown in the report Indicators of Climate Change in California (Office of Environmental  Health Hazard Assessment 2013), observations over the last several decades reveal clear signals  of climate change and its effects in California. The growing body of scientific research shows  unequivocally that this change is associated with the release of carbon dioxide and other  greenhouse gases (GHGs) resulting from burning fossil fuels as well as other human activities.  Using sophisticated computer models, climate research projects an unprecedented rate of rise  in temperature with shifting patterns of precipitation and more extreme weather events in the  future. Climate change and the efforts of the State to confront it will touch nearly every aspect  of California’s planning and investment for the future. Over the next few decades, significant  reductions in GHG emissions will be necessary to avoid the worst consequences of climate  change. At the same time, California must escalate and accelerate its efforts to safeguard the  state from the already-observable climate change as well as the larger changes that will be  unavoidable in the future. Scientific research sponsored by the State of California has provided  new knowledge that has enabled California to respond with science-based policies. New, carefully  targeted research is necessary to inform future policy development and implementation.  California Climate Policy Framework California has adopted a comprehensive approach to address climate change. This approach  follows the vision and cross-cutting goals articulated in the Governor’s Environmental Goals  and Policy Report (EGPR, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research 2013) (Figure 1). The  EGPR provides an overview of the State’s environmental goals, including efforts to reduce GHG  emissions, develop a clean economy, and provide clean air and water for all 50 million residents  projected to live here by 2050. The comprehensive approach for climate change includes the  following three interconnected elements:  1 Scientific Consensus on Maintaining Humanity’s Life Support Systems in the 21st Century: Information for Policy   Makers. May 21, 2013, http://mahb.stanford.edu/consensus‐statement‐from‐global‐scientists.  CHAPTER 1     4 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Introduction  Figure 1: The three interconnected elements of California climate policy and associated  comprehensive strategies, under the umbrella of environmental vision and goals.   EGPR = Environmental Goals and Policy Report.2  1. Reducing emissions: GHG emission reduction to reduce the impacts of climate change  Assembly Bill 32, the California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006, requires a reduction  of GHG emissions in California to 1990 levels by 2020. Executive Order S-3-05 specifies  further reductions to 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050. AB 32 also requires the State  to draft a Scoping Plan that guides California’s emission reduction goals and provides  a comprehensive overview of the broad suite of state policies and programs designed  to reduce GHG emissions. The California Air Resources Board (ARB) prepared the initial  Scoping Plan in 2008 and has released the First Update to the Climate Change Scoping Plan  (Scoping Plan Update) (California Air Resources Board 2008, 2014).  2. Preparing for impacts: Increasing preparedness and resilience to safeguard California   from a changing climate  The Safeguarding California Plan (California Natural Resources Agency 2014) updates the  2009 California Climate Adaptation Strategy (California Natural Resources Agency 2009)  in light of advances in climate science and risk management options. The Safeguarding  California Plan describes climate risks, work done to date, and recommendations for actions  still needed across nine different sectors (Agriculture, Biodiversity and Habitat, Emergency  Management, Energy, Forestry, Oceans and Coastal Ecosystems and Resources, Public  Health, Transportation and Water). The Safeguarding California Plan also includes seven  cross-sector strategies to safeguard California.  3. Research to inform policy and research informed by policy needs: A strong research  program to inform climate policy, advance climate change science, and support the  development of tools that will effectively reduce emissions and safeguard California  California has invested significant resources in order to understand the impacts of climate  change on California’s natural and built environment, public health, and key economic  sectors. Monitoring and numerical modeling of basic climate change parameters such  as temperature, precipitation, and weather patterns form the basis for all other climate  research that the State pursues. California’s climate research helps develop and evaluate  the strategies and technological advances needed to achieve emission reduction goals. The  State has completed three climate change assessments. These assessments provide up-to- date research that informs and responds to California’s policy needs.  2 http://opr.ca.gov/s_egpr.php  EGPR: Vision and   Crosscutting Goals  Reducing  emissions  AB 32   Scoping Plan  Research to  inform policy  Climate Change  Research Plan  Preparing for  impacts  Safeguarding  California  http://opr.ca.gov/s_egpr.php   5Climate Change Research Plan for California: Chapter Title & Section  These three elements of California’s climate strategy, coordinated through the interagency  Climate Action Team (CAT)3, inform one another and guide actions across state agencies to  meet its climate goals. Updated research informs the State’s choices about climate actions,  while climate policies explicitly or implicitly pose questions that need new research to address.  Together these elements help California design a sound course of action and make adjustments  as needed to meet its climate goals.   The box below includes relevant definitions of terms used in climate change research and  policy as they are used in the Research Plan.4 In this document the terms “safeguarding,”  “preparedness,” and “adaptation” refer to the same concept. The phrases “preparing for   climate risks” and “reducing risks from climate change” also relate to this concept.  Scope of the Research Plan California’s Climate Change Research Plan (hereafter the Research Plan) provides a  comprehensive and coordinated plan of research to inform California’s climate change policies.  The Research Plan, developed as a collaborative effort by the CAT agencies, synthesizes the  knowledge gaps and research needs from various state climate-related plans and strategies.  Foremost among these are the Environmental Goals and Policy Report, the Scoping Plan Update,  and Safeguarding California: Reducing Climate Risk. The CAT agencies are aligned in their efforts  to address climate change according to the best and latest science.  The Research Plan identifies important research initiatives without getting into the details of  specific research projects. The details will be developed by agencies as they implement the  Research Plan and carry out their own research programs. The Research Plan does not dictate  how agencies should manage or select research projects, but rather reflects important areas for  the research programs supported directly or indirectly by the agencies involved. Agencies will  select specific projects according to their established procedures but will coordinate through  the CAT Research Working Group. The issues in the Research Plan identify research needs over  the next five years, with an emphasis on the next three years. The Research Plan encourages  crosscutting research, which will require integration across sectors, across levels of government,  and between the public and private sectors.  3 To coordinate statewide efforts to implement climate change emission reduction programs and adaptation    strategies, the State established the CAT, consisting of state agency secretaries and the heads of agencies, boards,    and departments. The CAT is led by the Secretary of the California Environmental Protection Agency. 4 Definitions are adapted from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)    (http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/glossary/tar-ipcc-terms-en.pdf ).  Relevant Definitions for Climate Change Concepts Mitigation: Human intervention to reduce GHG emissions or to increase sinks (e.g., carbon   sequestration in forests).  Adaptation or Preparedness: Adjustments in human or natural systems to expected changes in the  environment. Preparation for climate change refers to adjustments made in response to experienced   or anticipated changes in the climate. California has adopted the term “safeguarding” for this concept.  Vulnerability: The degree to which a system is sensitive to, and able to respond to, the impacts  associated with a changing climate, including climate variability and extreme events. Vulnerability  depends on the rate and character of climate change, exposure to that change, the sensitivity of the  system, and its capacity to adapt.  Resilience: The amount of change a system can be exposed to without irreversible damage and the  ability of that system to bounce back after impact. Current research thinking on resilience includes the  ability of systems to self-organize, to learn and adapt and thus to change to some extent so that the  system can still be viable in changing conditions.  http://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/glossary/tar-ipcc-terms-en.pdf   6 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Introduction  Given the broad scope of possible climate research topics, a set of guiding principles was  developed to define the scope. The main principles are:  •  The Research Plan should leverage the contributions of federal, local, and other partners  whenever possible. State staff routinely communicate with these partners to ensure  that the Research Plan is complementary to their efforts and minimizes duplication.   •  The Research Plan should address issues specific to California—its environmental,  economic, and policy landscapes—and its vulnerabilities to climate change.  •  To the greatest extent feasible, research topics should generate actionable results.  The Research Plan strongly encourages research that is co-designed with the end  users so as to ensure better fit, user-friendliness, relevance, and appropriateness.  •  Priorities should be given where knowledge gaps are large and the  expected magnitude of the consequences of filling a gap is great, either in  benefits gained or losses from climate change impacts avoided.  •  The scope of the Research Plan is research to inform California’s ongoing efforts to address  climate change. Other important activities, such as collecting routine data, implementing  regulations, and formulating effective strategies for communicating climate change  science to citizens and policy makers, are not included in the Research Plan. All policies  that go through the regulatory development process are subject to required analyses,  including economic or cost analyses. Research may inform these analyses, but the  analyses themselves are not considered research for the purposes of the Research Plan.  •  The research agenda should not be constrained to initiatives that are already funded.  Rather, the Research Plan will document research needs as the basis for funding requests.   The Research Plan is written for several audiences. Foremost, the Research Plan proposes priority  research areas directly linked to policy makers’ information needs. State policy makers can use  this information to prioritize research areas, allocate funding, and build stronger coordination  with other research programs. The Research Plan also informs scientific researchers and  stakeholders about the proposed direction of research the State may pursue.   Organization of the Research Plan The Research Plan starts with a short history of climate change research in California (Chapter 2).  Chapters 3 and 4 outline research needs and priorities. Chapter 3 focuses on climate monitoring,  analyses, and modeling and outlines a path to advance our understanding of the changes in  California’s climate that mitigation and adaptation strategies must consider. Chapter 4 describes  the strategies and technological advances needed for reducing or mitigating GHG emissions and  for preparing for the risks of climate change impacts in different sectors of the economy. To foster  greater coordination and collaboration, Chapter 5 highlights several key crosscutting research  themes and the needs of regional and local planning efforts. The Research Plan concludes with a  broad overview of integration of segments of the Research Plan and its implementation (Chapter  6). Several appendices are being posted separately when completed that will provide more  detailed information about past research and current knowledge gaps in climate-related science  and strategies.    7Climate Change Research Plan for California: Supporting Regional Climate Change Science in California  Supporting Regional Climate   Change Science in California    A Historical Perspective In 1988, Assemblymember Byron Sher authored AB 4420, which required the California Energy  Commission (Energy Commission) to lead the preparation of the first assessment of the potential  impacts of climate change on California and of the options for reducing GHG emissions.   In the early 2000s, California initiated its own state-supported integrated climate research  program via the Energy Commission’s Public Interest Energy Research (PIER) program. This effort  culminated in a report about potential impacts of climate change on energy, water resources,  forestry, agriculture, coastal properties, and ecosystems. This study suggested that human  adaptation to climate change would be costly for California, and that impacts on ecosystems  would be severe, considering other stressors such as increased, unabated urbanization (Wilson et  al. 2003). In the early 2000s, ARB also began sponsoring research to provide state-of-the-science  global radiative forcing estimates for black carbon and other aerosols in conjunction with other  GHGs in California (Chung and Seinfeld 2005).  In collaboration with state and federal agencies and the scientific community, PIER prepared a  long-term integrated research plan on climate change for California in 2003. To implement this  plan, the PIER program created a virtual California Climate Change Center as the first state- sponsored climate research program in the US. The California Climate Change Center, with  research activities at almost all of the major research institutions in California, has produced more  than 200 peer-reviewed publications and has been in charge of preparing three California Climate  Change Assessments.5 The Assessments have been multi-agency efforts that have been influential  in climate planning. For example, the first Assessment released in 2006 was instrumental in the  passage of AB 32. The most recent one, released in July 2012, started to explore vulnerability and  adaptation options at the local and regional scales. In addition to supporting the California Climate  Change Center, the vast majority of PIER funds supported the development of clean energy  technologies that will be needed to reduce GHG emissions in California.  Most of the state agencies in California support climate change research, and their efforts have  been of critical importance. For example, the Chief Hydrologist of the California Department of  Water Resources released a study in 1991 (Roos 1991) showing that the contribution to annual  water-year runoff occurring in the spring and summer months has been on a declining trend  since records began in the early 1900s. This paper was very influential among water managers  and scientists.  Since the issuance of Executive Order S-3-05 in 2005 and the passage of AB 32 in 2006, the pace  of climate change research in California has increased substantially. For example, the California  Department of Public Health and the Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment have  published ground-breaking scientific papers on human mortality and morbidity from past heat  waves (e.g., Basu et al. 2008) and postulated how climate change may aggravate these impacts in  the future (e.g., Ostro et al. 2011).  AB 32 directed ARB to develop a scoping plan that describes the approaches that California will  pursue to meet the near-term target for reducing GHG emissions. To support the development  of the initial Scoping Plan and the recent Scoping Plan Update, ARB’s research program initiated  studies that assessed California’s GHG inventory and emission reduction opportunities, ranging   5 http://climatechange.ca.gov/climate_action_team/reports/climate_assessments.html  CHAPTER 2   http://climatechange.ca.gov/climate_action_team/reports/climate_assessments.html   8 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Supporting Regional Climate Change Science in California  from high global warming potential (GWP) industrial gases to voluntary strategies based on  climate-friendly behavior. Major findings include an improved understanding of molecular  species important to climate forcing such as black carbon, nitrous oxide, and hydrofluorocarbons.  These research efforts have led directly to some of the regulations and programs now in place in  California to meet the 2020 GHG emission target. The enactment of the Sustainable Communities  and Climate Protection Act of 2008 (SB 375) led to the initiation of research in the areas of  integrated land use, green buildings, and housing and transportation planning.  For about four decades, the Energy Commission and the California Public Utilities Commission  (CPUC) have supported research on energy efficiency and clean energy generation technologies.  This work continues today with multiple activities such as the creation by the CPUC of the  Electric Program Investment Charge (EPIC) program. This work has established California’s  leadership in energy efficiency as well as its current endeavor to develop a low-carbon  electricity generation system.  Since 2008, the CAT Research Working Group has coordinated State-sponsored climate change  research and has created a catalog of relevant research projects supported by the State since the  early 2000s. The catalog documents a balanced portfolio of projects supporting areas of research  of importance both to reduce GHG emissions in California and to determine potential impacts and  adaptation options.  From the beginning, state support for climate change science has been designed to complement  and enhance research funded by the federal government. An example of an early federal  effort is the creation of the California Application Program (CAP) at the Scripps Institution  of Oceanography, University of California San Diego by the National Oceanic Atmospheric  Administration (NOAA) in the late 1990s. The CAP program has focused on climate variability and  climate change impacts on water resources, wildfire, and human health. In 2001, the US Global  Change Research Program published the first national assessment report (National Assessment  Synthesis Team 2000). As part of this work, several regional assessments reports were produced,  including one that dealt exclusively with California (Wilkinson et al. 2002).  In the last few years, the federal government has established regional climate change research  centers similar to the CAP program created by NOAA at Scripps Institution of Oceanography.  Notable among them are the regional Climate Science Centers6 (CSCs) established by the  Department of the Interior (DOI) to develop tools and information to inform science-based climate  change adaptation planning for natural resources, primarily at the landscape-level. Research  priorities of the CSCs are partially informed by the Landscape Conservation Cooperatives7  (LCCs), also established by the DOI to facilitate communication and coordination among  partners. The LCCs are governed by steering committees comprised of federal and state agency  representatives, non-governmental organizations, tribal entities, and others depending on the  individual LCC. These LCC’s have also funded research projects related to identifying climate  risks and creating options for responding. Four LCCs fall within the borders of California. The  DOI also established the WaterSMART program to prepare for climate change and other impacts  on water supply. The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is establishing Regional Climate  Hubs to deliver science-based knowledge and practical information to farmers, ranchers, and  forest landowners to support decision making related to climate change.8 A subsidiary Hub at the  University of California Davis will focus its research on specialty crops and Southwestern forests.  The Research Plan will leverage the results of these types of federal research programs.   Finally, several non-governmental research organizations have substantially contributed to the  body of climate research in California using funds provided by sources such as foundations,  federal agencies, and the State of California. Innovative public-private partnerships have formed to  advance research around vulnerability assessments and other climate-related themes to support  management actions. For example, Point Blue Conservation Science partnered with the California   6 http://www.doi.gov/csc/index.cfm 7 http://www.doi.gov/lcc/index.cfm 8 http://www.usda.gov/oce/climate_change/regional_hubs.htm  http://www.doi.gov/csc/index.cfm http://www.doi.gov/lcc/index.cfm http://www.usda.gov/oce/climate_change/regional_hubs.htm   9Climate Change Research Plan for California: Supporting Regional Climate Change Science in California  Department of Fish and Wildlife to complete a vulnerability assessment of bird species of special  concern in 2011. Point Blue also developed comprehensive summaries of the ecoregional effects  of climate change in California with special emphasis on consequences for wildlife.  In summary, California has supported regional climate change science for more than a decade.  State agencies have coordinated their research programs with one another, private institutions,  and the federal government. This body of research has been guided by the needs identified  in state laws, executive orders, and other policy documents. The research results have also  informed subsequent decision making in an iterative fashion. This Research Plan is being  developed in this same tradition. Coordination and communication across state agencies ensures  that the Research Plan builds on results of prior studies and leverages knowledge gained to  address California’s needs for adaptation and mitigation efforts.    10 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling  Climate Monitoring, Analysis,   and Modeling  Introduction and Policy-relevant Questions This chapter briefly summarizes the state-of-the-art climate monitoring and modeling in  California and presents a proposed five-year research strategy designed to address the following  overall policy-relevant questions:  •  Monitoring: How is the climate changing throughout California? What are the reasons  for these changes? Where are these changes most detectable and under what  conditions? What monitoring strategies and capabilities will be necessary to track  variations and changes in key climate measures including those for extreme events?  •  Climate Projections: What do the latest generation of global models project  regarding climate change in California? What additional improvements are  needed to downscale climate model projections for California? What projection  and analysis capabilities will be necessary for extreme events?  •  Support for Reducing GHG Emissions and Risks from Climate Change: What additional  improvements in climate modeling are needed to support improved vulnerability assessments  that lead to better adaptation planning by state and local governments and private  entities to prepare for climate risks? What additional variables germane to public health,  infrastructure, and the environment should be added to climate projections for California?  Summary of Past Research Global climate models (GCMs) are used to estimate how the Earth’s climate will evolve under  different global GHG emission paths. These global models use relatively large grid cells (see  lower left map in Figure 2) that cannot resolve some important climate features within relatively   small regions such as California. For this  reason, two tools are used to further  “downscale” the outputs from global  climate models: statistical methods and  dynamic regional climate models (see the  downscaled field in the lower right map in  Figure 2). Statistical downscaling methods  use mathematical relationships between  large-scale features of the climate (e.g.,  high atmospheric pressure systems) and  local weather/climate conditions. Dynamic  regional climate models simulate future  climates based upon fundamental physical  laws (e.g., conservation of mass and  energy). The State has invested in cutting- edge research to develop and refine both  statistical and dynamic downscaling  models tailored to the geography of  California. Further improvements in  downscaling techniques are desirable, as  well as simulation of other meteorological  factors (e.g., aerosols, black carbon, land   Figure 2. Comparison of global climate model   (left) and downscaled model (right) grid scale.  CHAPTER 3     11Climate Change Research Plan for California: Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling  use) to inform mitigation and adaptation efforts. Moreover, statistical regional climate models  developed for California only project temperature and precipitation variables. Other variables,  including atmospheric moisture and winds, are needed to fully inform projections of changes in  extreme events and climate impacts. State-sponsored research has shown that dynamic models  driven directly by the outputs from global climate models generate values that are offset from  observed values. These offsets, technically known as biases, must be corrected before using  results from impact and adaptation studies (Pierce et al., 2013).  In 2003, the State of California, via the Energy Commission’s PIER Program, adopted a long-term  strategy to track how climate is changing in California, to assess the reasons for these changes,  and to produce ‘probabilistic’ climate projections for California that would be suitable for both  research and long-term planning (Franco et al. 2003). This effort has resulted in a myriad of  publications. This work has been fundamental for the last generation of California climate change  assessments and long-term planning conducted by different state agencies.  The State has also supported work on annual sea-level rise projections that created scenarios  fully compatible with the climate scenarios described in the above paragraph (Cayan et al.  2008; Cayan et al. 2009). Researchers, led by Scripps Institution of Oceanography, have also  produced hourly sea-level rise scenarios for both the Second and Third California Assessments  to investigate the possibility of extreme sea-level events. More recently, they have considered  the effect of ocean waves in the open ocean driven mainly by winds far from California that travel  to our coasts (Graham et al. 2013) and contribute to the dynamics affecting how far water can  penetrate inland (i.e., wave run-up), which affects erosion of dunes and cliffs (Bromirski et al.  2012). Finally, a report from the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) further investigated how  the annual average sea-level rise would change in the future considering, among other things,  the vertical movement of coastal lands (e.g., subsidence) (National Research Council 2012).  Prior assessments of sea-level rise used in the California Assessments are contained within the  range estimated by NAS (Franco et al. 2011). Recent sea-level rise studies point to the need for  more detailed observations to track land uplift and subsidence, wave run-up, and the potential  for periods of rapid sea-level rise associated with ocean circulation variability characterized by  phenomena such as the Pacific Decadal Oscillation.  In the area of climate monitoring, the California Energy Commission and the California  Department of Water Resources (DWR) have supported the creation of the California Climate  Tracker at the Western Regional Climate Center.9 This website uses data from hundreds of  meteorological stations in California and a standard method to continuously report how  temperature and precipitation levels are changing in climatologically homogeneous regions of  California (Abatzoglou et al. 2009). Cal-Adapt10, the State’s resource for visualizing projected  climate change trends and associated risks, provides similar information, but using simulations  of historical and future conditions. To more adequately track how climate (and its variability) is  changing in California, however, the current network of meteorological and hydrological stations  need to be improved, particularly by increasing the density of stations in coastal, mountain, and  urban areas.  The DWR has also invested in a unique state-of-the-art network of sensors that can track  atmospheric rivers (AR). ARs are intermittent narrow bands of concentrated moisture in the  atmosphere that transport enormous amounts of water to the Western U.S. and are a key  determinant of California’s water resources (Figure 3). This monitoring capability is essential to  tracking AR conditions and identifying conditions leading to flooding.  9 http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/monitor/cal-mon/ 10 http://cal-adapt.org/  http://www.wrcc.dri.edu/monitor/cal-mon/ http://cal-adapt.org/   12 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling  Figure 3. Data from NOAA showing an atmospheric river flowing across the Pacific Ocean  toward California. This storm dropped 15 inches of rain in the Santa Lucia Mountains on  California’s central coast and over 10 inches in the Santa Cruz Mountains.  Several other efforts involve strong collaboration between the State of California and federal  agencies, in particular NOAA. For brevity, we cite but do not discuss here other relevant  efforts partially or fully supported by the Air Resources Board (e.g., CalNex11), Department of  Water Resources (e.g., Hydrometeorological Testbed12, CalWater), and the Energy Commission  (CalWater13).  Research Agenda for the Next Five Years This section discusses research needs over the next five years to inform ongoing efforts to  address climate change. The research agenda is supported by additional material to be published  in Appendix B. Continued cooperation with federal partners will be essential to leverage limited  state resources.  Monitoring To monitor how California’s climate is changing and to uncover the reasons for those changes:  Precipitation: Continue supporting work on atmospheric rivers and field studies on the  role of aerosols and other factors in our regional climate to better characterize local-scale  precipitation variability including extremes.  Land uplift: Measure the relative vertical movement of lands affected by sea-level rise  through collaboration with federal agencies.  To determine where climate changes are most detectable and to assess potential monitoring  strategies and capabilities:  Sensor networks: Support the monitoring of appropriate measures, including climatic and  hydrological conditions. This work requires dense networks of sensors in areas with strong  gradients (e.g., coastal, urban, and mountainous areas) to improve high spatial resolution  downscaling techniques.  11 http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/calnex2010/calnex2010.htm 12 http://hmt.noaa.gov/ 13 http://atofms.ucsd.edu/content/calwater-2011  http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/calnex2010/calnex2010.htm http://hmt.noaa.gov/ http://atofms.ucsd.edu/content/calwater-2011   13Climate Change Research Plan for California: Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling  Technologies for monitoring: Evaluate the capability of current monitoring networks to  track climate change metrics important to the State. Determine how new observation  technologies including satellite data can be incorporated.  Climate Projections To explore what the latest generation of global models project regarding climate change in  California and to improve downscaling methods for California, including those necessary to  model extreme events:  Climate scenarios: Develop the next generation of climate scenarios that produce relevant  regional information that can support engineering design and long-term planning.   Statistical downscaling methods: Continue developing, testing, and improving statistical  downscaling models, including the creation of new statistical downscaling techniques that  are driven by large-scale climatic features that are supposed to be modeled relatively well  by the global climate models. Investigate performance of statistical downscaling techniques  in simulating extreme events. This area of work also includes the development of improved  bias-correction techniques.  Dynamic models: Continue improving dynamic climate models to add, for example, the  simulation of changes in vegetation patterns that in turn affect regional climate. Use dynamic  models to explore crucial resource and vulnerability issues (e.g., marine layer, Santa Ana  winds, and Bay/Delta storm situations). Coordinate this work with federal agencies.   Model comparisons: Use dynamic climate models to identify the physical parameters  driving differences among various climate projections. Create climate projections for  certain periods (e.g., 1936 to 1965) and check their results with the results of the statistical  models (inter-comparison of regional climate models). Ideally, statistical and dynamic  models should produce, in a broad sense, similar results (after bias-correction of the  dynamic models). Differences in results should be investigated and used to assist with  further improvements for both statistical and dynamic models.   Extreme events: Investigate performance of global and regional climate models, in  comparison to historical observations, in producing the patterns and conditions responsible  for extreme events (heat waves, floods, drought, coastal storms, and fire-prone conditions).   Forecasts: Explore the use of day-ahead and seasonal probabilistic forecasts to prepare for  extreme events and decadal probabilistic projections for long-term planning.  Support for Reducing GHG Emissions and Risks from Climate Change  To improve climate modeling to better support vulnerability assessments and adaptation  planning, including adding new variables germane to specific sectors and agreeing upon a  common set of climate scenarios:  Quasi-probabilistic projections: Develop new ‘quasi-probabilistic’ climate projections for  California to support risk assessment, planning, and resource management. Hundreds of  climate scenarios will be available for California from various sources from both dynamic  and statistical models. The State should embrace this multiplicity of scenarios and use them  to inform the development of probabilistic climate projections. These quasi-probabilistic  estimates assign likelihoods to the different scenarios that can be used in risk assessment  frameworks. Figure 4 illustrates this concept showing the envelope of climate simulations  for both the historical period and the rest of this century. The black line represents actual  observations, and the blue lines different realizations from the regional climate models that  are used to develop the quasi-probability distribution of outcomes at the end of this century  shown on the right of Figure 4. This scientific work can inform the selection of a set of  ‘representative’ climate scenarios to frame impact and adaptation studies.    14 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling  Figure 4. Conceptual diagram suggesting how quasi-probabilistic climate projections could   be derived from available climate simulations.  Derived metrics: Support the creation of secondary products of climate projections (e.g., extreme  temperature indices tailored to sectors such as water, energy, public health, and transportation).  Disseminate this information through Cal-Adapt.14   Additional variables: Identify and model additional variables (e.g., relative humidity, direct solar  radiation) beyond temperature and precipitation as needed to inform vulnerability assessments  and adaptation planning. The variables will be selected in consultation with researchers working  on adaptation issues, research managers, and stakeholders.  Model spatial resolution: Increase the number of locations where meteorological and  hydrological variables are calculated to match regional and state needs. Increase the spatial and  temporal resolution of downscaled projections to inform local and regional planning within the  limits that are scientifically defensible.  Extreme scenarios: Develop and explore low probability, high consequence climate scenarios  informed by the paleoclimatic record and past historical outcomes but not captured by the  probabilistic climate projections. Explore scenarios of extreme coastal storms and inundation,   in a manner similar to ARkStorm.15  Sea-level rise: Develop probabilistic relative regional sea-level rise projections compatible with  the climate projections that take into account multiple factors such as ocean warming, circulation  changes, land ice melting, and vertical movement of coastal lands.  14 http://cal-adapt.org/ 15 ARkStorm is a hypothetical “superstorm” scenario developed by USGS to describe a scientifically plausible    extreme event similar to the flooding of 1861-1862.  http://cal-adapt.org/   15Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Reducing Greenhouse Gas   Emissions and Safeguarding   California from Climate Risks     Introduction and Policy-relevant Questions As described in Chapter 1, California is committed to reducing its GHG emissions and  safeguarding the state from the unavoidable impacts of a changing climate. Actions that reduce  GHG emissions as well as decrease risks from climate change are of particular value to the state.  These “complementary” actions provide greater benefits with limited resources and should  be identified and implemented by the State. For example, increasing the carbon content in  agricultural soils (a carbon mitigation option) may often result in an increased ability of soils to  retain moisture and allow growers to better cope with droughts that may become more frequent  with climate change (Lobell et al. 2013). By diverting organics from landfills to produce compost,  GHG emissions are reduced at the landfill and the finished compost is useful for soil restoration.  In the same vein, the implementation of smart growth measures may often result in lower energy  consumption in urban areas but can also reduce the vulnerability to climate change if growth  occurs in areas that would be less prone to climate impacts.   There are, however, investment options that do not necessarily result in co-benefits between  mitigation and reducing climate risks (Moser 2012). Liverman et al. (2013) describe a number of  mitigation or adaptation strategies that potentially either support or undermine one another.  Often the strategies are chosen independently through different mandates and even governance  structures. This “complementarity” approach only incidentally provides co-benefits in the other  area, but does not necessarily maximize them. By planning for both mitigation and adaptation  synergistically, however, it would be possible to optimize the benefits of both, and thus reduce  trade-offs when they could potentially be counterproductive (Duguma et al. 2014). State and  local decision makers need greater awareness and understanding of the potential positive  synergies and negative trade-offs between adaptation and mitigation. Concerted analysis and  tool development in this area would both advance the state of knowledge and be immediately  practice-relevant.  This chapter lays out a proposed research agenda to inform GHG emission accounting, activities  to reduce GHG emissions, and safeguarding policies and strategies. The chapter begins with a  discussion of GHG emissions in California and research opportunities to refine accounting of  GHG emissions. The chapter then presents sector-by-sector research needs that are aligned with  the Scoping Plan Update, the Safeguarding California Plan, and other climate policy documents.  Pervading all sectors are the needs for informative performance metrics on the effectiveness of  mitigation and adaptation strategies and for effective methods to communicate risk.  The following overarching policy-relevant questions guide the research agenda for this chapter:   •  GHG Accounting: What new emissions accounting methods can help validate  estimates of GHG emissions, especially for non-CO2 gases such as short- lived climate pollutants and in difficult-to-quantify sectors such as agriculture,  waste, and forestry? What are the areas of greatest uncertainty?  •  Reducing GHG Emissions: What are the most effective strategies and  technological, policy, economic, or management innovations to significantly  reduce GHG emissions in all sectors of the economy? What are their   CHAPTER 4     16 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  economic, public health, and environmental impacts and co-benefits?   •  Reducing Risks from Climate Change: How vulnerable are the people, resources, and  infrastructure of California to climate change impacts, and how is this vulnerability  distributed among groups? What are the most effective technological, policy,  economic, or management innovations to safeguard the state from these impacts?   •  Integration: Which strategies serve to simultaneously reduce GHG emissions and the risk  from climate change? In which cases do strategies produce trade-offs between the two?  Policy-relevant questions for specific sectors will be found in Appendix C, D, and E, along with  additional material to support and elaborate on the research agenda. Appendix F provides a  synthesis of several important crosscutting research topics.  Greenhouse Gas Emissions Accounting in California   and Research Needs Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the dominant GHG emitted in California (85 percent in 2012). The  combustion of fossil fuels releases the vast majority of these emissions. The remaining  GHGs—primarily methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and fluorinated gases (F-gases)—currently  contribute about 15 percent to the California GHG inventory.16  As shown in Figure 5, energy consumption in the transportation sector is the largest source   of emissions, followed by emissions from the industrial and the electricity generation sectors.   (Note that oil and gas operations (e.g., oil extraction) are counted in the industrial sector).  Figure 5. California’s 2012 GHG emissions by economic sector.  Data source: California Air Resources Board 2012 GHG Inventory.17  An accurate inventory of GHG emissions and carbon sinks in California is essential to track  progress and demonstrate compliance with emissions reduction targets and goals. It can also  help to identify the opportunities with the greatest impact on reductions. California develops  its official GHG inventory using quality-assured and verified emissions reporting combined  with emission inventory methodologies used to calculate certain categories of GHG emissions.  Research projects in California are being used to help validate the statewide emissions inventory.  Measurements of the concentration of GHGs in the atmosphere (from tall towers, ground-based  measurements, research aircraft, satellite data, and other methods) also help determine the  origins of GHG emissions in California. Studies supported by the Energy Commission, the Air  Resources Board, and NOAA suggest that, in general, carbon dioxide emission estimates in the   16 http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/pubs/reports/ghg_inventory_00-12_report.pdf 17 The 2014 edition of the GHG inventory represents a transition to global warming potentials (GWPs) in the IPCC    4th Assessment Report (AR4).  10% Electricity Generation - Imports  7% Residential  37% Transportation   5% Commercial  Total = 459 MMTCO2e  11% Electricity Generation - In State  22% Industrial  8% Agricultural  Gross Emissions  http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/inventory/pubs/reports/ghg_inventory_00-12_report.pdf   17Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  GHG inventory are reasonably accurate, but nitrous oxide and methane emissions estimates may  underestimate actual emissions.  Research agenda for the next five years  To advance science related to GHG monitoring, refine GHG emission accounting, and determine  areas of greatest uncertainty:  Biogenic sources: Improve accounting for biogenic methane and nitrous oxide emissions  from poorly characterized area sources, such as nitrogen fertilizer and manure, which  can also improve quantification of air quality effects. Coordinate with federal agencies to  include California derived research findings on agriculture and GHG emissions into existing  tools that provide whole farm and ranch carbon and GHG accounting systems (e.g., COMET- FARM).18  Land use change impacts on carbon stocks and albedo19: Quantify emissions associated  with agricultural and urban expansion, as well as climate-forcing impacts associated with  changes in albedo.  Emissions from the natural gas and oil systems: Improve the accounting of emissions at  the source level, in terms of the numbers, amounts, and locations of fugitive methane leaks.  Emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels: Continue to improve alignment of data  related to the amount of fossil fuels combusted in California with the measurement of  ambient CO2 concentrations at different temporal and geographical scales.  Natural sources and sinks: Quantify carbon and nitrogen cycling (emissions and storage)  in both agricultural- and non-agricultural soils and sediments of different management  practices (e.g., wetlands, riparian areas, and reservoirs). Improve understanding of  baseline conditions, processes and projected trends in forestlands (biomass, carbon  stocks, forest health, disturbances, species migration, and genetics) in relation to climate.  Develop improved accounting methods for carbon stocks in California lands to determine  if, as suggested by preliminary research, a less dense forest stores more carbon than the  currently overgrown forest. If this is correct, the concern that forest thinning might decrease  carbon stored in forests may be incorrect. Compile baseline data on urban forests to  adequately characterize urban tree canopy coverage and structure as an important tool for  helping to mitigate the urban heat island effect. Complete an emissions inventory of the  Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta to document the ongoing carbon emissions and subsidence  that result from agricultural practices on the peat soils of the Delta.  Water system sources: Improve collection of data documenting water use and associated  GHG emissions. In addition, improve collection of data documenting energy used in new  desalination technologies, groundwater pumping, recycled water use, and water treatment  processes to improve understanding of how energy is used by water utilities and urban  water consumers. In some cases, research is needed to develop the tools that can assist  with data collection.  Short-lived climate pollutants (SLCP): Improve understanding of sources and scale  of emissions of short-lived climate pollutants – including methane, black carbon, and  hydrofluorocarbons – and further quantify the GHG and air quality co-benefits associated  with reducing methane, particulate matter, and black carbon.  Validation of emission inventories: Continue to reduce the uncertainties associated with  emissions inventories, which will help refine attribution of emissions to sources.  18 http://cometfarm.nrel.colostate.edu/ 19 Albedo is the ratio of reflected radiation from the surface to incident radiation upon it. Low albedo means that    more of the radiation is absorbed by the surface material. Generally, things like snow have high albedo, whereas    asphalt has low albedo.  http://cometfarm.nrel.colostate.edu/   18 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Agriculture Agriculture is a critical economic sector of California that provides a safe, reliable, diverse, and  nutritious source of food for millions of people. Agriculture also provides many other societal  benefits, including employment opportunities, wine and fiber production, potential carbon  storage in soils, and other ecosystem services from both crop and animal sub-sectors.   Measures were identified in the 2008 AB 32 Scoping Plan to address specific GHG emissions from  agriculture. These gases include methane, carbon dioxide, and nitrous oxide. The mitigation of  GHGs from agricultural sources and activities requires considerable investment in research given  the complex dynamics of farming and its associated operations. It is more difficult to quantify  and verify emissions reductions from agricultural operations than from point source emitters.  Compared to other sectors, California agriculture generates a relatively small fraction of the  overall GHG emissions in the state (8 percent in 2012, as shown in Figure 5). The net contribution  of agriculture to GHG emissions could further decrease in the future, considering the potential  for management practices that capture and biologically store carbon in agricultural soil such as  organic matter buildup. Additional research is necessary to fully identify GHG emissions sources  and inform optimal mitigation options in the sector including the participation in agricultural  carbon markets.  The importance of research studies has been recognized not only for mitigation of GHGs but  also as an adaptation measure by the recently organized CDFA Specialty Crop Climate Change  Consortium (California Department of Food and Agriculture 2013). The Consortium consists of  growers, agricultural support services personnel, scientists, and commodity groups/agricultural  association members. In keeping with the Consortium’s recommendations, the CAT encourages  agricultural research to include an outreach component so that research findings inform on-the- ground mitigation and adaptation efforts by California farmers as they face the impacts of climate  change. CDFA’s Fertilizer Research and Education Program is also funding and facilitating research  on how to reduce nitrous oxide greenhouse gas emissions from nitrogen fertilizer applications.  Research agenda for the next five years  To evaluate strategies to reduce GHG emissions and the vulnerability of California’s agricultural  sector to climate risk:  Farmland conservation: Characterize the impacts of continued urbanization of farmland   on GHG emissions under different development scenarios and land use policies.  Nitrogen and manure management: Increase the understanding of the interplay of nitrogen  forms, soil conditions, and management practices that affect nitrous oxide emissions  specific to California conventional and organic agricultural systems, including the use of  fertigation (the application of fertilizer through irrigation), cover crops, and slow release  nitrogen fertilizers. Consider and explore the relationship between nitrogen management  and carbon sequestration. Support field studies of the kinetics of nitrogen mineralization  under various conditions to determine the application rates that would prevent the adverse  impacts and maximize the environmental benefits of applying manure or compost to  agricultural soils. Generate information on nitrogen supply-demand relationships from  these studies to provide a scientific basis for adjusting the application rate and timing of  manure or compost in the field to reduce GHG emissions.  Crop and livestock management: Develop information to maximize the GHG mitigation  potential through optimal selection and management of crop rotation based on individual  site characteristics and cropping systems. Conduct research at test plots to determine the  effectiveness of potential adaptation measures such as structural, mechanical, or biological  methods to reduce crop heat stress and the switch to alternative crops or varieties that may  be better suited to future conditions. Develop crop-breeding options to increase heat and  cold tolerance and to identify low-chill varieties of temperate fruit and nut crops. Develop     19Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  varieties that are more resilient to pests that may arrive in California under a warmer  climate. Implement animal breeding research programs to increase resistance   to anticipated heat extremes and diseases associated with a warmer climate.  Water management in a changing climate: Investigate innovative methods to supply water  more reliably to the agricultural sector and to use water more efficiently. For example, flood  management projects could be designed to allow floodwaters to recharge groundwater,  which would be available during drought periods to farmers and other users. Increasing  soil carbon on croplands and rangelands, through the application of compost and other  strategies, would increase soil water holding capacity and reduce the amount of water  needed for irrigation. Investigate other soil management techniques, such as cover  cropping, minimum tillage, and soil amendments, as well as dry farming and on-farm  ponds, for their potential to store water, reduce overall water use, and reduce energy- related GHGs.  To address the economic and environmental impacts and co-benefits of potential emission  reduction strategies:  Carbon sequestration: Quantify the benefits of techniques for storing carbon in soils (e.g.,  compost application to rangelands, use of winter cover crops, and application of biochar)  through management practices.  Economics: Examine the economic impacts of GHG mitigation efforts, including also the  costs of taking no action. Quantify the economic and environmental effects of adaptation  co-benefits associated with agricultural GHG mitigation practices. Investigate the costs,  benefits, and risks associated with relocation of crops and animals to suitable climates.  To study the vulnerability of agricultural communities and resources to climate change impacts,  and costs and benefits associated with reducing agricultural sector emissions:  Threats to coastal and San Francisco Bay Delta regions from sea-level rise, and threats  to agricultural food production regions of the state from extreme event related flooding:  Identify the areas that are most vulnerable to saltwater intrusion in the state as a result of  projected sea-level rise. Identify agricultural areas in the state most at risk of catastrophic  flooding from heavy precipitation events and potential infrastructure failures (e.g., levees).  Conservation tillage: Assess the potential of conservation tillage, including when used  in conjunction with other soil management practices, for soil carbon sequestration in  California and its effects on crop yields and pest management.  Biodiversity and Habitat  Responsible management of California’s natural lands and habitat provides valuable ecosystem  services and can provide resilience in the face of a changing climate. Collaboration and  coordination with regional, local, and federal partners will play an important role in research on  biodiversity and habitat. In particular, there is a need to integrate state research needs with those  of other partners such as the LCCs and USGS Southwest Climate Science Center. Collaboration  is also essential with the forestry, wetlands, rangeland, and oceans sectors, whose management  must also sustain biodiversity.  Research agenda for the next five years  To address the vulnerability of California’s biological resources to climate change impacts and the  effectiveness of strategies and technological innovations to safeguard the state from these impacts:    20 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Habitat and species-related baseline conditions: Develop information against which to  compare future changes in biodiversity, including high-resolution vegetation maps, species  range maps, and statewide habitat maps. Complete vegetation mapping following the  National Vegetation Mapping Standard. Identify current land use and land use policies,  permitting, and planning statuses to understand how these features affect and should be  included in habitat restoration and land acquisition decisions.  Climate impacts and risks to biodiversity: Determine impacts of climate change on  the spread of invasive species, pests, pathogens, and diseases that affect the health of  terrestrial and marine ecosystem and pose stresses to native fish, wildlife, and plants.  Improve understanding of how shifts in the timing of life cycle events (e.g., breeding, food  availability, and migration) as a result of a changing climate will impact species. Identify  critical habitat, refugia, and wildlife corridors that can allow for species movement across  the landscape as climatic changes occur and suitable habitat locations potentially shift.  Improve understanding of ecosystem services and the impacts of climate change and of  mitigation and adaptation strategies. Assess species’ tolerance and ability to adapt to   short- and long-term climate disturbances. Investigate the impact of more frequent and  intense wildfires on sensitive species and ecosystem conversion. Identify the impacts of  extreme events (e.g., heat waves, flood, and drought) on ecosystem function, resilience,   and services.  Vulnerability assessment: Conduct comprehensive statewide climate vulnerability  assessment at the habitat scale for terrestrial and marine environments. Assess  vulnerability from risks to rare plant species, birds, reptiles and amphibians, mammals,  invertebrates, and aquatic species of concern.  Adaptation Strategies and Actions: Utilize climate impact and vulnerability information  to develop new, or update existing, adaptation strategies and actions where appropriate.  Develop decision-support tools to target the location and timing of restoration activities   that reduce climate risk. Conduct finer-scale corridor analyses to inform land acquisition  and investment decisions. Evaluate the costs, benefits, and effectiveness of adaptation  options for biodiversity.  Emergency Management Emergency management includes actions to prepare for, mitigate against, respond to, and  recover from emergencies that impact our communities, critical infrastructure, and resources  by lessening the likelihood, severity, and duration of the consequences of the incident.  Climate impacts, such as more extreme weather events, sea-level rise, changing temperature  and precipitation patterns, and more severe and frequent wildfires, will increase risks and  uncertainties that will affect all phases of emergency management. Incorporating projected  climate impacts into emergency management can help reduce exposure and vulnerability  and increase the resilience of California communities. Vulnerability assessments are needed  to better understand risks posed to populations, facilities, and critical infrastructure from the  impacts of a changing climate. Assessments will also need to investigate the combined and  cascading effects from multiple hazard events. Multi-hazard mitigation plans form the foundation  for a community’s short and long-term strategy to reduce disaster losses. By placing greater  emphasis on integrating hazard mitigation into state and local plans, development codes and  land-use ordinances, some of the negative impacts of disasters may be avoided or reduced.  However, research is needed to identify how to best incorporate climate change into all phases of  emergency management, since all are necessary components of resilience. A plan that focuses  on one to the exclusion of the others will not support true resiliency.    21Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Research agenda for the next five years  To assess the vulnerability of the people, resources, and infrastructure of California to climate  change impacts and to identify effective strategies:  Vulnerability assessment: Expand and refine information about climate vulnerabilities of  California’s populations, infrastructure, property, food and agriculture, and biodiversity.  Expand monitoring of extreme weather events such as flood, drought, heat, fire, and  related losses to inform emergency management. Coordinate among sectors on research  and monitoring funding, information sharing, and well-integrated actions to build safe and  healthy communities.  Adaptation strategies: Examine possible strategies to reduce vulnerabilities. Assess the  adequacy of surge and response capacity, the ability of the emergency system to handle  a number of cases that rapidly exceeds the system’s routine capacity, in light of climate  projections for more frequent and more severe weather events such as flooding, fire,  drought, extreme heat, and storms (especially when coupled with sea-level rise). Assess the  adequacy of California’s current emergency surge and response capacities.  Energy Services: Electricity and Natural Gas Energy services are provided by electricity (e.g., air conditioning, illumination) and natural gas  (e.g., space heating, process heat for industrial processes). Together the fuels discussed in this  section represent about 40 percent of California GHG emissions. Transportation energy services  (e.g., movement of people and goods) are addressed in the Transportation section below.  Achieving the climate policy goals for California’s energy system will require innovative new  clean technologies and strategies deployed in a smart, efficient manner. Government-funded  research, development, and demonstration (RD&D) helps advance the state’s energy system  towards this vision.20 Publicly funded RD&D fills critical funding gaps within the energy innovation  pipeline that are considered the greatest barriers to innovative energy prototypes and innovative  entrepreneurs entering the marketplace. Results from RD&D at these critical stages enable these  technologies to attract investment funding, demonstrate their merits to end-use customers and  regulators, and demonstrate their eligibility in market support programs. Both technology push  and market pull are needed to deploy these clean energy technologies and energy-efficient  appliances and reduce GHG emissions.  The benefits of energy technology research, especially for energy efficiency, far outweigh direct  research cost. Between 1999 and 2008, the Energy Commission invested $27.6 million in energy  efficiency research projects, which directly contributed to changes to California’s Building and  Appliance Energy Efficiency Regulations that are estimated to have saved California ratepayers  more than $10 billion between 2005 and 2025.   Multiple energy pathways can result in deep GHG emission reductions. Recent studies conclude  that there are multiple technology options for the energy sector for deep cuts in GHG emissions  commensurate with the California’s 2050 goal (Williams et al. 2012, Greenblatt and Long 2012,  and Wei et al. 2013). Since it is impossible to know with certainty what future technology options  will be available in commercial scale that consumers will choose, the State should have a broad  research portfolio that facilitates testing and improvements driven by market conditions.   20 A number of public programs have supported RD&D for California’s electricity and natural gas sectors to reduce    GHG emissions and build resilience into the energy system. The Energy Commission’s PIER Program was    authorized to “develop, and help bring to market, energy technologies that provide increased environmental    benefits, greater system reliability, and lower system costs.” In 2011, the Legislature did not reauthorize the funding    mechanism for the PIER Electricity Program. The new EPIC program will provide strategic investments to advance    the next- generation of clean energy technologies, tools, and strategies similar to PIER. The natural gas counterpart    to PIER and EPIC is the Public Interest Energy Research Natural Gas Program. CPUC funds an RD&D program under    the California Solar Initiative. Energy agencies in California work very closely with U.S. DOE to align state efforts    and leverage research investments, particularly through the Advanced Research Projects Agency-Energy (ARPA-E)    and the West Coast Regional Carbon Sequestration Partnership (WESTCARB).    22 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  The energy system is vulnerable to climate impacts. Multiple lines of evidence clearly  demonstrate that the energy system is more vulnerable to climate impacts than previously  believed (California Energy Commission 2013, Stoms et al. 2013). For example, increased  temperatures will decrease the efficiency of thermal power plants, transformers, and  transmission and distribution lines and increase electricity demand. Since all of these detrimental  effects are accentuated and happen simultaneously during heat waves, the cumulative impacts  on the energy system would be more significant without adaptation measures. Additional  research is needed to better understand how efforts to reduce emissions and safeguard the  energy sector align.  Research agenda for the next five years  California has a strong track record of successful investments on energy-related technology  research that has helped minimize load growth over the last several decades. Moving forward,  California should build on this success and expand these programs in an effort to maximize  efficiency as well as reduce GHG emissions. As indicated above, California should continue  with a diverse research portfolio, guided by the loading order of preferred energy resources.21  Further details on the agenda are provided in the EPIC triennial investment plan (California Energy  Commission 2012).  To support strategies and technological innovations necessary to significantly reduce GHG  emissions and climate risk and their economic, public health, and environmental impacts or co- benefits, to identify synergies and trade-offs between mitigation and adaptation strategies, and  to assess the vulnerability of the energy sector to climate change:  Energy efficiency and demand response: Develop next-generation energy efficiency  technologies and strategies to cost-effectively achieve targets and goals identified in the  CPUC’s Long Term Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan as well as AB 758 (Skinner, Chapter  470, Statutes of 2009), which addresses retrofitting existing buildings. Investigate options  to improve energy efficiency in buildings and other systems to reduce the energy sector’s  vulnerability to climate change while reducing GHG emissions. Develop and demonstrate  advanced capabilities of demand response to increase grid flexibility.  Renewable energy, distributed generation, and energy storage: Develop and demonstrate  utility-scale and distributed renewable generation as well as combined heat and power  technologies. This includes organic resources such as biosolids from wastewater treatment  facilities, biogas from landfills, and biomass from forests and agricultural lands. Develop  and demonstrate technologies and strategies to improve the performance, economics, and  environmental sustainability of baseload and dispatchable renewables. Develop and pilot  potentially breakthrough energy storage technologies that enable a variety of beneficial  grid functions. Model the impacts of climate change on renewable sources of energy (e.g.,  changes in wind patterns).  Clean fossil‐fueled sources and infrastructure improvements for grid resilience and  stability: Investigate ways to reduce the environmental footprint of existing energy  technologies (e.g., reduce fugitive methane emissions from the oil and natural gas systems).  Investigate techniques to improve the efficiency of natural gas burning energy technologies  while substantially reducing the emission of air pollutants. Develop technologies to improve  the performance of the existing energy infrastructure facing climate change impacts (e.g.,  innovative cooling technologies for thermal power plants). Develop and demonstrate  new technologies and strategies that enable the transmission and distribution system to  handle increased penetrations of renewables and distributed generation resources (e.g.,  microgrids, other smart grid features). Develop technologies and tools to maintain grid  resilience and stability under a changing climate, particularly with regard to extreme events.   21 The State’s loading order established by the energy agencies in the Energy Action Plan in 2003 calls for meeting  new electricity needs first with efficiency and demand response, followed by renewable energy and distributed  generation, and then with clean fossil generation.    23Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Carry out scientific and engineering analyses to test and operationalize our conceptual  knowledge regarding how to protect the existing and future energy infrastructure from  climate impacts in both the electricity system and the supply network for natural gas.  Analyze soft adaptation approaches, sometimes called “green infrastructure,” (e.g., using  wetlands instead of or to complement the flood protection afforded by levees) on an equal  footing with engineering solutions, considering ecological and societal co-benefits. Better  estimate the impacts of climate change on the existing energy infrastructure (e.g., wildfires  on electricity distribution networks).  Energy scenarios for California and supply and demand forecasting: Continue to develop  energy scenarios associated with deep GHG reductions with enough temporal and  geographical resolution to inform long-term energy planning as well as identify (and avoid)  potential unintended consequences such as substantial cumulative ecological and air  quality impacts. Assess the vulnerability of the energy system to climate change in these  scenarios to allow California to design an energy system that is more resilient to climate  change. Develop and test innovative supply and demand forecasting methods, including  probabilistic seasonal and decadal forecasts that incorporate projections of climate change  to reduce vulnerability.  Consumer choice and civic engagement: Investigate consumer choice and civic  engagement as a critical complement to RD&D for technological innovations. Investigation  of this crosscutting topic, discussed more broadly in Chapter 5 and Appendix F, can  generate additional strategies to substantially reduce energy use and GHG emissions while  reducing climate risks in the energy sector.  Industry The industrial sector is generally understood to include manufacturing and production processes.  For the purposes of this section, industrial sources of GHGs associated with energy generation,  use, and transmission; fuel use; and oil and natural gas extraction, production, distribution, and  use are included in the other relevant sections of the Research Plan. Large industrial facilities  are included in the GHG cap-and-trade program implemented by ARB. The declining cap and the  performance-based strategy implemented by ARB create an incentive to increase production  efficiencies. Through energy efficiency initiatives that target the industrial sector, California is  supporting these efforts via the EPIC and other RD&D programs. Previous studies suggest that  the electrification of some processes in the industrial sector currently served with fossil fuel  combustion devices should be implemented if the 2050 goal is to be achieved (e.g., Wei et al.  2013).  Hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, nitrogen trifluoride, and sulfur hexafluoride are  collectively known as high-GWP compounds, because they have very high GWPs ranging from  675 to 22,800 times greater than carbon dioxide with a 100-year horizon.22 Nitrous oxide, with  a GWP of 298, is also a high-GWP gas, but is generally viewed separately from other high- GWP compounds because only it can occur naturally. Nitrous oxide emissions from industrial  sources in California are negligible. The production of clinker, a component of cement, results in  emissions of CO2 from conversion of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) to lime (CaO).   Research agenda for the next five years  To identify effective strategies and technological innovations to significantly reduce GHG  emissions and to assess their economic impacts:  Replacements for high-GWP gases: Study the technical feasibility and cost-effectiveness  of using low-GWP substitutes to HFCs where no studies have been conducted. Coordinate  with national and international research on hydrofluorocarbon substitutes. Investigate the   22 GWP values in the Climate Change Research Plan are consistent with the Scoping Plan Update, based on the    IPCC Fourth Assessment (AR4).    24 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  most cost-effective means of replacing hydrofluorocarbons with substitutes or alternative  technologies.  Energy efficiency and fuel-switching options: Improve energy efficiency, and explore  fuel-switching options in the industrial sector. Model the effect on GHG emissions of  fuel switching in the industrial sector, including electrification and renewable biomass,  with feedback into energy scenario modeling. Monitor and assess economic costs and  opportunities associated with efforts to improve efficiency and reduce emissions in the  industrial sector.  Carbon capture, utilization, and sequestration: Develop and demonstrate the capabilities  of new and emerging CO2 utilization options that could provide economic benefits through  new products, such as plastics, chemicals, and building materials.  To improve understanding of the vulnerability of California’s industrial infrastructure to climate  change impacts:  Vulnerability and safeguarding strategies for the industrial sector: Conduct scoping  studies designed to identify research needs. Coordinate this work with similar efforts  such as vulnerability and safeguarding studies for the energy and transportation systems  discussed in other sections of this chapter.  Natural and Working Lands Three-quarters of California’s landmass is comprised of natural and working lands, such  as forests, rangelands, and wetlands. These lands provide a multitude of economic and  environmental benefits. They will also play an increasingly important role in California’s efforts  to prepare for and adapt to the impacts of climate change. In recognition of the importance of  natural and working lands in meeting California’s long-term GHG emission reductions goal, the  Scoping Plan Update expanded the focus of natural lands from forests (including woodlands and  urban forests) to include other land types such as wetlands (California Air Resources Board 2014).  Because forests, wetlands, and rangelands function so differently and because the knowledge  gaps are unique, the Research Plan discusses them separately below. These lands also provide  important benefits and services for healthy watersheds (see Water sector) and wildlife habitat  (see Biodiversity and Habitat sector) so management, and research to support it, must take an  integrated view of climate-related issues.  Forestry California’s forests act both as sources of GHG emissions and as sinks that remove CO2 from the  atmosphere. They provide an opportunity through management practices to offset emissions  from other sectors. Wildfire, mortality of vegetation, drought, and other forms of disturbance  cause a natural release of carbon to the atmosphere (see also Chapter 5). Given enough time,  healthy forests are resilient and will recover and regain carbon lost through such disturbances.  However, climate change is expected to increase risks from these disturbances, possibly  converting forested lands to carbon sources. Forests cannot be managed for carbon over the long  term without maintaining their health and resilience, which in turn sustains their biodiversity.  Therefore mitigation of climate change and preparing for climate risks to forests are inextricably  interconnected. Research is needed to better understand how forest carbon pools are affected by  land management and natural disturbance regimes in a changing climate.  Research agenda for the next five years  The fundamental focus of the research needs discussed in this section is to enhance monitoring  and develop a better understanding of forest and woodland ecosystem dynamics. Further, the  proposed agenda is intended to promote research that leads to managing forests sustainably to  augment forest carbon and related ecosystem services to meet California’s climate goals. Climate     25Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  change will have impacts on many factors that affect forest health, including fire, drought,  pests, and disease. Forestry actions to reduce GHG emissions and those to prepare for climate  risks are strongly interwoven because managing forests for long-term carbon storage requires  maintaining healthy and resilient forests.  To investigate the vulnerability of California forests to climate change impacts and assess the  effectiveness of strategies to reduce risk while also sequestering carbon:  Vulnerability assessment and adaptation in the forestry sector: Improve understanding  of how a changing climate will influence disturbances to California’s forest carbon such  as fire, insects, disease, and invasive pests. Investigate impacts of ozone and air pollution  on forests and their carbon storage capacity. Utilize paleoecology to better model and  understand climate and vegetation dynamics. Reduce uncertainties in forest climate  modeling and increase understanding of threats to forest carbon. Assess the influence of  climate change on forest health and productivity and therefore on carbon storage. Identify  potential climate-induced shifts in the ranges of forest plant species and identify potential  areas of refuge for protecting forest health, habitat, biodiversity, and carbon storage.  Tools and approaches in the forestry sector: Develop analytical tools to integrate the data  results from urban Forest Inventory and Analysis (FIA) and other urban forest analytical  tools into planning and policy decisions involving carbon storage. Improve tools and  capabilities for monitoring and modeling climate-related changes in ecosystems processes  that affect carbon fluxes. Identify best management practices to minimize losses to forest  capacity to sequester carbon. Protect genetic variety of tree species through seed banks  and nursery programs to maintain forest resilience.   Costs and benefits: Conduct multi-disciplinary and integrated analyses to understand the  costs, benefits, feasibility, and acceptability of alternative strategies for forest carbon and  other ecosystem services.  Wetlands California’s wetlands provide a number of important ecosystem services. Wetlands are critical  habitat for many species and provide flood protection and improve water quality. Unfortunately,  many of California’s historic wetlands have been diked or drained. The loss of these wetlands  reduces habitat and causes land subsidence, which results in GHG emissions and increased  risk of flooding. Wetland restoration can reduce emissions, sequester carbon, and provide  valuable habitat. A number of recent studies have found that carbon sequestration rates in  tidal and managed wetlands are among the highest rates of any ecosystem due to high rates of  photosynthesis and low rates of decomposition (Needelman and Hawkes 2012).  Restoration of California’s wetlands could play a critical role in protecting the coast and delta  from flooding due to high waves and sea-level rise while also sequestering carbon and reducing  GHG emissions. Coastal wetland restoration is urgent because (if restored soon) some of  these wetlands may be able to accrete and keep pace with initial sea-level rise. Restoration of  wetlands in the Delta reverses the active subsidence of the region, which has the added benefit of  eliminating the GHG emissions associated with that subsidence. In addition, wetland restoration  in the Delta could help protect important energy infrastructure and improve the reliability of the  state’s water delivery system by reducing the vulnerability of existing levees and pumps. Finally,  wetland restoration would provide important habitat for birds, fish, and wildlife.  There is a significant potential for landscape scale restoration of tidal wetlands in California,  including both saline and brackish wetlands along the coast and freshwater wetlands in the  Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta (the Delta). More than 10,000 acres of wetlands along the  coast and in San Francisco Bay have been restored in the past five years and final engineering  is currently being completed for restoration of more than 40,000 acres of additional coastal  wetlands – much of that in the San Francisco Bay Estuary (the Estuary). These projects could be     26 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  implemented over the next five years if funding were available. Since 2010, DWR has restored  more than 1,100 acres of managed wetlands in the Delta and an additional 800 acres is being  planned for Sherman Island in 2014. The Bay-Delta Conservation Plan, 23 if approved, envisions  eventual restoration of up to 83,200 acres of natural communities, including tidal wetland and  associated estuarine and upland natural communities in the Delta. There are over 700,000 acres  of diked former wetlands in the Delta that are currently private agricultural lands.   Research agenda for the next five years  To explore wetland strategies to reduce GHG emissions and climate risk and how to monitor their  effectiveness and co-benefits:  Wetland Carbon Protocol: Develop the scientific foundation to understand the potential for  reducing emissions through wetland projects. This could allow wetland restoration projects  to better monetize emission reduction benefits.  Restored wetlands as carbon sinks: Continue to construct and assess large-scale pilot  projects on Twitchell and Sherman Islands while continuing to monitor GHG flux, methyl  mercury, subsidence reversal, and general habitat effects in both baseline environments  (corn, alfalfa, and irrigated pasture environments) and constructed wetlands. Quantify  spatial variability of impacts on these measures by constructing and monitoring additional  sites throughout the Delta, Estuary, and along the coast.  Wetlands as protective assets for flood protection: Develop a quantitative understanding  on the role of wetlands as protective assets for urban areas and other infrastructures from  coastal and inland flooding. Wetlands can dissipate wave energy and buffer the impacts of  rising sea level and wave energy. The conservation and restoration of wetlands provides  a promising strategy for both climate change mitigation and adaption (Duarte et al. 2013).  Monitor existing multi-benefit wetland projects in California to document the habitat  benefits, flood protection, and ability to adapt to sea-level rise to learn from current projects  and help inform future multi-benefit wetland projects. Support implementation of multi- benefit restoration projects.  Wetlands at risk from climate change: Support ongoing science-based regional  planning (e.g., San Francisco Bay Ecosystem Habitat Goals Report, Southern California  Wetland Recovery Project Regional Strategy) that are identifying wetlands at risk from  climate change and strategies to increase resilience. Monitor the effectiveness of these  enhancement strategies to increase resilience.  Rangeland Past research suggests that rangelands may have significantly greater carbon sequestration  capacity than is currently being achieved. For example, native perennial plants in rangelands can  sequester substantial amounts of carbon and are more drought tolerant than the invasive annual  plants that have displaced them across much of the state (Koteen et al. 2011). This is attributed to  the deeper roots of perennial vs. annual species, but other mechanisms may also be at play and  require further investigation.  Research agenda for the next five years  To assess the effectiveness of mitigation strategies for rangeland to sequester carbon released   by other sectors:  Rangelands as carbon sinks: Quantify carbon sequestration of native perennial plants in  natural and working lands. Expand recent field studies that suggest that the application  of compost on rangelands used to raise cattle can sequester carbon in the soil without  increasing methane and nitrous oxide emissions (Ryals and Silver 2013). Conduct grazing   23 http://baydeltaconservationplan.com/PublicReview/PublicReviewDraftBDCP.aspx  http://baydeltaconservationplan.com/PublicReview/PublicReviewDraftBDCP.aspx   27Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  systems research trials to identify and evaluate strategies for increasing rangeland soil  carbon through prescriptive grazing. Investigate how soil chemical and physical properties  affect nutrient cycling, water availability, and forage quality. Explore the impact of managed  grazing practices on GHG flux and carbon sequestration in rangelands. Investigate potential  environmental and adaptive co-benefits, as well as impacts (trade-offs) of rangeland carbon  sequestration practices.  Co-benefits of rangeland carbon sequestration: Evaluate the potential for rangeland  mitigation strategies to provide co-benefits, especially those that support adaptation.  Impacts of rangeland conversion: Fill data and research gaps on the implications of  rangeland conversions. Identify priority areas and land use strategies for minimizing the  adverse impacts of rangeland conversion.  Ocean and Coastal Ecosystem and Resources California’s treasured coastline is threatened by a changing climate. Strategies will be needed to  protect shorelines and infrastructure from rising sea levels and to maintain healthy ecosystems  in the face of rising air and water temperatures, more frequent and intense storms, and ocean  acidification. The latter is particularly troubling because of the potentially large ecological and  economic impacts. In addition, information will be needed to prioritize areas for safeguarding  activities. California’s phenomenal diversity of species and habitats that reside in ocean and  coastal ecosystems is also vulnerable to climate change (see the Biodiversity and Habitat sector).  The policy-relevant questions for this sector relate to the rate of climate-induced changes in the  coastal environment and assessing strategies to prepare for these changes.  Research agenda for the next five years  To address the vulnerability of California’s ocean and coastal resources to climate change  impacts, how this vulnerability is distributed among groups, and the effectiveness of strategies  and technological innovations to safeguard the state from these impacts:  Monitoring and modeling ocean acidification and hypoxia and their impacts: Develop  a regional approach for monitoring spatial and temporal variation of ocean acidification  and hypoxia. Improve our ability to model pH, oxygen, and nutrients in the near-shore  environment to determine contributions of local nutrient inputs to acidification and hypoxia,  and identify geographic locations most susceptible to acidification and hypoxia. Determine  key marine species that should be targeted for impact analyses, and perform modeling  studies to assess food web responses under future climate scenarios and evaluate  appropriate management strategies (e.g., marine protected areas).  Coastal ecosystem and fisheries management: Evaluate approaches to developing  climate-ready fisheries and management actions within marine protected areas to improve  resiliency to climate.  Monitoring impacts on the shoreline: Collect data to track shoreline changes and impacts  from storms (e.g., beach and cliff erosion) to improve methods for predicting shoreline  evolution. Measure land elevation changes such as subsidence and tectonic activity in  relation to sea-level rise.  Forecasting and climate impact scenario information: Develop updated methods for  predicting flood frequency under changing climate, and improve forecasting of extreme  events such as extreme precipitation associated with atmospheric rivers (as described in  Chapter 3).  Role of marine protected areas in resilience: Investigate how, and the extent to which,  marine protected areas contribute to the resilience of coastal and marine ecosystems,  coastal communities and the broader economy.    28 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Tools and approaches to prepare for climate risk to ocean and coast: Compile improved  social and economic data, including the quantification of ecosystem services, to enable  the evaluation of different approaches to prepare for climate risk (e.g., seawalls, managed  retreat, living shorelines, artificial reefs, and no action/business as usual). Evaluate  innovative adaptation approaches such as green infrastructure (e.g., tidal wetlands,  eelgrass, and native oysters) to help reduce vulnerability to climate-related hazards.  Capitalize on the opportunity of a statewide network of marine protected areas as a   living laboratory, where considerable research and monitoring is already under way,   for understanding the effects of climate change on California’s ocean resources. Conduct  multi-disciplinary and integrated analyses to understand the costs, benefits, feasibility,   and acceptability of alternative strategies.  Public Health Impacts anticipated under a changing climate will exacerbate a wide range of existing risks  to public health and its infrastructure, ranging from effects due to heat and cold temperature  extremes; air pollution, allergen and wildfire exposures; food, water and vector-borne diseases;  occupational health risks; and mental health and systemic social impacts. Higher temperatures  and other meteorological conditions promote formation of ozone and particulates, increased  allergen production and distribution, and wildfire smoke and particulate exposures. Climate  change is anticipated to widely affect social, economic and environmental systems, with varied  and far-reaching implications for individual mental health, community resilience, and societal  change (e.g., stress, relocation, and other social/health effects cascading from extreme weather  events). It will alter immigration pressures on California from ocean-bordering and other warming  countries experiencing decreased habitability. Climate change is also likely to change crop yields,  and the increased food prices would impact the more vulnerable populations. Local vulnerability  assessments for climate-change health risks (heat, air quality, fire, flooding, housing availability  and safety, and water availability and quality) should guide adaptation strategies. Researchers  in other sectors will benefit from including public health scientists in the formulation of research  proposals so that potential health impacts may be considered as part of proposed research or  included in future intersectoral collaborations. The policy-relevant questions shaping the research  agenda for public health address changing exposure to health threats, vulnerabilities, monitoring,  and evaluation of strategies to reduce climate risk.  Research agenda for the next five years  To better understand the vulnerability of people to climate change impacts and the distribution   of vulnerability among groups:  Extreme temperature-related morbidity and mortality: Characterize health impacts  of temperature (extreme heat and cold), including downscaled projected impacts for  local health planners, and specific vulnerability drivers such as urban heat island, built  environment impacts and population vulnerabilities.   Air pollution, allergens, and wildfire exposures: Characterize population sensitivity for  health risks from intensified airborne exposures - respiratory inflammation, aggravation of  conditions such as asthma and emphysema, decreased lung function and damage to lungs,  and cardiovascular disease.  Infectious diseases: Investigate how threats from life-threatening vector-borne diseases  (e.g., Hantavirus Pulmonary Syndrome, Lyme disease, and West Nile Virus), as well as  potential water- and food-borne diseases may increase with changes in climate.  Occupational risks: Assess priority health impacts of climate change in occupational  settings with assistance from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention’s National  Institute on Occupational Safety and Health.    29Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Vulnerability assessment and risk characterization: Characterize risk, especially to sub- populations already experiencing lower baseline health status, and ensure equity issues  are addressed as effects of climate change and even mitigation actions themselves may  threaten to intensify risks or hardships for these groups.   Systemic social health, including mental health: Identify and forecast climate change  impacts on California populations through interdisciplinary engagement of physical  scientists with social scientists, economists, agricultural and nutrition researchers, and  other domain experts.  Surveillance and monitoring systems development: Develop and enhance tools to monitor  environmental and health indicators for diseases, vulnerabilities, protective and adaptive  capabilities for conditions affected by climate change. For example, coordinate with  federal and regional rapid surveillance efforts; enhance the infrastructure for syndromic  surveillance of climate-related morbidity and upgrading the California Death Registration  System24 to allow syndromic surveillance and monitoring of mortality patterns, including  heat-related death; and improve surveillance programs for infectious diseases including  vector-borne, water-borne, and food-borne diseases, including indicators tracking by the  California Environmental Health Tracking Program.  To better understand which strategies would be the most effective to safeguard public health:  Evaluation of interventions and risk communication: Assess whether current public health  guidance is being utilized and its effectiveness through interdisciplinary research. Improve  understanding of public knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors on climate risks and mitigation  and adaptation/preparedness actions within a health frame.  Support science to develop built environment and green infrastructure options: Expand  knowledge of physical, mental, and societal impacts of urban forest ecosystems in  the context of urban design (e.g., health impacts of urban tree cover, higher-albedo  pavement). Develop strategies and technologies aimed at protecting vulnerable populations  against heat without increasing air pollution and GHG burdens (e.g., low or net zero air  conditioning).  Transportation, Land Use, Fuels, and Infrastructure The transportation sector—including transportation fuels, land use, infrastructure, and travel  activity—is the largest contributor to GHG emissions in California. Due to the size of the  transportation sector, it is critical that it achieve significant emission reductions to achieve  the State’s 2020 GHG emission reduction goal and the 2050 target for deeper GHG emission  reductions in the transportation sector. Market and policy forces will ultimately drive the  transformation of the transportation system and create more efficient land use development  patterns and agricultural and natural resource conservation. California has taken a multi-pronged  approach to reducing emissions in the transportation sector, including emissions standards for  vehicles, fuels with lower carbon content, paving materials that improve mileage, and smarter  land use. Cross-sectoral policies promote a broad range of objectives, such as infill development  including affordable housing, increased connectivity of residential, employment, and other land  uses, jobs-housing fit, and reduced driving and single occupancy vehicle use and increased low  carbon transportation options. At the same time, state policy promotes environmental justice to  avoid placing disproportionate environmental, economic, or health burdens on disadvantaged  segments of the population.  A multi-pronged policy environment and research programs of sustainable communities,  pavement materials, sustainable freight, advanced technology vehicles, alternative fuels and  fuel infrastructure, and the associated costs and benefits and environmental justice issues are   24 http://www.edrs.us/  http://www.edrs.us/   30 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  managed collaboratively by Caltrans, ARB, the Energy Commission, California Department of  Food and Agriculture, and the Strategic Growth Council through the Transportation Research  Roundup. RD&D will produce advanced technologies and test strategies to successfully  implement the State’s policies.  Research agenda for the next five years  To evaluate the effectiveness of strategies and technological innovations to significantly reduce  GHG emissions in the transportation sector and their economic, public health, and environmental  impacts or co-benefits:  Sustainable communities: Continue evaluating and testing of innovative approaches to  reduce GHG emissions (both direct and indirect) through sustainable community strategies.  Investigate how climate and land use policies (e.g., smart growth) will affect the climate  resilience of the transportation system and the residential sector. Provide decision makers  with a clear understanding of the public health, economic, and equity co-benefits of  implementing smart growth considering potential climate and ways to avoid adverse impacts.  Life cycle studies of pavement material in transportation networks: Integrate the results of  Life Cycle Analysis (LCA) of GHG emissions with the estimation of life cycle costs. Continue  work to reduce the embodied GHG emissions in pavement, as well as develop innovative  new pavement materials with lower rolling resistance that have the potential to improve  fuel efficiency for the millions of vehicles that use California’s roads every day. Examine  how materials used in the construction of the transportation network perform under climate  change such as extreme temperatures and standing and moving water during flood events.  Sustainable freight: Develop advanced fuels, vehicles, intelligent transportation systems  technologies, operations, and systems that reduce oxides of nitrogen and fine particulate  matter such as black carbon in the freight area. Coordinate research with air quality  planning activities, as exemplified by the ongoing ARB “Vision for Clean Air” program, to  achieve greatest benefits. Leverage climate change research in other transportation areas to  support goods movement.  Advanced technology vehicles and consumer behavior: Continue to support RD&D on  technologies (e.g., fuel cells, batteries, charging options, and vehicle-grid integration) that  will enable the deployment of zero or near-zero tailpipe GHG emission vehicles. Invest  in market research on consumer and freight transportation sector acceptance and usage  of zero or near-zero tailpipe GHG vehicles (e.g., fuel cell vehicles, electric cars) to inform  policies and to increase adoption of these vehicles.  Alternative fuels: Support the development of new technologies that improve efficiency  and reduce GHG emissions from biorefineries, and develop new methods to increase the  production of alternative fuels (e.g., renewable hydrogen, renewable drop-in fuels). Examine  the land-use impacts of biofuels crop production on the carbon sequestration potential of  soils, air quality, and other ecosystem services from different biofuel crop types that are  appropriate for California. Investigate the impact of climate change on projected biomass  production to accurately project future alternative fuel supply.  To investigate the vulnerability of transportation infrastructure of California to climate change  impacts:  Vulnerability of the transportation system and fuel infrastructure: Assess vulnerability  of the state’s transportation system to sea-level rise, extreme weather-related events, and  other climate impacts. Examine the vulnerability and adaptation options of the fueling  infrastructure (e.g., pipelines, marine terminals, storage tanks, oil refineries) that may be  affected by sea-level rise.    31Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  Waste Management California’s sustainability vision is to develop low-carbon, economically sustainable industries,  technologies, and strategies that align with the state’s existing integrated energy, waste, and  environmental policy objectives for reducing overall GHG emissions.  The waste management sector covers all aspects of solid waste and materials management,  including source reduction; the recycling, reuse, and remanufacturing of recovered material;  composting and anaerobic/aerobic digestion; biomass management (combustion, composting,  chip and grind); municipal solid waste thermal operations; and landfilling. The primary source of  GHG emissions from the waste sector is the direct emission of methane from the decomposition  of organic material in landfills. Instead of landfilling, using organic material as feedstock for  composting and anaerobic digestion can result in reductions of GHG emissions. The GHG  emission reductions from these activities would occur from reduction in energy demands  associate with recycling and manufacturing, avoided landfill emissions, displacement of fossil  fuel with biogas, and reduction in synthetic fertilizer and water usage.  CalRecycle and ARB staff collaborated to develop a Waste Management Sector Plan addressing  greenhouse gas emissions from waste management to achieve the 75 percent recycling goal of  AB 341 (Chapter 476, Statutes of 2011 [Chesbro, AB 341]) and inform the development of the AB  32 Scoping Plan Update.  Research agenda for the next five years  To identify the most effective strategies and technological innovations to significantly reduce  GHG emissions in the waste management sector and to monitor their effectiveness:  Public education: Investigate methods to improve the efficacy of education and outreach  efforts regarding source reduction, which is at the top of the waste management hierarchy  and is the preferred approach to reduce GHG emissions from the waste sector.  Technology and practices: Investigate technologies and practices for handling solid and  green waste and its byproducts that have the highest potential to reduce GHG emissions,  as well as address other issues such as water conservation, compost production, and  renewable energy/fuel production. Improve measurement methods of GHG emissions  at solid and green waste facilities to support assessment of different technologies and  practices with regard to GHG emissions reductions.  Reducing waste generation: Develop new products and markets with the highest potential  for reducing waste in the first place and its associated GHG emissions.  To assess the vulnerability of waste management infrastructure in California to climate change  impacts:  Vulnerabilities and adaptation options: Examine vulnerabilities of and adaptation options  for the waste management sector to climate change. Past research has shown that some  hazardous waste sites are located in areas of higher risk of coastal and San Francisco Bay  Delta flooding (Heberger et al. 2009), but potential impacts and viable adaptation options  have not been investigated thus far.  Water The Scoping Plan Update outlines a comprehensive set of actions that will reduce overall GHG  emissions in California in water use efficiency, water recycling, water system energy efficiency,  urban runoff reuse, and increased renewable energy production. DWR released the California  Department of Water Resources Climate Action Plan Phase I: Greenhouse Gas Emissions  Reduction Plan in 201225. That plan will significantly curtail DWR’s GHG emissions in coming  decades, describes how the department will reduce GHG releases by 50 percent below 1990  25 http://www.water.ca.gov/climatechange/docs/Final-DWR-ClimateActionPlan.pdf  http://www.water.ca.gov/climatechange/docs/Final-DWR-ClimateActionPlan.pdf   32 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  levels within the next seven years, and sets the stage for an 80 percent emissions reduction  below 1990 levels by 2050. In 2009, Senate Bill X7-7 was enacted, requiring all water suppliers,  both urban and agricultural, to increase water use efficiency. The goal of SB X7-7 for the urban  sector was to reduce per capita water use 10 percent by 2015 and 20 percent by 2020.  The water sector is one of the largest generators and consumers of electricity in California and  thus plays an important role in reducing energy demand and GHG emissions. In addition, natural  gas is used for water heating purposes in the residential, commercial, and industrial sectors.  Reducing GHG emissions in the water sector offers secondary benefits. For example, reducing  energy consumption also reduces energy costs for consumers. In some cases, reduced energy  costs can pay back initial investments associated with efficiency measures, relatively quickly.  Local water agencies can implement projects to reduce the energy intensity of water in their  region within their Water Management Portfolios; they can also include a plan to monitor the  effectiveness of their strategies such as consumer surveys, quantifiable reductions in water  volume delivery or consumer water use efficiency program participation rates. At the same  time, there may be tradeoffs between reducing GHG emissions in the water sector and other  water management objectives (e.g., water and wastewater treatment to protect public health,  environmental restoration projects).  California climate change research efforts in the water sector have focused on impacts and  adaptation (e.g., Moser et al. 2012). Climate change will affect all stakeholders and therefore  coordination with and participation by all entities, especially the public, will be necessary to  mitigate the impacts of the water sector on climate and to develop preparedness strategies.   Research agenda for the next five years  To investigate the most effective strategies and technological innovations to significantly reduce  GHG emissions in the water sector and their economic and environmental impacts or co-benefits:  Reducing embedded GHG emissions: Improve and develop less costly technologies and  procedures for conserving water and energy. Provide insight and guidance for state and  regional water management planning, and address water and energy conflicts and climate  change mitigation needs through regional data collection on water and energy intensity.  Conduct studies about the GHG benefits of increased use of non-traditional local water  supplies to reduce the embedded GHG emissions associated with imported water.  To determine the vulnerability of water resources to climate change impacts and to measure and  assess the effectiveness of potential strategies and technological innovations to safeguard the  state from these impacts:  Understanding how climate change is affecting key water indicators: Measure how a  changing climate is affecting water supply, because this information will enable planners  to anticipate needs and to target future policies. Some of the monitoring needs are as  follows; 1) changes in snow-covered and rain dominated portions of key watersheds, 2) the  relationship between snow pack, rainfall, and groundwater recharge and quality, and 3) the  effects of land-cover and ecosystem responses to climate change on precipitation-runoff  relationships. This research topic is also discussed as a research need in Chapter 3.  Understanding key vulnerabilities in the state’s water system: Improve understanding  by planners and resources managers of climate-mediated risks to the water, including  wastewater and recycled water, infrastructure (e.g., sea-level rise and flooding) as well  as impacts to water quality in rivers, lakes, and groundwater aquifers due to changes in  precipitation, timing of flow, and temperature. Better characterize the risk to water supply  and demand conflicts (in-stream flows, agriculture, urban consumption, industry, and  hydropower) with climate change.   Developing a toolbox of adaptation strategies: Develop decision-support tools for  adaptation in the water sector such as to determine where to prioritize regulations and     33Climate Change Research Plan for California: Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions...  technical and financial assistance to protect surface water quality, groundwater storage,  assign water rights equitably, minimize urban flooding, and reduce the potential for public  safety threats from water and wastewater facilities impacted by extreme events. Identify  a toolbox of adaptation measures that water, wastewater, and recycled water facilities can  implement to prepare for future sea-level rise and extreme storms. Investigate the pros and  cons of desalination as an adaptation strategy, including its feasibility and acceptability,  impacts on aquatic species, water quality, ecosystems, energy use, and potential GHG  emissions from pumping seawater to the surface.    34 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  Crosscutting Issues      Crosscutting areas of research include topics that are common to different sectors or that would  benefit from strong interdisciplinary approaches. The discussion below about regional research  highlights the importance of local and regional analyses to complement and enhance statewide  studies or for more in-depth examinations that can only be afforded at the local/regional levels.  The discussion about the regional topics benefited immensely from input received by the Alliance  of Regional Collaboratives for Climate Adaptation representing local agencies and groups in the  Sacramento area, the nine counties in the San Francisco region, the Los Angeles metropolitan  area, and San Diego County.  The Economics of Climate Change Past studies at the state, national, and international levels have focused on determining the  magnitude of aggregate economic impacts. Their primary role has been to estimate the nature  and magnitude of overall statewide or national economic impacts. For the most part, they provide  very little information that could be used for resource management and decision making on local  or regional levels. At the same time, the Second California Climate Assessment strongly suggests  that effective adaptation can significantly lower overall economic impacts from a changing  climate (Franco et al. 2011). What are needed now are “on the ground” studies with enough  granularity and specificity to allow in-depth estimation of economic costs and benefits and/ or the implementation of risk management strategies. To provide actionable results, economic  analyses must also involve other areas of science such as engineering, ecology, and social  sciences, because non-economic factors (e.g., institutional constraints, lack of consideration of  ecological impacts, and public acceptance of options) can play a major role in the implementation  of attractive adaptation measures.  Environmental Justice The State of California is committed to the fair treatment of people of all races, cultures, and  incomes with respect to the development, adoption, implementation, and enforcement of  environmental laws, regulations, and policies. State law defines this as environmental justice  (Government Code section 65040.12). In the climate change context, disadvantaged communities  and certain racial/ethnic groups are projected to experience disproportionate risk of mortality  and morbidity from extreme heat events such as higher exposure to urban heat island effects or  outdoor working conditions, lower access to air conditioning, lower baseline health, and greater  exposure to air pollutants (Shonkoff et al. 2011). California’s disadvantaged communities may  not have equitable access to urban forests or share in the many benefits they could provide.  Some groups may experience disproportionate economic impacts including increased cost of  necessities such as housing, reductions in agricultural employment, and lower adaptive capacity  (Shonkoff et al. 2011). Some cultural groups face extra burdens from ecological impacts.  Different groups may also bear the brunt of impacts from mitigation or adaptation actions.  Environmental justice, affecting and affected by both mitigation and adaptation strategies,  is a universal crosscutting issue that could benefit from more attention in climate change  studies. For instance, research could examine if and where the generation of bioenergy from  wastewater treatment facilities (e.g., as a substitute for diesel in heavy-duty trucks) might reduce  environmental justice impacts.  CHAPTER 5     35Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  Barriers to Adaptation It is now clear that to go beyond adaptation studies into practical implementation of adaptation  measures, it is necessary to identify regulatory, legal, scientific, socio-economic, institutional,  and financial barriers and options to overcome them (Moser and Ekstrom 2010). Here we define  barriers “as obstacles that can be overcome with concerted effort, creative management, change  of thinking, prioritization, and related shifts in resources, land uses, institutions, etc.” (Moser  and Ekstrom 2010). One of the potential barriers to adaptation is a legal framework that may  impede or at least create obstacles to the implementation of technically attractive adaptation  options. For example, studies have shown that the use of groundwater reservoirs to store water  during wet years and making this water available during dry years is an attractive adaptation  option (Medellín-Azuara et al. 2008; Langridge et al. 2012). However, a legal analysis conducted  by researchers at the Center for Law, Energy & Environment in UC Berkeley found the current  interpretation of water law would not allow the implementation of this measure. In addition,  the lack of information about the amount of water obtained from groundwater resources would  impede the implementation of this measure at the needed scale (Hanemann et al. 2012). Similar  studies are sorely needed to identify similar obstacles in other issues and sectors, such as the  effects of water requirements for endangered species on adaptation strategies in other sectors  and vice versa. A suite of options for overcoming barriers should be explored through systematic  research, including private sector contributions, payments for ecosystem services, public goods  charges, fees, and insurance. Research should address what level of funding could be raised  through different types of financing options, their potential structures, public or private sector  acceptability, social justice and economic impacts.  Extreme Events As mentioned in Chapter 3, extreme weather-related events are likely to become more frequent  and intense in California (Mastrandrea et al. 2012). These extreme events affect several sectors  of the economy and public health resulting in a cascade of issues that can exacerbate overall  impacts. For example, prolonged droughts affect ecosystems and agricultural production,  decrease hydropower generation, increase wildfire risks, degrade air quality, and cause major  economic losses. Extreme weather-related events must be used to integrate and coordinate  research approaches and investigate the best options to prepare California for and recover from  these events.  Indicators of Climate Change, Impacts, and Actions There is currently considerable interest in the state – at all levels of governance – to assess and  report on mitigation and adaptation efforts and their effectiveness. While certain metrics exist for  tracking mitigation, research in approaches and metrics for assessing adaptation planning and  implementation, and reporting on preparedness as well as progress toward achieving mitigation  and adaption goals is limited. Nevertheless, a basic foundation exists that can lend itself to the  development of indicators or pilot testing for improvement over time. Such research would  need to account for process and outcome aspects of adaptation and consider the need for wide  applicability across sectors and levels of decision making.  Indicators are used in many disciplines to describe the status, trend, or performance of a  system. They synthesize large volumes of often-complex data into summary measurements  that are understandable to a broad audience. Recognizing the value of indicators as tools  for characterizing and reporting on climate change in the state, the California Environmental  Protection Agency’s (CalEPA) Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment has developed  a set of climate change indicators to describe the multiple facets of climate change—its  anthropogenic drivers, changes in climate, and the physical and biological impacts of such  changes (report published originally in 2009 and updated in 201326). The Research Plan envisions  an ongoing effort by CalEPA—in close collaboration with other state programs, and with input   26 http://www.oehha.ca.gov/multimedia/epic/2013EnvIndicatorReport.html  http://www.oehha.ca.gov/multimedia/epic/2013EnvIndicatorReport.html   36 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  from external research and monitoring programs—to further develop and periodically update a  system of climate change indicators. A new area of integrative research would develop indicators  that track activities to reduce GHG emissions and the risk of climate change, as well as the  outcomes of these activities. This will also tie in with state efforts to make data more open and  accessible to researchers, the public, and other interested parties.  The Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta The Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta is a unique and valuable natural resource spanning 738,000  acres where the Sacramento and San Joaquin Rivers join and drain westward to the San  Francisco Bay. It is a region of towns and cities, farms, and other businesses. The Delta also  serves as a hub for water supply, energy, and transportation infrastructure vital to the economic  well-being of California (Figure 6). The diversity of salt, brackish, and freshwater marshes  and other ecosystems within the Delta provides habitat for many species of conservation and  recreational value throughout their different life stages (Lund et al. 2007). Water from the Delta  supplies two-thirds of California’s people, and it contributes to making the Central Valley a  food basket of the nation. Much of the land in the Delta lies below sea level, separated from the  network of channels by levees built with local materials over 100 years ago to drain marshlands  to reclaim land for agriculture and subsequently to protect it against floods. This use has caused  land subsidence, and increasing GHG emissions while making the Delta more vulnerable to sea- level rise and flooding. Research has shown that restoring its wetlands can reverse subsidence  and be used as a carbon sink for mitigating climate change (see Chapter 4—Natural and working  lands). The Delta Plan (Delta Stewardship Council 2013) created rules and recommendations  to achieve the State’s coequal goals for the Delta: Improve statewide water supply reliability,  and protect and restore a vibrant and healthy Delta ecosystem, all in a manner that preserves,  protects, and enhances the unique agricultural, cultural, and recreational characteristics of the  Delta. The Delta Plan recognizes the challenges from many impacts of climate change (e.g., from  warmer temperatures, changing precipitation patterns, changing timing and volume of river  flows, higher sea levels, and the potential for greater extremes) on achieving the two policy goals.  Thus, integrated research on vulnerability and management strategies to mitigate and adapt to  climate change is a necessity for the Delta region.  Figure 6. Transportation, water, and   energy infrastructure in the Delta.  Climate-smart Choices   and Civic Engagement The success of many climate change strategies  depends on Californians actively participating in  identifying, supporting, and implementing climate- smart choices. For example, in the transportation  sector, regional planning efforts under SB 375 depend  on shifting consumer choices to reverse the historical  trend of increasing vehicle miles traveled. Meeting  ZEV as well as alternative fuel vehicle goals relies on  consumer purchasing decisions. Scenarios developed  to explore what California’s energy system might look  like in 2050 suggest that aggressive efficiency programs  might provide a means of reducing demand and  thereby securing GHG emissions reductions. However,  the required future impact of such proposed efficiency  programs is unprecedented if drastic GHG emissions  reductions are going to take place by 2050 (Williams  et al. 2012, Wei et al. 2013). These programs have   Source: Lund et al. 2007.    37Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  succeeded thus far in slowing aggregate load growth but have not reversed it (Rufo and North  2007, Parker et al. 2008). Moreover, routine behaviors and decisions that are not associated with  consumer purchases play a large role in determining GHG emissions. Californians’ choices will  also shape strategies to prepare for climate risks. Accordingly, it is critical that the State better  understand consumer choices, habits, and decision making, as well as how to craft effective  strategies to reduce GHG emissions and climate risks. Research on these human dimensions  must complement the technological innovation RD&D proposed in Chapter 4.  Urban, Suburban, and Exurban Growth and Climate Change The pattern of urban growth affects land use, agriculture, energy demand, conservation,  transportation, and many other facets of California’s environment. How California accommodates  a growing population will have far-reaching effects on (and be shaped by efforts to reduce) GHG  emissions and resilience to a changing climate. California should continue supporting integrative  research on the synergies between climate change and urban and rural growth. Research is  needed to understand how efforts to reduce GHG emissions and risk from climate impacts will  affect land use patterns, housing siting, and transportation networks and to identify potential  conflicts between these efforts. For example, the State needs to develop a more complete  understanding of induced demand (increase in travel or other emissions-causing behaviors as  a result of a given policy action) and build this into project analysis to accurately estimate the  potential GHG emission reduction benefits associated with alternative projects or policy options.  Additional research is needed to ensure that scenario-planning models incorporate future  climate conditions and the impacts associated with these changes (e.g., sea-level rise, flood  regimes). Assessment of impacts on the residential sector will be important, as it accounts for  the largest proportion of land use within the urban footprint and incorporates identified research  needs ranging from green buildings, public health effects, built environment development  patterns affecting transportation, economic impacts, and environmental justice issues affecting  disadvantaged communities. There is also a significant need to assess how the state’s housing  stock might be impacted by sea-level rise. With an overall shortage of housing, loss of housing  stock would exacerbate the rising cost of housing and disproportionately impact vulnerable  populations. The movement of biological species in response to climate change needs to be  incorporated into urban scenario planning to avoid exacerbating ecological impacts. Research  is needed to understand how shifts in human demographics (e.g., aging population, faster  growth in the state’s inland areas) and job trends will affect land use, transportation needs, and  infrastructure investments. The costs, benefits, and strategies for appropriate conservation  of natural and working lands to achieve smart growth goals needs further study. Pressure  to produce more biofuels could compete with agricultural lands needed to feed a growing  population. Therefore, planning for the transformative changes of many of the state’s systems  to achieve long-term GHG emission reduction goals and create sustainable communities needs  to determine what policies and tools cities and counties can apply to support this transformation  and what barriers will need to be overcome.  Green Buildings Green building offers a comprehensive approach to reduce GHG emissions by minimizing the  energy, water, waste, and transportation impacts of the building. In addition to the California  Green Building Standards (CalGreen), there are also state policies and goals focused on zero net  energy (ZNE) building. Currently, the State’s ZNE goals established by both the California Public  Utility Commission and the California Energy Commission require all new homes be ZNE by  2020 and new commercial buildings to be ZNE by 2030. To date, there has been some research  on the GHG benefits of green building, including on the realized GHG improvements from water,  waste, and transportation improvements that come from achieving Leadership in Energy and  Environmental Design for Existing Buildings: Operations and Maintenance certification. However,  additional research is needed to fully understand the GHG reduction potential of green building.  Further, research is needed to advance the adoption of zero net energy building, including real-    38 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  world data on marginal cost premium of pursuing ZNE and actual return on investment. Lastly,  the First Update to the Climate Change Scoping Plan (California Air Resources Board 2014)  identifies future actions and policies that can help California achieve our post-2020 climate goals,  including advancing ZNE buildings to be zero net carbon buildings. In order to do this, ARB and  state agency stakeholders must chart a path for expanding ZNE goals to focus on GHG emissions,  and as a result, consider water, waste, and transportation impacts of a building. Significant  crosscutting research will be needed to provide technical support for the pursuit of low-carbon  building in California as part of the State’s long-term climate program.  Wildfire and Other Ecosystem Disturbances Natural and working landscapes contribute to California’s GHG emission reduction policies but  are simultaneously vulnerable to the risks of climate change. Disturbance (e.g., wildfires, pests,  and invasive species) is a natural part of ecosystems and influences the composition of species,  the cycling of carbon, and the flow of goods and services. Human-caused impacts, including  climate change, can alter the frequency or magnitude of disturbances and therefore increase  the threats to property, safety, watersheds, habitat, and infrastructure. Wildfire, in particular,  has emerged as a pervasive issue throughout the Research Plan. The 2013 Rim Fire near  Yosemite clearly underscored the full range of impacts on a massive scale. Past studies suggest  that wildfires and changes in vegetation patterns may result in net loss of biomass carbon  to the atmosphere in this century. This has tremendous implications for mandates to reduce  greenhouse gas emissions (e.g., AB 32) because even small fractional changes of the carbon  stock in our forest result in substantial carbon emissions. Key crosscutting research topics about  ecosystem disturbances include:  Wildfire regimes: Research should continue to improve projections of future wildfire and  its impacts on many sectors. Ideally state agencies and other partners will agree upon  a common set of wildfire scenario projections to support vulnerability assessments and  adaptation planning.  Carbon dynamics: increased rates of disturbance will decrease the capacity of forests to  store carbon, at least over the short-term, and increase GHG and black carbon emissions.  Progress in understanding the role of disturbance in carbon dynamics will help refine the  GHG emissions accounting methods and provide support for more effective management  of resilient natural landscapes. Since less dense forests should also result in less intense  forest fires, the Research Plan places a priority on answering how to create healthier forests  for both mitigation and adaptation purposes.  Positive feedbacks: The interactions of climate change and disturbance processes can  create positive feedbacks. Research is needed on these feedback loops, which then need to  be incorporated into ecosystem process models to project climate change impacts.  Co-benefits of healthy landscapes: Strategies to increase forest health and resilience are  likely to have co-benefits for watersheds, safety, wildlife, habitat, and bioenergy. Research  is needed to better account for such co-benefits in choosing strategies to prepare for  climate risk. Forecast-based interventions that could be used to reduce the public health  and economic impacts of wildfires should also be explored.  Ecosystem Services and Green Infrastructure Ecosystem services, the benefits people obtain from ecosystems, have been mentioned  throughout the Research Plan for their vulnerability to climate change and for possible positive  and negative impacts of climate strategies. Carbon sequestration in natural and working  landscapes is a critical service in California’s strategy to reduce GHG emissions, but it depends  on maintaining healthy ecosystems in the face of climate change. Nature-based solutions  (so-called green infrastructure) can address the same climate threats while also providing     39Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  co-benefits such as the maintenance or enhancement of valuable ecosystem services that  engineered solutions may not. For example, both restoring coastal wetlands for protection and  armoring the coastline can provide protection from floods and storm surges, but the wetlands  strategy can also filter water and provide essential habitat. Research can determine when it  is more cost-effective to pay landowners for maintaining publicly valued ecosystem services  than pay for engineering solutions. Perhaps the greatest advantage of the ecosystem services  framework is that it provides a more comprehensive way to consider the benefits and trade- offs of protecting/restoring ecosystems to build resiliency and maintain or enhance ecosystem  services in a changing climate. The ecosystem services framework could support other  crosscutting themes such as providing new climate change indicators and information about  the distribution or loss of services from the perspective of environmental justice. Although the  ecosystem services framework is increasingly familiar to scientists and resource managers, it  is still not commonplace in state policy. Multi-sector research is needed to improve methods  for modeling ecosystem services and to demonstrate its value in assessing climate risks and  climate-related projects or policies. Research is also needed on where and how to best deploy  adaptation strategies.  Urban Forests In addition to making our cities more beautiful and livable, trees provide climate services for  both mitigation and adaptation (Liverman et al. 2013). Trees store carbon. The shade they provide  modulates the urban heat island effect, resulting in lower demand for cooling-energy, further  reducing emissions. Adaptation in urban areas could include additional use of urban forests  and tree planting to prevent heat-related health problems, protect air quality, and absorb excess  water. The need is often greatest in environmental justice communities. Urban forests, however,  are also stressed by air quality, soil compaction, and modified hydrology. Therefore climate  change research must also consider the cumulative effects of all these stressors. Major climate- related research gaps regarding urban forests include improved mapping and inventory methods,  field-based and remotely sensed measures of the effects of urban forests on urban heat islands,  and strategies to keep urban forests resilient in a changing climate. As with other sectors and  crosscutting topics, decision makers need information on the costs, benefits, feasibility, and  acceptability of expanding, enhancing, or adapting urban forests.  Water-energy-food Nexus Water, energy, and food production are inextricably linked. Water is transported from north to  south to provide adequate supplies for multiple beneficial purposes including food production  and community use. Energy is required as water is moved from its source, treated, transported,  consumed, and treated once again before disposal. Water is involved in almost every aspect of  producing, generating, or processing energy in the state as well as in the many different stages  of food production. Moreover, water, energy, and food production will all be affected by climate  change. Integrated research studies are needed to examine the water, energy, and other co- benefits of existing and new management practices in the water-energy-food nexus for climate  change. The development of grower-friendly electronic tools (e.g., apps) to provide guidance on  the management practices will ensure the research findings are effectively used at the farm level  to adapt to climate change and reduce GHGs. The Water Energy and Agricultural subgroup of the  Climate Action Team coordinates research efforts aimed at achieving water and energy savings  and efficiencies, reducing GHG emissions, and ensuring the state’s ability to mitigate and adapt  to climate change impacts on agriculture and water resources.  Climate Impacts Outside California Affecting our State Climate impacts affecting areas outside California could affect our state. For example hurricanes  in the Gulf Coast region affect oil platforms and refineries creating cascading effects in energy  prices in the United States. Warmer waters in the Atlantic in the areas where hurricanes form  may result in more intense extreme hurricanes with global climate change (Grinsted et al. 2013).     40 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  Prices of global commodities, such as timber, will determine the economic impact on California  industries (Hannah et al. 2011). Our high technology society is dependent on global supplies, such  that disruptions far from California result in loss of manufacturing productivity in California. For  example, floods in Thailand in 2011 affected the world supply of computer chips, hard drives, and  other electronic devices, which in turn affected the manufacture of computers in California. For  all of these reasons, California should start exploring this emerging area of research.   Local and Regional Issues Nearly all climate research conducted in California is going to be place-based and will ultimately  inform actions taken overwhelmingly by local decision makers. Therefore, framing State research  in line with local and regional information needs is one of the most salient crosscutting topics.  Cities, counties, and regions are often at the front line of climate impacts and extreme events.  Moreover, experience has shown that the potential impacts and vulnerabilities, and therefore the  research needs, vary significantly between areas, such that the solutions to climate risk must be  customized for each locale.  In the past, local and regional climate change research issues have been addressed using two  methods. The first method relies on statewide studies with enough geographical resolution  adequate to inform local and regional actors. For example, a statewide study looking at potential  changes in electricity demand under different climate scenarios estimated changes in demand at  the ZIP code level (Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat 2012a). The study provided enough spatial  resolution to allow the production of a derivative product about potential impacts to the nine  counties in the San Francisco region (Figure 7) (Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat 2012b).  Figure 7. Simulated percent increase in household electricity consumption by ZIP Code   from 2080-2099 relative to 1961-1990. A2 global emission scenario.  Source: Auffhammer and Aroonruengsawat 2012b.  11.6 - 15.1  3.5 - 11.6  1.7 - 3.5  0.6 - 1.7  -2.0 - 0.6    41Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  The second approach involves the production of local or regional studies such as “Climate  change-related impacts in the San Diego region by 2050,” (Messner et al. 2011) and the on-going  study known as C-Change.LA for the Los Angeles region. In some cases, these local or regional  studies inform and are informed by statewide efforts, which was the case for the study for San  Diego County that contributed to the Second California Climate Assessment.27  The two general approaches described above can also converge. For example, the Third  California Climate Change Assessment included a series of reports commissioned for the San  Francisco region (e.g., Garzon et al. 2012, Biging et al. 2012) that, together with the statewide  studies that had enough details for the San Francisco region, allowed the production of an  integrated report about impacts and adaptation options for the region (Ekstrom and Moser 2012).  As more local and regional agencies get involved in climate research, both directly funding  studies and using research products, the approaches described above should be implemented  and enhanced as needed. Local or regional agencies should have a strong voice shaping the  studies funded by the State of California, helping identify specific research needs and enhancing  the link between research and actual implementation of measures to reduce GHG emissions  and climate risks. A well-coordinated research activity involving local and regional efforts  with research funded by state agencies is also critical because local studies must use parallel  scenarios and assumptions if they are to effectively leverage, and be coherent with, related  studies at the regional or national levels.   Four of the state’s regions (San Francisco Bay Area, the Los Angeles region, San Diego, and the  Sacramento area) have developed collaborative efforts around adaptation and preparedness at  the regional scale. The regional collaboratives have worked together to share experiences and  best practices and to serve as a bridge between state actions and regional and local adaptation  needs. The groups have formed the Alliance of Regional Collaboratives for Climate Adaptation  (ARCCA). Some common themes emerge from the regions’ research needs:  Monitoring: Monitoring information is needed to understand ongoing changes and trends  in the natural and built environments and to help evaluate planning decisions that have  been made. This information is needed from a steady, reliable source.  Forecasting and Climate Projections: Information on the potential impacts of climate  change is needed at a scale that is relevant and actionable by the regions, including an  improved understanding of the risks of extreme events.   Vulnerability Assessment: Regions need tools and information to identify what is at risk  under a changing climate, including infrastructure, population, natural systems, and the  economy.  Adaptation Tools and Approaches: Research needs to identify the appropriate scale for  action designed to address climate risks. When is the regional scale the appropriate scale  for action?  Partnerships: How can we best leverage work being completed at the regional level to  support adaptation? How can State-sponsored research best support regional efforts? What  governance mechanisms best support regional adaptation efforts? How can climate risks  and response options be effectively communicated at the local to regional level?  Case studies: There is a great need for successful case studies. At the local level, decision  makers need to know what works and how to act on it. This is particularly true with the  economics, barriers, and disturbance topics. Positive feedbacks, co-benefits, and replicable  outcomes are critical information for engaging local leaders to take action.  27 http://climatechange.ca.gov/climate_action_team/reports/second_assessment.html  http://climatechange.ca.gov/climate_action_team/reports/second_assessment.html   42 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Crosscutting Issues  The overall areas of research listed above are highly compatible with the areas of research  described in other parts of the Research Plan. The local focus brings a wealth of specificity  that must be incorporated as much as possible into research efforts. For example, prior  studies funded by the State have developed streamflow projections for more than a dozen  stream gauges in California of statewide importance. This is not enough, however, for local  and regional applications.    43Climate Change Research Plan for California: Integration and Implementation  CHAPTER 6   Integration and Implementation      The work delineated in the prior chapters must be purposefully integrated to allow for a  meaningful exchange of information between the different research areas. In addition, integration  and coordination with non-state sponsored research programs is important to leverage scarce  resources and to attempt to provide coherent and practical research results for California. To  that end, this chapter presents a high-level strategy to integrate the different areas of research  discussed in prior chapters. It starts with a brief introduction on how the State has tackled  integration in the past and then suggests a way forward. The chapter ends with a brief discussion  about implementation issues.  Past Integration Efforts In the area of impacts and adaptation, California has established a strong record for integration  of multiple disciplines. For example, the 2009 California Climate Assessment used a common set  of climate and sea-level rise scenarios and a common set of urban growth projections. Different  research groups estimated physical impacts such as increased risk of flooding, changes in  the physical characteristic of beaches in Southern California, and changes in the snowpack in  the Sierra Nevada. These results were then used to estimate economic impacts and, in some  cases, explore the economic implications of adaptation measures (Franco et al. 2011). Figure  8 illustrates this approach. Physical scientists from Stanford University determined a range of  potential changes in yields for several perennial agricultural crops (Lobell and Field 2011), while  a group in UC Davis similarly estimated the potential impacts of climate change on annual crops  (Lee et al. 2011). Finally, economists from UC Davis used their statewide economic model of the  agricultural sector in California to assess economic impacts (Medellín-Azuara et al. 2011). The  latter also considered the effect of water availability as suggested by a statewide water supply  model (not shown) (Connell-Buck et al. 2011) and the loss of farming areas due to urbanization.  The economists explored adaptation options, such as planting different crops in response to a  changing climate, as a way to reduce economic losses.   The Third California Climate Change Assessment advanced the integration approach used in the  prior California Assessment in multiple ways. For example, it expanded the urban projections  to include simulations of growth in the urban-wildland interface for a scoping analysis  investigating how different overall growth patterns may reduce vulnerability to climate impacts  (Thorne et al. 2012).  The integration between mitigation and adaptation, however, has been absent in many past  studies. There are only a handful of notable exceptions, such as a study about climate change  and ecosystems services in California that concluded that climate change could substantially  erode the success of mitigation efforts because a warming climate in California may result in  substantial losses of carbon stocks in forests in California (Shaw et al. 2011).    44 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Integration and Implementation  Figure 8. Integrated study of economic impacts to the agricultural sector considering  adaptation: Conceptual framework used in California Climate Change Assessments.  Future Integration Efforts Previous California assessments and the vast majority of studies conducted for California have  used an approach that starts with climate, socio-economic, and growth scenarios and end up  with estimation of impacts and/or adaptation options. Only a handful of studies have used an  alternative approach that begins with estimation of vulnerabilities and proceeds toward an  examination the available climate scenarios to estimate the likelihood of when the system under  study would experience the negative effects of climate change (Lempert et al. 2012). The second  approach can also be applied to identify robust adaptation options that would perform relatively  well under a variety of different, but plausible, future climate scenarios (Hallegatte et al. 2012;  Kunreuther et al. 2013).   The Research Plan suggests using both approaches in a synergistic way as illustrated  schematically in Figure 9. From the start of future California climate assessments, scenarios will  be available to the groups in charge of mitigation and adaptation studies implementing the first  approach. When applicable, long-term mitigation or adaptation studies must consider how they  affect each other. At the same time, research groups using the second approach will begin their  exploration of climate vulnerabilities without being constrained by the selected scenarios. Usually  impacts and adaptation studies produce initial results in a two-year timeframe. During this  period, the developers of climate and sea-level rise scenarios will refine their models and develop  additional scenarios with the goal of producing quasi-probabilistic scenarios (see Chapter 3). At  this point, the integration of the different efforts would take place. For example, the researchers  that start with the climate scenarios could reflect on their results in light of the new quasi- probabilistic projections. The users of the second approach could estimate when their systems  under study would experience negative impacts and what the potential likelihood of these  impacts would be (black arrow on the right in Figure 9). Additional iterations are theoretically  possible because adaptation and mitigation measures can affect our regional climate (blue arrow  on the left in Figure 9). For example, forest-thinning practices to reduce the risk of wildfires  may reduce the amount to water transferred from forested areas to the atmosphere, impacting  streamflows and ambient temperatures.    45Climate Change Research Plan for California: Integration and Implementation  Figure 9. Conceptual illustration of climate change research integration: mitigation and  adaptation studies will inform each other to ensure that they are mutually consistent, and  development of scenarios will iteratively guide and be guided by results from adaptation and  mitigation research.  State-sponsored research must also be integrated and coordinated with national and  international components so that the California studies address the regional “gaps” left by large- scale efforts, leverage outside resources, and feed into national and international assessments.  The federal government should release the Fourth National Climate Assessment in 2018 in  compliance with a mandate to produce assessments every four years. California and the federal  government are discussing opportunities to coordinate, such as selecting common climate, sea- level, and socio-economic scenarios. At the same time, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change may be moving towards the production of more timely topical assessments, and this may  represent an opportunity to inform and be informed by future IPCC assessments.  Implementation As indicated in Chapter 1, the Research Plan does not create mandates for the agencies involved.  The Research Plan was developed to enhance coordination actions inside state government  and with external groups and to identify research gaps. The Research Working Group of the  Climate Action Team provides the forum for state agencies to discuss their proposed research  activities and to coordinate them. The research catalog also keeps the Research Working Group  and interested stakeholders informed about the range of activities and the status of individual  projects. The Climate Action Team, in coordinating research activities with mitigation and  adaptation strategies, will update the Research Plan every other year, with major revisions every  four years. This section briefly presents an overview of how regional climate change research is  being funded in California to illustrate how parts of this plan may be implemented.   At present, the CPUC, ARB, and the Energy Commission have research funds to support climate  research for both mitigation and adaptation. For example, the Energy Commission is the  administrator of the EPIC and Natural Gas Research programs created by the CPUC. The vast  majority of these funds are allocated to the development and demonstration of clean energy  technology designed to help California achieve a variety of energy-related goals, including   Climate, Socio-economic  Scenarios and Urban Projections  Mitigation with  Local/Regional  Applications  Vulnerability  and Adaptation   Studies with  Local/Regional  Applications    46 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Integration and Implementation  its climate mitigation targets and goals. A small fraction of these funds, however, is being  used to develop climate scenarios and for mitigation and impacts/adaptation options for the  energy sector with the goal of reducing potential negative effects to electricity and natural gas  ratepayers. ARB mainly funds research on GHG emissions accounting methods, mitigation  options, and air quality impacts from a changing climate.  Other state agencies use existing funds that have not been directly allocated for climate change,  but that must consider climate change for the ultimate success of their endeavors. For example,  the California DWR has funded research on atmospheric rivers and installed a network of coastal  observing units to provide an early flood warning system. This system will also be extremely  useful as a preparedness tool under a changing climate that is expected to result in an increased  risk of flooding (Das et al. 2013). The CDFA is funding research to investigate how current  agricultural practices for specific crops contribute to nitrous oxide emissions. State agencies are  also benefiting from funds available from the federal government to advance regional climate  science. For example, the California Department of Public Health (CDPH) received federal funds  to develop and implement measures to reduce public health impacts of a warming atmosphere.  ARB is leveraging data collected by the National Institute of Standards and Technology and NASA  on GHG monitoring in the Los Angeles Basin to improve emissions accounting efforts. The San  Francisco Bay and Conservation Development Commission has received several federal grants  to study the impact of sea-level rise in its jurisdiction. Caltrans has received funds from the U.S.  Department of Transportation to conduct a climate vulnerability study for the transportation  network in California. Additionally, the U.S. Department of the Interior has created the California  Landscape Conservation Cooperative to support research on climate-related ecological issues.  The federal government also directly funds or conducts climate-related scientific research in  California, such as the research by the U.S. Forest Service on adaptation options for lands in  California owned by the federal government. Finally, private groups such as non-governmental  organizations and foundations are supporting local and regional efforts. In summary, there  are multiple climate-related research activities in California that must be considered in the  implementation of this plan. At the same time, the diversity of activities creates a challenge for  long-term research planning. Under this sea of activities, the important liaison role played by the  Climate Action Team Research Working Group should include coordination with external groups.   As California embarks on its Fourth Climate Change Assessment with limited state funds, it  must consider how to advance actionable science that serves the growing needs of state- and  local-level decision makers from a variety of sectors. The Fourth Assessment will be led by the  CNRA, with the CAT Research Working Group serving as an advisory steering committee. A suite  of studies directly related to the energy system will be funded and managed by the California  Energy Commission. Although the Energy Commission studies will draw different funding  streams from the “non-energy” studies to be funded by CNRA, the two groups of studies are  closely coordinated to ensure internal consistency and to leverage limited state funds.  It is important to note that this Research Plan does not provide direct suggestions for new  investments in climate research for the State, which most likely would require tens of millions  of dollars per year. However, the Research Plan clearly suggests that outside the electricity and  natural gas sector, state investments in other areas such as agriculture, public health, water  resources, and coastal resources are sorely needed.  Concluding Remarks Human-caused climate change is projected to substantially affect all major economic sectors  in California, and all sectors must be a part of California’s efforts to significantly reduce GHG  emissions. The international scientific community has made clear both the urgency and  magnitude of the climate challenge: in addition to rapidly and significantly reducing aggregate  GHG emissions, we must prepare to thrive under climatic conditions that depart from the  historical norm to which we’ve been accustomed.    47Climate Change Research Plan for California: Integration and Implementation  Fortunately, California has been an early actor in developing both the science and policy to  address climate change. Over the past twenty-five years, California has established a strong  network of climate scientists engaged in modeling regional impacts, tracking GHG emissions,  and identifying sectoral vulnerabilities and adaptation options. This scientific community has, in  turn, been instrumental in forming a basis for California’s leadership in climate change mitigation  policy as well as efforts to safeguard California against climatic changes already underway.   The Research Plan can help ensure that California continues to benefit from a sound scientific  basis for its climate change strategies. This Research Plan is intended to help improve  communication between the producers of scientific results and decision makers. For instance,  ARB hosts periodic meetings to receive updates on N2O research activities funded by ARB, the  Energy Commission, CDFA, and CalRecycle. This is a continuing effort to coordinate research  with state agencies, academia, and industry and receive input from stakeholders on proposed  research for improving our understanding of N2O emissions associated with fertilizer use in  California. The Research Plan also envisions the continuing integration of strategies to limit  and prepare for climate change, because a climate-resilient California demands aggressive  mitigation and adaptation efforts that are inextricably linked to each other. The Research Plan  will help the State coordinate with federal and international actors, because California’s efforts  must harmonize with, inform, and reinforce those of the broader community to ensure global  climate resilience.  Although the challenges before the state are daunting, the required transformations present  opportunities to foster communities that are more equitable, healthy, and food-secure, while  protecting California’s bountiful natural resources.    48 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Glossary of Acronyms  Glossary of Abbreviations      Acronym Definition  AR Atmospheric River  ARB California Air Resources Board  ARCCA Alliance of Regional Collaboratives for Climate Adaptation  CAP California Application Program  CAT Climate Action Team  Cal/EPA California Environmental Protection Agency  CalFIRE California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection  CalRecycle California Department of Resources, Recycling and Recovery  Caltrans California Department of Transportation  CDFA California Department of Food and Agriculture  CDFW California Department of Fish and Wildlife  CDPH California Department of Public Health  CNRA California Natural Resources Agency  CO2 Carbon Dioxide   CO2e Carbon Dioxide Equivalent  CSC Climate Science Center  DOE U.S. Department of Energy  DOI U.S. Department of the Interior  DWR California Department of Water Resources  EGPR Environmental Goals and Policy Report (Office of Planning and Research)  EPIC Electric Program Investment Charge  FIA Forest Inventory and Analysis (U.S. Forest Service)  GCM Global Climate Model  GHG Greenhouse Gas  GWP Global Warming Potential  HFC Hydrofluorocarbons  IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  LCA Life Cycle Assessment  LCC Landscape Conservation Cooperative  LCFS Low Carbon Fuel Standard  LEV Low Emission Vehicle  MMTCO2e Million Metric Tons Carbon Dioxide Equivalent  NAS National Academy of Sciences  NOAA National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration    49Climate Change Research Plan for California: Glossary of Acronyms  NWS National Weather Service  ODS Ozone Depleting Substance  OEHHA Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment  OPR Governor’s Office of Planning & Research  PFC Perfluorocarbon  PIER Public Interest Energy Research  RD&D Research, Development, and Demonstration  SLCP Short-lived climate pollutant  USDA U.S. Department of Agriculture  VMT Vehicle miles traveled  ZEV Zero Emission Vehicle  ZNE Zero Net Energy    50 Climate Change Research Plan for California: References  References      Abatzoglou, J. T., K. T. Redmond, and L. M. Edwards. 2009. Classification of regional climate  variability in the state of California. Journal of Applied Meteorology & Climatology 48:1527-1541.  Auffhammer, M., and A. Aroonruengsawat. 2012a. Hotspots of climate-driven increases in  residential electricity demand: A simulation exercise based on household level billing data for  California. California Energy Commission, Publication Number: CEC-500-2012-021.  Auffhammer, M., and A. Aroonruengsawat. 2012b. Impacts of climate change on San Francisco  bay area residential electricity consumption: Evidence from billing data. California Energy  Commission, Publication number: CEC-500-2012-035.  Barreca, A., K. Clay, O. Deschenes, M. Greenstone, and J. S. Shapiro. 2013. Adapting to Climate  Change: The Remarkable Decline in the US Temperature-Mortality Relationship over the 20th  Century. Working Paper 18692. National Bureau of Economic Research.  Basu, R., W.-Y. Feng, and B. D. Ostro. 2008. Characterizing temperature and mortality in nine  California counties. Epidemiology 19:138-145   Biging, G. S., J. D. Radke, and J. H. Lee. 2012. Impacts of predicted sea-level rise and extreme  storms events on the transportation infrastructure in the San Francisco Bay region. California  Energy Commission, Publication number CEC-500-2012-040.  Bromirski, P., D, D. R. Cayan, N. Graham, M. Tyree, and R. E. Flick. 2012. Coastal flooding-potential  projections: 2000-2100. A White Paper from the California Energy Commission’s California  Climate Change Center, Publication number: CEC-500-2012-011.  California Air Resources Board. 2008. Climate Change Scoping Plan.  California Air Resources Board. 2014. First Update to the Climate Change Scoping Plan: Building  on the Framework.  California Department of Food and Agriculture. 2013. Climate Change Consortium for Specialty  Crops: Impacts and Strategies for Resilience. Climate Change Consortium Final Report. California  Department of Food and Agriculture, Sacramento.  California Energy Commission. 2012. Application of the California Energy Commission -   For Approval of Electric Program Investment Charge Proposed 2012 Through 2014 Triennial  Investment Plan.  California Energy Commission. 2013. 2013 Integrated Energy Policy Report. California Energy  Commission, Publication Number: CEC‐100‐2013‐001‐CMF.  California Natural Resources Agency. 2009 California climate adaptation strategy.  California Natural Resources Agency. 2014. Safeguarding California: Reducing Climate Risks:   An update to the 2009 Adaptation Strategy.  Cayan, D., P. Bromirski, K. Hayhoe, M. Tyree, M. Dettinger, and R. Flick. 2008. Climate change  projections of sea level extremes along the California coast. Climatic Change 87:57-73.  Cayan, D., M. Tyree, M. Dettinger, H. Hidalgo, T. Das, E. Maurer, P. Bromirski, N. Graham, and R.  Flick. 2009. Climate change scenarios and sea level rise estimates for the California 2009 climate  change scenarios assessment. California Climate Change Center, Publication Number CEC-500- 2009-014-F.    51Climate Change Research Plan for California: References  Chung, S. H., and J. H. Seinfeld. 2005. Global radiative effect of particulate black carbon.  California Air Resources Board, Final Report, Contract Number 02-322.  Connell-Buck, C. R., J. Medellín-Azuara, J. R. Lund, and K. Madani. 2011. Adapting California’s  water system to warm vs. dry climates. Climatic Change 109:133-149.  Das, T., E. P. Maurer, D. W. Pierce, M. D. Dettinger, and D. R. Cayan. 2013. Increases in flood  magnitudes in California under warming climates. Hydrology 501:101-110.  Delta Stewardship Council. 2013. The Delta Plan.  Duarte, C. M., I. J. Losada, I. E. Hendriks, I. Mazarrasa, and N. Marba. 2013. The role of coastal plant  communities for climate change mitigation and adaptation. Nature Climate Change 3:961-968.  Duguma, L. A., P. A. Minang, and M. van Noordwijk. 2014. Climate change mitigation and  adaptation in the land use sector: From complementarity to synergy. Environmental Management  54:420-432.  Ekstrom, J. A., and S. C. Moser. 2012. Climate change impacts, vulnerabilities, and adaptation in  the San Francisco Bay area: A synthesis of PIER program reports and other relevant research.  California Energy Commission, Publication number: CEC-500-2012-071.  Franco, G., D. R. Cayan, S. Moser, M. Hanemann, and M.-A. Jones. 2011. Second California  Assessment: Integrated climate change impacts assessment of natural and managed system.  Guest editorial. Climatic Change 109:1-19.  Franco, G., R. Wilkinson, A. H. Sanstad, M. Wilson, and E. Vine. 2003. Climate Change Research,  Development, and Demonstration Plan. Public Interest Energy Research Program. California  Energy Commission, Publication Number: P500-03-025FS.  Garzon, C., H. Cooley, M. Heberger, E. Moore, M. Allen, E. Matalon, and A. Doty. 2012.  Community-based climate adaptation planning: Case study of Oakland, California. California  Energy Commission, Publication Number: CEC-500-2012-038.  Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. 2013. California’s Climate Future – The Governor’s  Environmental Goals and Policy Report. Discussion Draft.  Graham, N. E., D. R. Cayan, P. D. Bromirski, and R. E. Flick. 2013. Multi-model projections of  twenty-first century North Pacific winter wave climate under the IPCC A2 scenario. Climate  Dynamics 40:1335-1360.  Greenblatt, J., and J. Long. 2012. California’s energy future: Portraits of energy systems for  meeting greenhouse gas reduction targets. California Council on Science and Technology.  Grinsted, A., J. C. Moore, and S. Jevrejeva. 2013. Projected Atlantic hurricane surge threat from  rising temperatures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 110:5369-5373.  Hallegatte, S., A. Shah, R. Lempert, C. Brown, and S. Gill. 2012. Investment decision making  under deep uncertainty application to climate change. Policy Research Working Paper 6193. The  World Bank.  Hanemann, M., D. Lambe, and D. Farber. 2012. Climate vulnerability and adaptation study for  California. Legal analysis of barriers to adaptation for California’s water sector. California Climate  Change Center. California Energy Commission, Publication Number: CEC-500-2012-019.  Hannah, L., C. Costello, C. Guo, L. Ries, C. Kolstad, D. Panitz, and N. Snider. 2011. The impact of  climate change on California timberlands. Climatic Change 109:429-443.  Heberger, M., Heather Cooley, P. Herrera, P. H. Gleick, and E. Moore. 2009. The impacts of sea- level rise on the California Coast. California Energy Commission, Publication Number: CEC-500- 2009-024-F.    52 Climate Change Research Plan for California: References  IPCC. 2013. Summary for policymakers. In: Climate change 2013 the physical science basis.  Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, and New York,  NY, USA.  Koteen, L. E., D. D. Baldocchi, and J. Harte. 2011. Invasion of non-native grasses causes a drop in  soil carbon storage in California grasslands. Environmental Research Letters 6:044001.  Kunreuther, H., G. Heal, M. Allen, O. Edenhofer, C. B. Field, and G. Yohe. 2013. Risk management  and climate change. Nature Climate Change 3:447-450.  Langridge, R., A. Fisher, A. Racz, B. Daniels, K. Rudestam, and B. Hihara. 2012. Climate change  and water supply security: Reconfiguring groundwater management to reduce drought  vulnerability. A white paper from the California Climate Change Center, Publication Number: CEC- 500-2012-017.  Lee, J., S. D. Gryze, and J. Six. 2011. Effect of climate change on field crop production in  California’s Central Valley. Climatic Change 109:S335-S353.  Lempert, R., Ryan L. Sriver, and K. Keller. 2012. Characterizing uncertain sea level rise projections  to support investment decisions. California Energy Commission, Publication Number: CEC-500- 2012-056.  Liverman, D., S. C. Moser, P. S. Weiland, L. Dilling, M. T. Boykoff, H. E. Brown, E. S. Gordon, C.  Greene, E. Holthaus, D. A. Niemeier, S. Pincetl, W. J. Steenburgh, and V. C. Tidwell. 2013. Climate  choices for a sustainable Southwest, in: Assessment of Climate Change in the Southwest United  States: A Report Prepared for the U.S. National Climate Assessment, edited by G. Garfin, A.  Jardine, R. Merideth, M. Black, and S. LeRoy, pp.405-435. A report by the Southwest Climate  Alliance. Washington, DC: Island Press.  Lobell, D. B., U. L. C. Baldos, and T. W. Hertel. 2013. Climate adaptation as mitigation: The case of  agricultural investments. Environmental Research Letters 8:015012.  Lobell, D. B., and C. B. Field. 2011. California perennial crops in a changing climate. Climatic  Change 109:317-333.  Lund, J., E. Hanak, W. Fleenor, R. Howitt, J. Mount, and P. Moyle. 2007. Envisioning futures for the  Sacramento–San Joaquin Delta. Public Policy Institute of California, San Francisco, CA.  Mastrandrea, M. D., C. Tebaldi, C. W. Snyder, S. H. Schneider. 2012. Current and future impacts of  extreme events in California. Climatic Change 109:43-70.  Medellín-Azuara, J., J. Harou, M. Olivares, K. Madani, J. Lund, R. Howitt, S. Tanaka, M. Jenkins,  and T. Zhu. 2008. Adaptability and adaptations of California’s water supply system to dry climate  warming. Climatic Change 87:75-90.  Medellín-Azuara, J., R. Howitt, D. MacEwan, and J. Lund. 2011. Economic impacts of climate- related changes to California agriculture. Climatic Change 109:387-405.  Messner, S., C. Miranda, E. Young, and N. Hedge. 2011. Climate change-related impacts in the San  Diego region by 2050. Climatic Change 109:505-531.  Moser, S., J. Ekstrom, and G. Franco. 2012. Our Changing Climate 2012. Vulnerability & Adaptation  to the Increasing Risks from Climate Change in California. A Summary Report on the Third  Assessment from the California Climate Change Center. Publication Number: CEC-500-2012-007.  Moser, S. C. 2012. Adaptation, mitigation, and their disharmonious discontents: An essay. Climatic  Change 111:165-175.  Moser, S. C., and J. A. Ekstrom. 2010. A framework to diagnose barriers to climate change  adaptation. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107:22026-22031.  National Assessment Synthesis Team. 2000. Climate Change Impacts on the United States: The  Potential Consequences of Climate Variability and Change. US Global Change Research Program,  Washington DC.    53Climate Change Research Plan for California: References  National Research Council. 2012. Sea-level rise for the coasts of California, Oregon, and  Washington: Past, present, and future. The National Academies Press.  Needelman, B.A., and J.E. Hawkes. 2012. Mitigating greenhouse gases through coastal habitat  restoration. In: B.A. Needelman, J. Benoit, S. Bosak, and C. Lyons (eds.) Restore-Adapt-Mitigate:  Responding to Climate Change through Coastal Habitat Restoration. Restore America’s Estuaries,  Washington, DC pp. 49-57.  Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment. 2013. Indicators of climate change in  California. California Environmental Protection Agency.  Ostro, B., S. Rauch, and S. Green. 2011. Quantifying the health impacts of future changes in  temperature in California. Environmental Research 111:1258-1264.  Parker, S., B. Hamilton, and M. Wickenden. 2008. What Does It Take to Turn Load Growth Negative?  A View from the Leading Edge. 2008 ACEEE Summer Study on Energy Efficiency in Buildings.  Roos, M. 1991. A trend of decreasing snowmelt runoff in northern California. Pages 29-36,  Proceedings of the 59th Annual Western Snow Conference. Juneau, Alaska.  Rufo, M. W., and A. S. North. 2007. Assessment of long-term electric energy efficiency potential in  California’s residential sector. California Energy Commission, PIER Energy-Related Environmental  Research, Publication Number CEC-500-2007-002.  Ryals R, and W. L. Silver. 2013. Effects of organic matter amendments on net primary productivity  and greenhouse gas emissions in annual grasslands. Ecological Applications 23:46-59.  Shaw, M. R., L. Pendleton, D. R. Cameron, B. Morris, D. Bachelet, K. Klausmeyer, J. MacKenzie,  D. Conklin, G. Bratman, J. Lenihan, E. Haunreiter, C. Daly, and P. Roehrdanz. 2011. The impact of  climate change on California’s ecosystem services. Climatic Change 109:465-484.  Shonkoff, S. B., R. Morello-Frosch, M. Pastor, and J. Sadd. 2011. The climate gap: Environmental  health and equity implications of climate change and mitigation policies in California—a review of  the literature. Climatic Change 109:485-503.  Stoms, D., G. Franco, H. Raitt, S. Wilhelm, and S. Grant. 2013. Climate change and the California  energy sector. California Energy Commission, Publication Number CEC-100-2013-002.  Thorne, James H., J. Bjorkman, and N. Roth. 2012. Urban growth in California. Projecting growth  in California (2000-2050) under six alternative policy scenarios and assessing impacts to future  dispersal corridors, fire threats, and climate-sensitive agriculture. California Energy Commission,  Publication Number: CEC-500-2012-009.  Wei, M., J. H. Nelson, J. B. Greenblatt, A. Mileva, J. Johnston, M. Ting, C. Yang, C. Jones, J. E.  McMahon, and D. M. Kammen. 2013. Deep carbon reductions in California require electrification  and integration across economic sectors. Environmental Research Letters 8:014038.  Wilkinson, R., K. Clarke, J. Reichman, and J. Dozier. 2002. The potential consequences of climate  variability and change for California The California Regional Assessment. A Report of the  California Regional Assessment Group for the U.S. Global Change Research Program   Williams, J. H., A. DeBenedictis, R. Ghanadan, A. Mahone, J. Moore, W. R. Morrow III, S. Price,  and M. S. Torn. 2012. The technology path to deep greenhouse gas emissions cuts by 2050: The  pivotal role of electricity. Science 335:53-59.  Wilson, T., L. Williams, J. Smith, and R. Mendelsohn. 2003. Global climate change and California:  Potential implications for ecosystems, public health, and the economy. California Energy  Commission, Publication Number: 500-03-058CF.    54 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix A  Acknowledgements      The California Climate Change Research Plan was prepared by the Climate Action Team Research  Working Group under the leadership of the Energy Commission’s Chairman Robert Weisenmiller.  This document was made possible by the hard work of numerous contributors. Below is a list of  state agencies, organizations, and individuals that have provided input into the Research Plan.  Project Director  Guido Franco, California Energy Commission  Project Manager  David Stoms, California Energy Commission  Steering Committee for the Research Plan  •  Whitney Albright, Climate Change Associate, Department of Fish and Wildlife  •  Michael Anderson, State Climatologist, Department of Water Resources  •  Louise Bedsworth, Deputy Director, Governor’s Office of Planning and Research   •  Guido Franco, Team Lead for Environmental Research, California Energy Commission  •  Amrith Gunasekara, Science Advisor to the Secretary, Department of Food and Agriculture  •  Sumi Hoshiko, Research Scientist, Department of Public Health  •  Chris Keithley, Research Manager of the Fire and Resource Assessment  Program, Department of Forestry and Fire Protection  •  Ryan McCarthy, Science and Technology Policy Advisor,  Office of the Chair, Air Resources Board  •  Amber Pairis, Assistant Secretary for Climate Change, California Natural Resources Agency  •  Sarah Pittiglio, Air Pollution and Climate Change Research Coordinator, Air Resources Board  •  David Stoms, Research Lead: Terrestrial Resources and  Climate Change, California Energy Commission  •  La Nae Van Valen, Senior Transportation Planner, Department of Transportation  •  Mark Wenzel, Climate Change Adviser, California Environmental Protection Agency  •  Susan Wilhelm, Research Lead: Climate Change and Public  Health, California Energy Commission  APPENDIX A     55Climate Change Research Plan for California:  Appendix A  Contributing Authors by Agency and Department  Governor’s Office of   Planning and Research Louise Bedsworth  California Environmental  Protection Agency  Air Resources Board  Richard Bode Belinda Chen Glenn Gallagher Lei Guo Ying-Kuang Hsu Doug Ito Whitney Leeman Ryan McCarthy Sarah Pittiglio Courtney Smith Klaus Scott Webster Tasat Marc Vayssiers  California Department of Resources,   Recycling and Recovery (CalRecycle)  Brian Larimore Teri Wion  Office of Environmental   Health Hazard Assessment   Carmen Milanes  State Water Resources Control Board  Max Gomberg  California Natural   Resources Agency Amber Pairis  Department of Fish and Wildlife  Whitney Albright  California Department of Forestry   and Fire Protection (CalFIRE)  Chris Keithley Tiffany Meyer  Department of Water Resources  Jamie Anderson Michael Anderson John Andrew  Bryan Brock Qinqin Liu Jennifer Morales  California Energy Commission  Simone Brant Guido Franco Janna Franks Joe O’Hagan Linda Schrupp Michael Sokol Erik Stokes David Stoms Susan Wilhelm  Ocean Protection Council  Abe Doherty  San Francisco Bay Conservation   and Development Commission  Joel LaClair  State Coastal Conservancy  Mary Small  Department of Food   and Agriculture Carolyn Cook Amrith Gunasekara Maurice Pitesky Casey Walsh-Cady  Transportation Agency  California Department   of Transportation (Caltrans)  La Nae Van Valen  Health and Human   Services Agency  Department of Public Health  Kathy Dervin Sumi Hoshiko Neil Maizlish    56 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix A  Contributing Authors by Chapter •  Executive Summary - Susan Wilhelm, Guido Franco, and David Stoms  •  Chapter 1 (Steering Committee)  •  Chapter 2 (Supporting Regional Climate Change Science in California:   A Historical Perspective: Guido Franco, Amber Pairis, and Whitney Albright)  •  Chapter 3 (Climate Monitoring, Analysis, and Modeling: Guido Franco and Michael Anderson  •  Chapter 4 (Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions and  Safeguarding California from Climate Risks):  •  Greenhouse gas emissions – Whitney Leeman, Guido Franco,  Ying-Kuang Hsu, Marc Vayssiers, and Richard Bode  •  Agriculture – Lei Guo, Jennifer Morales, Maurice Pitesky,   Carolyn Cook, Casey Walsh-Cady, and Amrith Gunasekara  •  Biodiversity and habitat – Whitney Albright and Amber Pairis  •  Emergency management – Louise Bedsworth  •  Energy – Erik Stokes, Michael Sokol, Ryan McCarthy, and Guido Franco  •  Industry – Glenn Gallagher and Linda Schrupp  •  Natural and working lands – (Forests) Chris Keithley, Klaus Scott, Tiffany  Meyer; (Wetlands) Mary Small, Simone Brant, Sarah Pittiglio, Bryan Brock,  Joel LaClair, and Jennifer Morales; (Rangelands) Guido Franco  •  Ocean and coastal ecosystem and resources – Abe Doherty and Louise Bedsworth  •  Public health – Sumi Hoshiko, Kathy Dervin, and Neil Maizlish  •  Transportation, land use, fuels, and infrastructure – Ryan McCarthy, Belinda Chen,  Erik Stokes, Sarah Pittiglio, La Nae Van Valen, Courtney Smith, and Doug Ito  •  Waste management – Brian Larimore and Teri Wion  •  Water – Qinqin Liu, Max Gomberg, and Jennifer Morales  •  Chapter 5 (Crosscutting and Local/Regional Issues) listed alphabetically: Whitney Albright,  Jaime Anderson, Michael Anderson, John Andrew, Louise Bedsworth, Guido Franco, Janna  Franks, Amrith Gunasekara, Sumi Hoshiko, Chris Keithley, Sarah Pittiglio, Carmen Milanes,  Jennifer Morales, Joe O’Hagan, Courtney Smith, David Stoms, and Susan Wilhelm  •  Chapter 6 (Integration and Implementation): Guido Franco and Susan Wilhelm  Other Contributors  •  Rizaldo Aldas, California Energy Commission  •  Andrew Altevogt, CalEPA, currently with Central Valley Regional Water Quality Control Board  •  Julia Biggar, Caltrans  •  Ann Chan, CNRA  •  Ashley Conrad-Saydah, CalEPA  •  Paul English, CDPH  •  John Faust, OEHHA  •  Sekita Grant, California Energy Commission  •  Martha Harnley, CDPH  •  Bruce Kemp, Caltrans  •  Nicole Longoria, Caltrans    57Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix A  •  Ann Mahaney, Caltrans  •  Deepak Maskey, Caltrans  •  Joanne McDermott, Caltrans  •  Julie Norris, Office of Emergency Services  •  Seunggeun Paek, Caltrans  •  Mitchell Prevost, Caltrans  •  Max Richardson, CDPH  •  Patrick Tyner, Caltrans  •  Alliance of Regional Collaboratives for Climate Adaptation  Climate Action Team Research Working Group—Member Agencies  •  California Air Resources Board  •  California Environmental Protection Agency  •  California Coastal Commission  •  California Independent System Operator  •  California Natural Resources Agency  •  California Energy Commission (CAT Research Working Group Chair, Robert Weisenmiller)  •  California Public Utilities Commission  •  Department of Conservation  •  Department of Fish and Wildlife  •  Department of Food and Agriculture  •  Department of Forestry and Fire Protection  •  Department of Public Health  •  Department of State Parks  •  Department of Transportation  •  Department of Water Resources  •  Department of Resources, Recycling and Recovery  •  Governor’s Office of Emergency Services  •  Governor’s Office of Planning and Research  •  Labor and Workforce Development Agency  •  Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment   •  San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission  •  State Coastal Conservancy  •  State Water Resources Control Board    58 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix B  Climate Monitoring, Analysis,   and Modeling  This appendix provides more background detail on past and current research on climate  monitoring, analysis, and modeling, and main lessons learned to explain the rationale for  the research agenda in Chapter 3 of the Climate Change Research Plan. It also provides more  detail on the proposed agenda. The appendix is a separate document that will be posted at the  California Climate Change Portal when completed.  APPENDIX B   http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/   59Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix C  GHG Emissions Accounting  Methods and Research Needs  This appendix provides more background detail on California’s methods for emissions accounting  of GHGs, past and current research on inventory methods, and main lessons learned to explain  the rationale for the inventory research agenda in Chapter 4 of the Climate Change Research Plan.  It also provides more detail on the proposed agenda. The appendix is a separate document that  will be posted at the California Climate Change Portal when completed.  APPENDIX C  http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/   60 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix D  Reducing GHG Emissions   in California  This appendix provides more background detail on past and current research on strategies and  technological innovations to reduce GHG emissions by sector, and main lessons learned to  explain the rationale for the research agenda in Chapter 4 of the Climate Change Research Plan. It  also provides more detail on the proposed agenda. The appendix is a separate document that will  be posted at the California Climate Change Portal when completed.  APPENDIX D  http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/   61Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix E  Safeguarding California   from Climate Risks  This appendix provides more background detail on past and current research on the impacts of  climate change in California, the vulnerabilities by sector, and main lessons learned to explain  the rationale for the research agenda in Chapter 4 of the Climate Change Research Plan. It also  provides more detail on the proposed agenda. The appendix is a separate document that will be  posted at the California Climate Change Portal when completed.  APPENDIX E  http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/   62 Climate Change Research Plan for California: Appendix F  Crosscutting Issues      This appendix provides more background detail on crosscutting issues that were briefly  highlighted in Chapter 5 of the Climate Change Research Plan. The appendix is a separate  document that will be posted at the California Climate Change Portal when completed.  APPENDIX F  http://www.climatechange.ca.gov/   63Climate Change Research Plan for California: Chapter Title & Section  For more information, contact: California Environmental Protection Agency  1001 I Street  P.O. Box 2815  Sacramento, CA 95812  (916) 323-2514  www.calepa.ca.gov   