                                                                 What Climate Change Means for California   California’s climate is changing. Southern California  has warmed about three degrees (F) in the last century  and all of the state is becoming warmer. Heat waves  are becoming more common, snow is melting earlier in  spring—and in southern California, less rain is falling  as well. In the coming decades, the changing climate is  likely to further decrease the supply of water, increase  the risk of wildfires, and threaten coastal development  and ecosystems.   Our climate is changing because the earth is warming.  People have increased the amount of carbon dioxide  in the air by 40 percent since the late 1700s. Other  heat-trapping greenhouse gases are also increasing.  These gases have warmed the surface and lower  atmosphere of our planet about one degree during the  last 50 years. Evaporation increases as the atmosphere  warms, which increases humidity, average rainfall, and  the frequency of heavy rainstorms in many places—but  contributes to drought in others.  Greenhouse gases are also changing the world’s oceans  and ice cover. Carbon dioxide reacts with water to form  carbonic acid, so the oceans are becoming more acidic.  The surface of the ocean has warmed one degree during  the last 80 years. Warming is causing snow to melt  earlier in spring, and mountain glaciers are retreating.  Even the great ice sheets on Greenland and Antarctica  are shrinking. Thus the sea is rising at an increasing  rate.   August 2016  EPA 430-F-16-007    What Climate Change  Means for    California Snowpack As the climate warms, less precipitation falls as snow, and more snow melts during  the winter. That decreases snowpack—the amount of snow that accumulates  over the winter. Since the 1950s, the snowpack has declined in California and the  nearby states that drain into the Colorado River.  Diminishing snowpack can shorten the season for skiing and other forms of winter  tourism and recreation. The tree line may shift, as mountain hemlock and other  high-altitude trees become able to grow at higher elevations. A higher tree line  would decrease the extent of alpine tundra ecosystems, which could threaten some  species.   Water Availability The changing climate is likely to increase the need for water but reduce the supply.  Rising temperatures increase the rate at which water evaporates into the air from  soils and surface waters. Rising temperatures also increase the rate at which  plants transpire water into the air to keep cool, so irrigated farmland would need  more water. But less water is likely to be available, because precipitation is  unlikely to increase as much as evaporation. Soils are likely to be drier, and  periods without rain are likely to become longer, making droughts more severe.  Increasing temperatures and declining rainfall in nearby states have reduced the  flow of water in the Colorado River, a key source of irrigation water in southern   California.   This 2014 photo shows the dramatic effect of a multi-year drought on Lake Oroville.  Credit: Kelly Grow, California Department of Water Resources.  Temperature change (°F):  -1 1 2 3 3.50-0.5 0.5 1.5 2.5  Rising temperatures in the last century. Southern California has  warmed more than the rest of the state. Source: EPA, Climate  Change Indicators in the United States.    The decline in snowpack could further limit the supply of water for some  purposes. Mountain snowpacks are natural reservoirs. They collect the  snow that falls during winter and release water when the snow melts  during spring and summer. Over the past 50 years, snowpack has been  melting earlier in the year. Dams capture most meltwater and retain it for  use later in the year. But upstream of these reservoirs, less water is  available during droughts for ecosystems, fish, water-based recreation,  and landowners who draw water directly from a flowing river.   Sources: Esri, DeLorme, USGS, NPS, Sources: Esri, USGS, NOAA  Colorado River Basin  Snowpack, 1955–2015 Percent Change  <-8 0  -80  to   -60  -60  to   -40  -40  to   -20 -5 t  o 5  -5 t o -2  0 >80  60  to 8  0  40  to 6  0  20  to 4  0 5 to   20  Trends in April snowpack in California and the Colorado River Basin, 1955–2013.  Snowpack has decreased at most monitoring sites in California and the basin.  Source: EPA.  Agriculture   About 90 percent of crops harvested  in California are grown on farms that  are entirely irrigated, so a sustained  decrease in the amount of water  available for irrigation would force  farmers to either reduce the acreage  under cultivation or shift away from  the most water-intensive crops. But  even if sufficient water is available,  rising temperatures could transform  California’s agriculture. Fruit trees and  grape vines need a certain number of  “chilling hours” during which temperatures are between 32° and 50°F   in the winter before they can flower. Suitable areas for growing wine  grapes are likely to shift north, and the area capable of consistently  producing grapes for the highest-quality wines is likely to shrink by more   than 50 percent during the next 75 years. Chilling will be insufficient in  much of California for the types of fruit trees found in the state today. The  yields of most grain crops currently grown in the state are likely to decline  as well. Livestock may also be affected: higher temperatures cause cows  to eat less, grow more slowly, and produce less milk, and in extreme  cases, it may threaten their health.   Wildfires and Changing Landscapes Higher temperatures and drought are likely to increase the severity,  frequency, and extent of wildfires, which could harm property, livelihoods,  and human health. On average, 4 percent of the land in California has  burned per decade since 1984. In 2003, the Old, Grand Prix, and Padua  wildfires destroyed 800 homes in southern California, forced 100,000  residents to be evacuated, and cost $1.3 billion. Wildfire smoke can reduce  air quality and increase medical visits for chest pains, respiratory prob- lems, and heart problems.  The combination of more fires and drier conditions may expand deserts and  otherwise change parts of California’s landscape. Many plants and animals  living in arid lands are already near the limits of what they  can tolerate. A warmer and drier climate would generally expand the  geographic ranges of the Sonoran, Mojave, and Great Basin deserts. In  some cases, native vegetation may persist and delay or prevent expansion  of the desert. In other cases, fires or livestock grazing may accelerate the  conversion of grassland to desert in response to a changing climate. For  similar reasons, some forests may change to desert or grassland.  Human Health  Hot days can be unhealthy—even dangerous. Certain people are  especially vulnerable, including children, the elderly, the sick, and the  poor. High air temperatures can cause heat stroke and dehydration, and  affect people’s cardiovascular, respiratory, and nervous systems. Higher  temperatures are amplified in urban settings where paved and other  surfaces tend to store heat. Warming can also increase the formation of  ground-level ozone, a component of smog that can contribute to  respiratory problems. EPA and the California Air Resources Board have  been working to reduce ozone concentrations. As the climate changes,  continued progress toward clean air will be more difficult.  Sea Level Rise  Sea level is likely to rise between one and four feet in the next century.  Even a 16-inch rise could threaten coastal highways, bridges, and the  San Francisco and Oakland airports. A rise of three feet would increase  the number of Californians living in places that are flooded by a 100-year  storm from about 250,000 today to about 400,000. Along some ocean  shores, homes will fall into the water as beaches, bluffs, and cliffs erode;  but along shores where seawalls protect shorefront homes from erosion,  beaches may erode up to the seawall and then vanish. The sea could also  submerge wetlands in San Francisco Bay and other estuaries, which would  harm local fisheries and potentially remove key intertidal feeding habitat  for migratory birds.  Warming and drought threaten  economically vital California crops,  such as grapes. Credit: Caitlyn  Kennedy, NOAA Climate.gov.  The sources of information about climate and the impacts of climate change in this publication are: the national climate assessments by the U.S. Global Change Research  Program, synthesis and assessment products by the U.S. Climate Change Science Program, assessment reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, and EPA’s  Climate Change Indicators in the United States. Mention of a particular season, location, species, or any other aspect of an impact does not imply anything about the likelihood or  importance of aspects that are not mentioned. For more information about climate change science, impacts, responses, and what you can do, visit EPA’s Climate Change website  at www.epa.gov/climatechange.   http://www.epa.gov/climatechange    