                                           Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands - Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science   See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318654513  Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Chapter · June 2017  DOI: 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.455  CITATIONS  2 READS  381  3 authors:  Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:  Responsible life-science innovations for development in the digital age: EVOCA View project  EVOCA: Environmental Virtual Observatories for Connective Action View project  Art Dewulf  Wageningen University & Research  149 PUBLICATIONS   4,217 CITATIONS     SEE PROFILE  Daan Boezeman  PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency  33 PUBLICATIONS   270 CITATIONS     SEE PROFILE  Martinus J. Vink  PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency  31 PUBLICATIONS   348 CITATIONS     SEE PROFILE  All content following this page was uploaded by Art Dewulf on 25 September 2017.  The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318654513_Climate_Change_Communication_in_the_Netherlands?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_2&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318654513_Climate_Change_Communication_in_the_Netherlands?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_3&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/project/Responsible-life-science-innovations-for-development-in-the-digital-age-EVOCA-2?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/project/EVOCA-Environmental-Virtual-Observatories-for-Connective-Action?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_9&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_1&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Art_Dewulf?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Art_Dewulf?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/institution/Wageningen_University_Research?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Art_Dewulf?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Daan_Boezeman?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Daan_Boezeman?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/institution/PBL_Netherlands_Environmental_Assessment_Agency?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Daan_Boezeman?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Martinus_Vink?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_4&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Martinus_Vink?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_5&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/institution/PBL_Netherlands_Environmental_Assessment_Agency?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_6&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Martinus_Vink?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_7&_esc=publicationCoverPdf https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Art_Dewulf?enrichId=rgreq-19e81c9f6441f7bcb29c644a5dce7b50-XXX&enrichSource=Y292ZXJQYWdlOzMxODY1NDUxMztBUzo1NDI0NjcwNzAwOTk0NTZAMTUwNjM0NTYzNjQ3Ng%3D%3D&el=1_x_10&_esc=publicationCoverPdf   Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 1 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Summary and Keywords  Climate change communication in the Netherlands started in the 1950s, but it was not  until the late 1970s that the issue earned a place on the public agenda, as an aspect of  the energy problem, and in the shadow of controversy about nuclear energy. Driven  largely by scientific reports and political initiatives, the first climate change wave can be  observed in the period from 1987 to 1989, as part of a broader environmental  consciousness wave. The Netherlands took an active role in international climate change  initiatives at the time but struggled to achieve domestic emission reductions throughout  the 1990s. The political turmoil in the early 2000s dominated Dutch public debate, until  An Inconvenient Truth triggered the second climate change wave in 2006–2007,  generating peak media attention and broad societal activity. The combination of COP15  and Climategate in late 2009 marked a turning point in Dutch climate change  communication, with online communication and climate-sceptic voices gaining much  more prominence. Climate change mitigation was pushed down on the societal and  political agenda in the 2010s. Climate change adaptation had received much attention  during the second climate change wave and had been firmly institutionalized with respect  to flood defense and other water management issues. By 2015 a landmark climate change  court case and the Paris Agreement at COP21 were fueling climate change  communication once again.  Keywords: climate change, communication, the Netherlands, media, framing, public agenda, science-policy  interface, social media  Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Art Dewulf, Daan Boezeman, and Martinus Vink Subject:  Climate Change Communication Online Publication Date:  Jun 2017 DOI:  10.1093/acrefore/9780190228620.013.455     Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Climate Science    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 2 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Introduction Communication is what turns a scientifically complex and epistemologically distant issue  such as climate change into an issue of public concern (Driessen et al., 2010). Myriad  communication efforts over multiple decades have made climate change into what it has  become in the early 21st century: an issue of prime importance for the future of  humanity, inspiring global coordination, national policies. and local initiatives. However,  this issue is now heavily debated politically and subject to considerable skepticism. In our  attempt to reconstruct the legacy of climate change communication in the Netherlands,  the purpose is not to take a stance on how climate change should be communicated or  who should engage in climate change communication. Instead, this article aims to chart  and understand the different forms and shapes that climate change communication in the  Netherlands has taken since the topic first appeared in the Dutch media in 1957, in the  context of International Geophysical Year.  Studying climate change communication in a country such as the Netherlands requires  awareness of a number of contrasts. Jointly defending low-lying land against flooding is  part of the Dutch national history and identity. The artificially constructed and intricately  managed water system of polders, dykes, and canals is vulnerable to climate change  impacts such as sea-level rise and extreme weather conditions, but at the same time  there is a strong conviction that the national water infrastructure and expertise is up to  almost any challenge (Kabat et al., 2005). The centuries-long tradition of strong mutual  dependence and consensual deliberation in the maintenance and protection of polder  systems against flooding has given its name to the “polder model” as a form of interactive  governance (Vink et al., 2015; Torfing et al., 2012). The Dutch also pride themselves as  global leaders and agenda setters in the international climate change arena, while at the  same time strong economic interests have made it difficult to achieve significant  reductions in greenhouse gas emissions domestically (Pettenger, 2007; Liefferink et al.,  2017). This seems to resonate with a recurrent tension throughout Dutch history between  the identity of a nation of “preachers,” with strong moral leadership at home and abroad,  and the identity of a nation of “merchants” trading with anyone regardless of their  political or religious conviction (Kickert, 2003).  Scientific studies focusing on climate change communication in the Netherlands are less  abundant than one would expect for a country that has historically been active in  domestic and international climate change discussions. While climate change  communication in the Netherlands is often touched upon in studies on Dutch  environmental policy, in studies of the science-policy interface or in international  comparative research, in-depth studies of the Dutch case are scarce and the overall  picture is quite fragmented. Because both modes of communication and our  understanding of climate change have developed considerably since the 1950s, historical  context is crucial for understanding climate change communication; however, a     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 3 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  systematic historical overview is lacking in current literature. The aim of this article is to  review and collate the extant research that typically addresses a particular aspect of  climate change communication at a particular juncture in Dutch history.  This analysis is guided by three theoretically grounded cross-cutting themes, which  together provide a comprehensive picture of climate change communication in the  Netherlands: (1) the framing of the issue and its priority on the public agenda; (2) the  relations between science, policy and society; and (3) the rise of the network society and  on-line communication.  Firstly, through climate change communication the issue is positioned on the public and  political agenda and also framed in particular ways. Theories of agenda setting address  the competition for public attention between climate change and a broad range of other  policy issues and how this affects policy priorities (Jones & Baumgartner, 2004; Kingdon,  1995; Pralle, 2009). The cycles of attention for an issue need to be considered, but also  important is how an issue is framed through processes of strategic communication  (Nisbet & Huge, 2007). Different framings aim to establish different meanings of the  climate change issue, through employing different language and selectively emphasizing  certain aspects of the issue at the expense of others (Entman, 1993; Nisbet & Mooney,  2007), affecting decision preferences and public engagement (Nisbet, 2009).  Secondly, because of the strongly science-driven nature of the climate change issue,  particular attention is paid to communication processes in the science-policy-society  triangle. Here, the analysis relies on concepts such as co-production of political order and  scientific knowledge (Jasanoff, 2004), politicization of science (Gauchat, 2012), and post- normal science (Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1993). The analysis deliberately goes beyond the  limited focus on communication at the science-policy interface by paying attention to  emerging communication practices in which citizens directly engage with scientists.  Thirdly, the rise of the network society (Castells, 2007) is a particularly relevant context for  climate change communication. In the 21st century, the development of horizontal,  interactive, and global online networks of communication have enabled large parts of the  population to become active communicators in a new virtual public space. Starting with  the blogosphere and developing into an ecosystem of different platforms, social media  play important roles in climate change communication—roles different from those of  mass media (Schäfer, 2012).  The combination of a broad historical overview and more focused discussion on these  three cross-cutting themes aims to provide both historical context and analytical depth to  our analysis of climate change communication in the Netherlands. In putting this  together, choices had to be made. Most existing studies only cover a particular aspect of  climate change communication for a particular historical episode, so the evidence for  each of the phases had to be pieced together from a variety of sources. The analysis is  mainly based on a review of peer-reviewed journal articles and book chapters, which  were obtained through literature search and consultation of colleagues. To make the     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 4 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  analysis more complete, other sources were consulted, including a number of research  reports produced at Dutch the science-policy interface. Additional media data has been  extracted from Lexis-Nexis Academic to reconstruct media attention and framing over  time (see Figures 1 and 2).  Both mitigation and adaptation have been included in the analysis. While the story is  about mitigation of climate change through reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the  first phases in the historical overview, adaptation to climate change impacts becomes a  dominant theme in the later phases.  Working from a broad concept of climate change communication (Nerlich et al., 2010;  Nisbet, 2009; Schäfer, 2012), our focus is on climate change communication in the public  sphere on a variety of media platforms—focusing on communication by a variety of  people, including scientists, politicians, administrators, journalists, businessmen,  activists, and regular citizens. Climate change has been a topic of discussion frequently  and at length in the Netherlands. Deliberate climate change communication efforts have  been undertaken by both public and private actors, but large-scale publicly or privately  driven communication campaigns on climate change are virtually absent. As it turns out,  a substantial share of climate change communication in the Netherlands is linked to both  national and international efforts to develop climate change policies, which is reflected in  this analysis.  Historical Overview of Climate Change  Communication in the Netherlands After the discussion of relevant antecedents in the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s, we  structured our historical overview of the period between 1978 and 2016 in six  consecutive phases. Although the delineation of historical phases is always somewhat  arbitrary, the start of each new phase marks a significant change in climate change  communication in the Netherlands. The delineation of the phases was informed by those  studies taking a long-term perspective (e.g., Duyvendak, 2011; Liefferink et al., 2017;  Pettenger, 2007; Van der Sluijs et al., 2010). For each historical phase, the amount and  nature of attention for climate change in media sources is discussed, in relation to  developments in climate change science, national policy and politics, and international  developments at the EU and UN level.  Antecedents  Before the 1970s climate change was not an issue in the Netherlands, yet climate change  did occasionally surface in scientific and political discussions. Although scientific interest  in carbon cycles was not big in the Netherlands (Dinkelman, 1995), G. S. Callender’s     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 5 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  publications on the temperature-CO  relationship did receive attention in (popular)  scientific media and caused some controversy. In the context of the 1957 International  Geophysical Year, scientists of the Dutch Royal Meteorological Organisation (KNMI)  addressed the issue in various lectures, as well as during a talk on national radio. The  KNMI installed a CO  measuring station in 1957, following international agreements.  During this period, the issue gets framed in various different terms (Duyvendak, 2011, p.  18): ranging from climate improvement, to climate variability and a “dangerous carbonic  acid blanket.” The question whether coal and oil (a large reserve of natural gas would be  discovered in the northern part of the Netherlands in 1959) would lead to temperature  changes was still open. Press coverage of the climate issue would almost be as much  about the possibility of global cooling than of global warming until the early 1970s (Van  Eijndhoven et al., 2001).  The issue of climate change was first raised in the Dutch political arena in 1970, when  two members of parliament with a scientific background wanted to know “what is known  about the greenhouse effect? Is it really alarming?. . . Do scientists agree?” (Boersema,  quoted in Van der Sluijs et al., 2010, p. 16). Although these questions were raised, answers  were not vigorously pursued within the political arena. Climate change received  permanent yet passive attention mostly in scientific circles, more as a phenomenon than  as a problem up until the 1980s. Climate change research was still rather  underdeveloped in the Netherlands at the time (Dinkelman, 1995).  Important for understanding the initial debates on climate change are two issues. First,  the 1972 Limits to Growth report by the Club of Rome became a bestseller in the  Netherlands. Remarkably, and following in line with the report, local thermal pollution  was given as much prominence as the greenhouse effect in Dutch policy documents.  Second, the 1973 oil crisis hit the Netherlands. Both events are influential in reframing  the energy issue away from the self-evident and cheap supply of fossil fuels, as was  evident in a governmental television campaign to promote dealing sensibly with energy in  1974. The emergence of the Dutch debate on climate change should be understood  against the background of the oil crisis, the subsequent energy diversification strategy,  and the fierce societal resistance against nuclear energy. Environmental NGOs  campaigned actively against nuclear energy but were reluctant to engage with the  climate change issue because it was hard to reduce the issue to human proportions, and  climate change also risked enlistment in pro-nuclear arguments.  It is amidst this political and societal controversy that the climate change issue was first  raised publicly. Environmental policy lifted off in the early 1970s, yet remained mainly a  matter of keeping the environment clean (Milieuhygiëne, literally “environmental  hygiene”) at that time (Boezeman et al., 2010; Keijzers, 2000). The first environmental  memorandum in 1972 (Urgentienota milieuhygiëne) followed the Club of Rome’s analysis,  referring to the “anti-ecological nature of cultural patterns,” yet was optimistic about  solving the environmental problems in 5 to 10 years. Climate change was not addressed  with policy measures.  2  2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 6 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  A New Issue Rising on the Environmental Agenda (1978–1986)  The late 1970s and first half of the 1980s can be characterized by two streams. First,  scientific interest in climate change was growing, but Dutch scientists would not become  actively involved in international climate debates until the mid-1980s (Van Eijndhoven et  al., 2001, p. 123). Second, political communication would center around carbon dioxide, yet  mostly in the sideline of discussions on the energy problem. From the mid-1980s framing  would shift to the more encompassing “greenhouse effect,” gaining status as an issue in  its own right.  From 1978 onward, various advisory councils started signaling the significance of climate  change for the Netherlands. The anthropogenic greenhouse effect had become an issue of  science policy in 1979, when the memorandum on the annual science budget stated that  the underdeveloped climate research should be stimulated. A few years later, resources  from the National Research Program on Coal were invested into research into carbon  dioxide. While signaled by a report of the Scientific Council for Government Policy in  1977, the 1981 Vossers Committee for Meteorological and Oceanographic Research in  the Netherlands was a particularly important first step toward advancing the cause of  climate change on the Dutch scientific agenda. The 1983 and 1986 authoritative reports  by the Health Council, the most important advisory organ for environmental issues at the  time, were important for translating scientific discourse into societally relevant terms.  The two-part first report dealt with the carbon cycle and with the societal consequences.  The second report elaborated on other GHGs and concluded sea level would rise up to 77  cm and water management would be domestic adaptation issues related to climate  change. Although the Health Council stressed the seriousness of the problem, the council  emphasized uncertainties and was pessimistic about the possibilities of “prevention” on  political and economic grounds (Dinkelman, 1995). The international Villach conference of  1985 proved an important turning point in the Dutch scientific community becoming  active in international research (Van Eijndhoven et al., 2001). Although research into the  global climate system itself was relatively insignificant in the Netherlands, Dutch  scientists (notably Pier Vellinga) were internationally well established on the impacts and  adaptation side. During the Villach conference the Netherlands would offer to organize a  European conference on climate impacts in Noordwijkerhout and a related Western  European Ministerial conference in Noordwijk in 1987.  Societal and political debates were still dominated by nuclear energy in the Netherlands  at that time. The political intentions of the Biesheuvel and following Den Uyl  administrations to generate half of Dutch electric energy use by nuclear power in 2000 on  the one hand and the large societal resistance by the growing antinuclear movement on  the other hand led to a political-administrative deadlock at the end of the 1970s. In 1978  the minister of economic affairs announces plans for a broad national debate on (nuclear)  energy (Brede Maatschappelijke Discussie). Dinkelman (1995, pp. 167–168) argues that  carbon dioxide had only an indirect role in the broad national debate, concluding that  although attention for anthropogenic greenhouse effect was growing, it did not affect the     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 7 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  energy policy agenda at that time. Environmental NGOs were reluctant to pick up climate  change, framing it as an CO -energy issue with effects for agriculture in 1980s (Pleune,  1997). The liberal-conservative political party VVD, a proponent of nuclear energy, raised  CO  at various occasions and filed a joint political motion with the progressive PPR (a  predecessor of the Greens) to invite the cabinet to take a stance on CO  in 1979.  Nevertheless, coal policy was not influenced by CO  but rather by issues related to  sulphur, dust and waste (Dinkelman, 1995, p. 167). Following the aforementioned Health  Council reports the Dutch started following a “three-track policy”: to promote  international awareness raising, to conduct scientific research, and to take policy  measures (both adaptive and preventive). The two former tracks were far more important  than the latter. In 1986, when chairmen of various political parties asked questions on  climate change during the debate on the environmental budget, environmental minister  Nijpels promised a policy memo on the “CO  issue.”  The First Climate Change Wave and the Difficulties of Policy (1987– 1993)  The public attention for climate change peaked for the first time in the period from 1987  and 1989, an episode that was coined the “first climate change wave” (Duyvendak, 2011, p.  33), although it was part of a larger environmental consciousness wave (Pettenger, 2007).  The Netherlands’ reputation as an ambitious player and international advocate for  climate policy can be traced to this period (Liefferink et al., 2017). In 1987, the minister of  environment (Nijpels) presented the promised policy document on “climate change by  carbon dioxide and other trace gasses” (Klimaatverandering door CO  en andere  sporegassen) framing the problematic nature of the greenhouse effect in terms that  would be dominant for the periods to come. The issue was complicated because of its  global character, (expectedly inherent) large uncertainties, long-term character, and  interwovenness with large scale societal developments that are difficult to steer  (Dinkelman, 1995, p. 185). Nevertheless, because climate change was said to be  internationally still in a “signaling phase,” the “three-track policy” was continued,  claiming it was too early for domestic preventive policies.  The Netherlands took an active international role in two domains. On the one hand, Dutch  environmental minister Nijpels actively opted to politicize the climate issue (Van  Eijndhoven et al., 2001; Duyvendak, 2011), trying to reorient the 1988 Toronto International  Conference on the Changing Atmosphere in a more political direction. The minister  attended the conference and supported the closing statement of developing a climate  agreement and cut CO  emissions by 2005 with 20%. Also, he announced that the  Netherlands would take the initiative to organize an international ministerial conference  in Noordwijk in 1989. Internationally, the greenhouse effect was also on the agenda of the  G7 meeting a few days later in Toronto, and NASA’s Jim Hansen had given testimony in  Congress on the 1988 droughts being first signals of climate change. On the other hand,  knowledge supply also influenced the pioneering role of the Netherlands, with Dutch   2  2  2  2  2  2  2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 8 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  scientists playing prominent roles in Integrated Assessment Modelling first for acid rain  and later on the greenhouse effect (Van der Sluijs, 2002): the IMAGE model, developed in  the second half of the 1980s at the Netherlands National Institute of Public Health and  Environmental Protection, not only influenced domestic policy but was also foundational  for the IPCC emission scenarios. Dutch scientists would become more active  internationally, with Pier Vellinga becoming vice chair of the IPCC Working Group  “response strategies.” The role of knowledge supply is also illustrated by the fact that,  domestically, a few days after the Toronto conference, the Central Council for  Environmental Protection (Centrale Raad voor de Milieuhygiëne) presented a report on  anthropogenic emissions and the need for preventive action, even before international  agreements (Dinkelman, 1995). Various research institutes became more actively involved,  supported by policies in the “second track”: the National Research Programme on Global  Air Pollution and Climate Change was initiated in 1989, effectively making fragmented  research to become more coherent (Van de Kerkhof & Leroy, 2000). In addition, the  environmental ministry funded environmental organizations for developing European  policy goals for climate change, following a resolution in the European Parliament in  1986 (Dinkelman, 1995, p. 187). This should be understood in view of the environmental  ministry’s strategy to strengthen its support base in the battle against other ministries  (Duyvendak, 2011), and the professionalization of the environmental movement in what  became a broad discourse coalition of science, government, industry, and the  environmental movement around reformist principles of ecological modernization in the  Netherlands (Van der Heijden, 2000, p. 86). It would lead environmental NGOs to finally  embrace the issue (Pleune, 1997).  Meanwhile, attention for environmental issues peaked in the Netherlands (Boezeman et  al., 2010). Several international and national environmental accidents, the influential  Brundtland report, the alarming domestic scientific report Concern for Tomorrow (Zorgen  voor Morgen) published in 1988 by the National Institute for Public Health and the  Environment (Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid en Milieu) claiming Dutch CO emissions would have to be cut with 80%, and a Queen’s Christmas speech in which she  claimed “slowly the earth is dying,” led to an enormous societal momentum. The report  Concern for Tomorrow was particularly important for reframing the scale and scope of  “modernized environmental policies” (Keijzers, 2000, p. 186) from local and regional  pollution and health issues to the functioning of ecosystems at a global scale. The  Brundtland report advanced thinking in terms of the “precautionary principle” in the  environmental and climate debate (Van der Sluijs et al., 2010, p. 18). In this national mood,  the first National Environmental Policy Plan: To Choose or To Lose was presented by the  cabinet, in which climate change was the first of the central issues. Importantly, this plan  was internationally the first to introduce a goal for the stabilization of carbon dioxide  emissions: around 183 Mton in 2000. The plan’s rhetoric was ambitious but policy was  not. Before the report was presented, the administration had to resign over its plan to  abolish a commuters tax cut when the liberal-conservative party VVD withdrew support  for its own ministers. It fueled “the greenest election campaign the world has ever seen”   2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 9 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  in 1989 (Economist, quoted in Pettenger, 2007, p. 58) and the follow up National  Environmental Policy Plan in 1990 formulated a more ambitious carbon goal. The 1991  Memorandum on Climate Change would make an all-gasses approach the basis for policy.  The Dutch environmental policy community played an active role in setting the agenda in  the runup to the Rio conference in 1992 and tinkered with new policy concepts to realize  the formulated goals (Liefferink et al., 2017). With other member states it pushed for an  EU-wide CO  tax, investigated emission trading, explored what would later be called  “Carbon Capture and Storage” and was active in the discussion on (and later  participation in) doing emission reductions abroad via the Clean Development Mechanism  and Joint Implementation. In 1991 a national greenhouse communication campaign saw  daylight stating, “We can no longer deny that there is a greenhouse effect.” A nationwide  energy-efficient light bulb campaign aimed at the installation of 3.5 bulbs per household,  supported by subsidies, quality standards, consumer advice centers, and a deposit-return  system (Wynne, 1993). In 1992 municipalities found “Klimaatverbond,” a daughter of the  international Climate Alliance, to promote local climate action.  At the same time, skeptical sounds started penetrating both the Lower House (far right)  and the Senate (social democrats) in the early 1990s (Van der Sluijs et al., 2010, p. 20). The  environmental minister responded that scientific uncertainties were an argument to  engage in action, following the precautionary principle. However, action would prove  tough in the episodes to come.  International Breakthroughs and Domestic Policy Struggles (1994– 2001)  In 1994 the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change entered into force  after enough countries had ratified it. This started a cycle of yearly Conference of the  Parties meetings (COPs) as an international arena for negotiation and decision making on  climate change targets and measures (Van der Sluijs et al., 2010). The COPs are also  occasions for periodically putting climate change back on the national public agenda and  functioned as triggers for increasing communication on climate change. In the runup to  the 1997 Kyoto Treaty, the Netherlands held the EU Council Presidency. The Dutch  environmental minister played a key role in forging a common EU opening offer for  Kyoto: a reduction of emissions by 15% in 2008–2012 (relative to 1990), a “triptych”  approach for burden sharing, and the conditionality upon the commitment of other  industrialized countries to comparable reductions (Liefferink et al., 2017). While the final  Kyoto agreement included only an 8% emission reductions for the EU, this was  considered far too radical by some of the other ministers in the cabinet (Duyvendak, 2011).  Notwithstanding the environmental policy ambitions of the late 1980s and early 1990s  and the active role played internationally, domestic implementation would prove far more  difficult for at least two reasons. First, climate policy became part of an effort to move  responsibilities from government to private actors. Earlier than in the rest of the EU,   2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 10 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  market mechanisms and voluntary agreements became important. The 1997 Environment  and Economy Memorandum proposed benchmarking covenants for energy efficiency, in  return for the abandonment of plans for a GHG emissions tax. Waves of liberalization  limited the competencies of government for direct intervention Second, negotiations had  to be done with the economically important and energy-intensive industry and transport  sectors in the Netherlands. Within government, the environmental, economic and  transport ministries had conflicting goals. Economic Affairs started cutting subsidies for  energy savings and sustainable energy, while the Transport and Water Ministry invested  in energy-intensive transport infrastructure. This led to ongoing struggles; and with a  cabinet primarily focused on creating employment, climate change action was not being  prioritized.  The period 1995–1997 marked a change in Dutch political communication on climate  change. First, following critical questions in parliament, a Temporary Committee Climate  Change was founded in parliament to get more insight into scientific knowledge. The  committee concludes that according to science, high levels of CO  lead to dangerous  climate change, and the committee advises internationally coordinated reduction efforts  (Van der Sluijs et al., 2010). Second, the Kyoto Protocol with its emission rights and  reduction targets closed the domestic policy debate on targets. These two events shifted  the political debate to one about how to reach the targets. The participatory “national  dialogue” (1999–2001) of the Dutch scientific project “Climate OptiOns for the Long  Term” (COOL) is a prime example thereof (Van de Kerkhof, 2004), in which policymakers,  business, NGOs, and scientists assessed long-term climate policy to achieve the “given”  goals. At the same time, the covenants with industry and measures in the building sector  enhanced energy efficiency but did not reduce absolute emissions. Hardly any policy  measures were in place for transport, and renewable energy production showed slow  growth rates (Liefferink et al., 2017). Reducing emissions abroad, an option included in the  Kyoto Protocol through Joint Implementation and Clean Development Mechanism  projects, became the preferred strategy. The 6th COP in The Hague in 2000 led to  increased media attention, but the United States withdrawal and rejection of the Kyoto  Protocol was received as a major setback for the Dutch climate change strategy  (Pettenger, 2007).  The ambitious Fourth National Environmental Policy Plan (2001) took a global  perspective on environment and development issues and introduced the idea of  “transitions” (i.e., toward a more sustainable energy system). Although this was a  potentially powerful idea, it was criticized for “its strong technological bias, its continued  (and therefore contradictory) dependence on the fossil fuel industry, and the prevalence  of the short-term efficiency goals of the energy liberalization agenda over long term  sustainability objectives” (Liefferink et al., 2017; see also Kern & Howlett, 2009). According  to Pettenger (2007), the Fourth NEPP emerged at a difficult time in Dutch politics, when  GHG were rising rather than declining, the government was investing in airport   2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 11 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  expansion, and issues of unemployment and economic recession were dominating the  agenda.  In parallel with (yet largely disconnected from) mitigation debates, attention for  adaptation to climate change was rising in the water sector, particularly in relation to  flood safety. In the 1990s several climate impact studies were done (e.g., for major rivers  such as the Rhine) (see Kwadijk & Rotmans, 1995; Middelkoop et al., 2001) and the Meuse  (see Wesselink et al., 2009). At the same time, several (near) flooding events of rivers in  1993 and 1995 exposed the relative negligence of river dikes (Tol & Langen, 2000) and  fueled discontent with the disconnect between water management and spatial planning in  the Netherlands. It informed the ongoing “spatialization” in water management (De Vries  & Wolsink, 2009) as well as the rise of a “water accommodation” storyline (Van den Berg,  2013), which were linked to the developing Room for the River policy in which future  climate change was accounted for (Vink et al., 2013).  The Committee Water Policy 21st Century (WB21) was installed in 1999, for which the  KNMI together with hydrological institutes developed the first climate scenarios of sea  level rise, river discharge, precipitation and soil subsidence: the WB21 scenarios.  A Change in the Political Climate (2002–2006)  The year 2002 shows a sharp turning point in the framing and agenda setting of climate  change in the Dutch public debate. Important factors were competing issues such as the  9/11 terrorist attacks, which pushed security high on political agendas worldwide, and  the turbulent domestic elections of 2002 in which the new populist political party lead by  Pim Fortuyn took the lead. In Fortuyn’s campaign, he made a distinction between what  the “established elites” in power had done over the last eight years and the will of the  ordinary people, particularly with respect to immigration issues. Fortuyn invoked a clash  between the views and issues of the establishment (left and right) and the views and  issues of the people (Van Holsteyn & Irwin, 2003; Mudde, 2004). Environmental issues were  framed within this strong societal polarization, with climate change portrayed as an elitist  concern of the establishment.  The national shock provoked by the assassination of Fortuyn in 2002 amplified the  polarization and his party LPF won the elections. Most established political parties were  influenced by this “populist Zeitgeist” (Mudde, 2004) and adopted some of its rhetoric to  win back legitimacy. Two consecutive right-wing cabinets cut back green ambitions and  budgets, of which the replacement of an environmental minister by a state secretary was  symptomatic (Boezeman et al., 2010). As other issues took over the political agenda, the  state secretary felt part of a cabinet that did not have the time nor the interest for  environmental issues. Environmental organizations followed this trend and showed a  much less politicized attitude in the first decade of the 21st century (Duyvendak, 2011, p.  67).    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 12 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Critical sounds toward climate science surfaced in the public debate. Some Dutch  geophysical scholars wrote opinion articles in newspapers more regularly, placing CO issues in geological perspective. Using longer timeframes, they questioned the influence  of human action. Other geophysical scholars called climate science “pseudoscience,”  which they claimed to be informed by Calvinistic feelings of guilt rather than facts  (Duyvendak, 2011, p. 111). The low priority of climate change on the political agenda, in  combination with skeptical voices on climate change science made policymakers  emphasize the importance of finding win-win solutions between the economy and the  environment in climate policy. At the European level the Dutch pushed the “clean, clever,  competitive” storyline of eco-efficiency during their 2004 EU presidency (Boezeman et  al., 2010). In preparation for a follow-up to the Kyoto Protocol, parliament commissions a  report to inform itself about the scientific state of the art in 2004. The report dealt with  climate-sceptic questioning of climate science but was not shared by the researchers (Van  der Sluijs et al., 2010, p. 26).  In the meantime, within water management the climate issue was getting mainstreamed  as a flood protection issue using the water accommodation storyline. Following the  Committee Water Policy 21st Century’s recommendations, efforts were made to integrate  water and spatial planning and to enhance policy coordination to keep the entire Dutch  water system in “good order” (National Administrative Agreement Water). Local  governments had to carry out a “municipal water task,” obliging them to adjust water  systems to cope with climatic changes (Van den Berg, 2013). Water boards had to deal with  secondary flood barriers (Boezeman, Vink, Leroy, & Halffman, 2014) and the 2006 planning  decision “Space for the River” anticipated on a discharge of 18.000 m3/s in 2100 (Verkerk  & Van Buuren, 2013). Also, public communication on living with water in a different  climate was strengthened by initiating the Netherlands Lives with Water (Nederland  Leeft met Water) campaign in 2003 (restarted in 2008). Concerning climate change  adaptation, the issue was broadened. The large national research program Climate  Changes Spatial Planning was founded in 2004, advancing both the idea that climate  change would determine planning decisions in the future as well as a “climate proofing”  storyline (Kabat et al., 2005). A 2005 motion in the Senate urging Dutch government to  incorporate climate change in long-term public investments decisions was unanimously  accepted. This was also the year that Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, a disaster that  received extensive news coverage in the Netherlands.  The Second Climate Change Wave: Rise and Fall of Climate Change  as a Major Issue on the Public Agenda (2006–2011)  The movie An Inconvenient Truth by Al Gore released in the fall of 2006 became an  unexpected success in the Netherlands and triggered the second climate change wave.  Initially none of the major film distributors showed interest in the movie, but an inspired  communication professional managed to bring the book, the movie, and eventually Al  Gore to the Netherlands (Duyvendak, 2011). The public turned up in large numbers,   2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 13 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  facilitated by free screenings by municipalities, foundations, and businesses. Politicians  were inspired by the movie, including prime ministers Balkenende (Netherlands) and  Blair (UK), who issued a joint appeal for climate change action to their EU colleagues. A  group of eighty Dutch businessmen, including leaders from Shell, Unilever, and Royal  Dutch Airlines (KLM), wrote a public letter to politicians asking for environmental  protection in the Netherlands and worldwide (Duyvendak, 2011). Climate change was  increasingly seen as a potential business concern and opportunity. New environmental  organizations are founded, such as Urgenda in 2007, who played an important role in  translating scientific insights into practical actions. Urgenda also proclaimed  Sustainability Day and demanded less government regulation and more opportunities for  new initiatives led by societal actors. In 2007 the “HIER Nederland Klimaatneutraal”  campaign started, aimed at convincing one million Dutch people to become climate  neutral, as well as the Green4sure campaign, a coalition of the environmental and labor  movement lobbying for a climate law (Van der Heijden, 2009).  Environmental issues had played little to no role in the 2005 elections for the Dutch  parliament, and a report by the Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL) at  the end of the same year on the “Effects of Climate Change for the Netherlands” did not  catch the public’s attention. A year or so later, the presentation of the “State of the  Climate” report by the newly established Platform for Climate Change Communication  (PCCC) was covered broadly in the media. Although environmental issues had been out of  the public eye for a while, climate change soon became a hot topic. The first climate  change wave primarily impacted policy and political agendas as part of a broader  environmental consciousness wave, but this second wave had a much broader societal  reach that specifically focused on climate change.  A number of significant  events fueled  unprecedented levels of  climate change  communication in 2006  and 2007 (see Figure 1). In  2006 the combination of  An Inconvenient Truth and  the release of the Stern  Review turned climate  change into a relevant,  serious, but manageable  issue for the Netherlands.  In 2007 the PCCC’s State  of the Climate report, the  IPCC’s Fourth Assessment  Report, and the awarding   of the Nobel Peace Prize to Al Gore and the IPCC were significant events driving climate   Click to view larger  Figure 1.  Number of news articles published in the  Dutch quality newspaper NRC Handelsblad  containing any of the search terms  klimaatverandering (climate change),  klimaatsverandering (climate change), broeikaseffect (greenhouse effect), opwarming van de aarde (global  warming), or klimaatbeleid (climate policy), between  1990 and 2015.  (Source: compiled by the authors based on the Lexis- Nexis Academic database).    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 14 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  change communication. Hot summers and mild winters (in 2006 record breaking  temperatures were observed for the Netherlands) and increasing oil prices might have  made people more susceptible to recognizing climate change as an important issue. In  2007 the new Christian Democratic/Social Democratic cabinet included a minister of  environment again. Minister Cramer’s ambitious climate program aimed at 30%  reduction in GHG emissions by 2020 (base year: 1990), a 20% share of renewable energy  by the same year, and an annual energy saving rate of 2% (Liefferink et al., 2017). In 2008  the EU launched the 20-20-20 Renewable Energy Directive, setting targets for emission  reductions (20%), reduced energy consumption (20%), and increased renewable energy  (20%) by 2020.  In 2008 and beginning of 2009, media attention for climate faded, only to increase  sharply in the runup to COP15 in Copenhagen (see Figure 1 and Van der Sluijs, et al.,  2010).  With respect to the climate change adaptation issue, the fact that Hurricane Katrina had  hit the low-lying delta area of New Orleans in August 2005, causing severe floods and  hundreds of casualties, became an important public image. The similarities of the lowland  delta area with the Dutch delta, and its history of severe floods in view of potential sea  level rise, fueled debate on the Dutch flood safety in view of climate change. Newspaper  articles were reporting about how Dutch engineering companies were hired for large  sums of money to advise the Americans on how to increase flood safety, highlighting the  potential business opportunity of climate change. In 2007 the image of Hurricane Katrina  played a role in the commissioning of the Second Dutch Delta Committee to advise the  government on flood safety in view of climate change (Boezeman et al., 2013). In the wake  of the growing attention for the climate issue, this political advisory committee put  adaptation to climate change firmly on the political agenda as a water management issue  of national importance. Of the many newspaper articles that covered the committee’s  recommendations, only a few were critical of the drastic measures proposed by the  committee, including raising the protection levels of all dike areas with a factor of 10 and  raising the level of the Lake IJssel up to 1.5 meters (Verduijn et al., 2012; Vink et al., 2013).  In this episode, cautiously new issues such as urban warming were added to the water- centric adaptation framing (Boezeman, 2016).  The public debate about climate change took a largely unexpected turn in the fall of 2009  and continued into 2010, marked by increasing polarization between “alarming” and  “skeptical” views. The controversy that sprung from the release of e-mail correspondence  between climate scientists at the University of East Anglia (now known as “Climategate”)  in the run up to COP15, and the subsequent identification of a number of errors in the  IPCC Fourth Assessment Report—including one regarding the percentage of Dutch  territory lying below sea level—contributed to this (Edwards et al., 2011; Dewulf et al., 2013;  Hajer, 2012). Climate skepticism had been developing for quite a while, particularly in the  blogosphere, but it was now picked up by mainstream media and also by right-wing  political parties and the far-right Party for Freedom (PVV), a denialist voice. This  skepticism would seep into the Dutch parliament. The new website climategate.nl was     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 15 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  established and quickly became a platform for Dutch climate skeptics, discussing at  length the hacked e-mails and errors in the IPCC report. The reputation of the IPCC  suffered considerable damage, to the extent that the cornered minister of environment  stated that she would no longer accept any errors of science (Edwards, Bekkers, de Kool,  & Straten, 2011, p. 10). Some political parties wanted to suspend decision making on  climate policy altogether, pending an investigation into the IPCC. The 2010 elections led  to a conservative minority coalition authorized by the denialist Party for Freedom (PVV).  The new coalition dissolved the Ministry of Environment and transferred its  responsibilities to the new Ministry of Infrastructure and the Environment. Climate  change was hardly mentioned in the coalition agreement of the new cabinet.  From Climate Change Mitigation to Adapting the Dutch Delta to  Climate Change (2011–2016)  After the climate controversy and the subsequent decline in media attention to the  climate issue, climate change as a policy issue was reframed. Attention shifted away from  mitigation toward climate change adaptation, which was characterized largely as a flood  safety issue. Climate change adaptation became part of the Delta Program, launched in  2011 as a policy development program acting upon the recommendations of the 2008  Delta Committee. The title of the Delta Program, “Working on the Delta,” refers to  addressing the flood safety issues, stressing continuity with what the Dutch have been  doing for centuries. Although the public announcement touched upon increasing  temperatures, sea-level rise, and extreme weather events as reasons for the policy  program, climate change as such is not even mentioned (Vink et al., 2013). The focus was  on maintaining prosperity in the Dutch delta by continuing to invest in water  management. That the cabinet had no plans for climate change action is also illustrated  by the fact that the minister of infrastructure and the environment commissions invited  one of the founders of the climategate.nl website to review the fifth IPCC report.  Although in official communication the concept of climate change largely disappeared,  climate change impacts on water management did remain a policy issue. Various water  management projects such as the Delta Program and many other regional programs rely  on climate scenarios in drafting policies, indicating a divide between the intentional  framing of policies and the substance of policies (Dupuis & Biesbroek, 2013; Boezeman et  al., 2014; Vink et al., 2015). In this case the divide between official framing and actual policy  substance can be understood as the result of climate adaptation having been  mainstreamed in existing policy fields such as water management and particularly flood  protection. That the issue disappeared from official communication did not matter too  much for its impact on policy, since the issue had been formalized as specific criteria for  water management. However, little or no progress was made regarding adaptation issues  in other sectors, or regarding climate mitigation issues.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 16 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  The 2012 elections led to a new cabinet that excluded the denialist Party for Freedom,  and climate change started to reappear in official communication; however, this time it  was featured less prominently than in the second climate wave, and it was more  ambiguously defined. Although this did not come with the societal and political  momentum associated with the second climate change wave, the more ambiguous  framings did allow for mainstreaming the issue in the form of sector-specific criteria  sectors beyond water management and flood protection. Another sign of increasing  interest in climate change was the Dutch Energy Agreement for Sustainable Growth  (Energieakkoord voor duurzame groei) in 2013. Whereas during the first wave climate  change was framed in terms of pollution, and subsequently became a matter of reducing  CO  and other greenhouse gas emissions in the second wave, in 2013 this agreement  between the government and 40 companies and societal organizations aimed at  “sustainable growth.” Obviously CO  emissions played a major role in the agreement, but  the agreement was framed as a national sustainable growth agenda rather than an  attempt to combat pollution or mitigate the global greenhouse effect.  The year 2015 saw two significant events in climate change communication that have  contributed to increasing media attention (see Figure 1). First, a Dutch court ruled that  the Netherlands must step up its efforts to reduce domestic greenhouse-gas emissions.  This was the result of a landmark lawsuit filed by the sustainability movement Urgenda in  2013; Urgenda sued the government for violating human rights by failing to take  adequate action to prevent the harmful impacts of climate change. Unless the  government wins the appeal case, the Dutch state must cut its emissions by at least 25%  by 2020 according to the ruling (Purnhagen, 2015). Second, the United Nations Climate  Change Conference in Paris (COP21) led to the Paris Agreement on 12 December 2015,  requiring countries to come up with increasingly ambitious national climate plans in the  form of Nationally Determined Contributions. The agreement also put forward a new and  ambitious global temperature target: limiting the temperature increase to 1.5 degrees  Celsius above preindustrial levels. This meeting was covered widely in the press and  engendered significant social media activity on climate change. As can be seen in Figure  1, media attention to climate change was on the rise in 2015 and 2016.  2  2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 17 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Discussion: Cross-cutting Themes in Research  on Climate Change Communication in the  Netherlands  Climate Change Framing and Agenda Setting  The prominence of climate change as an issue on the public agenda has gone through  multiple attention cycles, driven by issue competition, framing contests, and media logic  (Nisbet & Huge, 2007). Triggering or focusing events can catapult a dormant issue into  public attention, generating public concern and ideas to address the problem. This shifts  the framing of an issue defined in technical terms toward more dramatic terms,  increasing the potential for both broad mobilization and controversy as more actors enter  the debate. When the media have exhausted the dramatic elements of the issue, attention  goes down again and competing issues come to the forefront. The dramatic and  politicized framing of the issue may shift to a more technical and administrative framing,  taken up in specialized institutionalized settings.  The two climate change waves that were identified in the Netherlands are clear examples  of sharp increases in media attention, with the associated dramatic frames. The first  climate change wave (1987–1989), triggered by policy reports and political meetings  driven by an entrepreneurial ministry of environment, was part of a broader wave of  environmental awareness. Environmental pollution became the topic of high politics, to  the point of becoming the central issue in the 1989 national elections. Climate change  had transformed from a technically and scientifically defined phenomenon into a political  issue of broad public concern and as a global greenhouse gas emissions problem.  Throughout the 1990s climate changed stayed on the public agenda but with much lower  levels of public attention; the early 2000s were dominated by the rise of the rise of a new  populist party and the assassination of its leader. The second climate change wave (2006– 2007), triggered mainly by the movie An Inconvenient Truth, led to unprecedented public  attention for the issue and broad mobilization in politics, business, and society. The  increased attention due to the Copenhagen summit (COP15) and the public controversy  about climate science triggered by Climategate were followed by lower levels of media  attention during 2011–2014, although attention was still at a higher level than in the  1990s and early 2000s. The year 2015 saw another increase in media attention for  climate change, which was linked to a climate change lawsuit and the Paris Agreement  (COP21).  Compared to other countries, the first climate change wave came early in the  Netherlands—in other countries attention for climate change was linked more closely to  the 1992 United Nations conference in Rio de Janeiro on sustainable development. Media  attention for climate change since 2004 can be compared with international media data     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 18 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  (Luedecke et al., 2016). The second climate change wave is comparable to the international  pattern, with similar peaks during 2006–2007 and at the end of 2009. The controversy in  2009–2010 was prominent in the Netherlands but not to the point of resembling the  “cultural wars” about climate change that can be observed in the United States, when  scientific discourse starts to coincide with political discourse (Dunlap & Jacques, 2013). In  the Dutch neo-corporatist tradition, political debate can be severe showing strong  disagreement but remained always relatively organized and embedded in an existing  institutional context. The increasing attention in 2015 can also be observed  internationally. That climate change communication in the Netherlands is linked strongly  to global fora is also evident in the role of the UNFCCC COP meetings in generating  domestic media attention for climate change. International climate conferences with  prominent roles for Dutch politicians attract relatively more attention (Breeman et al.,  2009).  Taking a historical perspective also allows us to point out longer-term trends in the  framing of climate change in the Netherlands. First, a shift has occurred over time in the  terms used to refer to the issue (see Figure 2). In 1990 the Dutch term for “greenhouse  effect” was prominent in media articles around 1990–1995, while the Dutch term for  “climate change” was relatively rare. By 2015, this trend had been reversed: the term  “climate change” was used prominently, and “greenhouse effect” all but disappeared. The  middle point is the year 2003, when both terms are used equally frequently. The literal  translation of global warming is used much less overall but has clearly increased over  time. This confirms the strength of “climate change” as a historical breakthrough frame  or “a discursive bridge connecting all kinds of ideas and events that were not previously  understood as connected” (Brick & Cawley, 2008), including not just warmer temperatures,  but also sea level rise, droughts, floods, and storms.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 19 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Second but not unrelated  to the first, a shift from  sectoral problems toward  an all-encompassing  understanding of the  climate change issue has  occurred (Breeman et al.,  2009). A wide array of  issues, such as air  pollution, carbon dioxide  emission, flood risk, sea- level rise, deforestation,  green energy, transport,  and sustainable buildings  were repackaged in terms  of climate change. This has  created more attention for  those issues at times  where climate change was   high on the public agenda; but this also meant less attention on other environmental  issues not connected to climate change (e.g., water pollution). Repackaging is not without  risks, however: piggybacking on the success of another issue can boomerang. After 2009,  as climate change became controversial not only is climate change pushed off the public  agenda but so, too, were environmental issues as a whole, marked in 2010 by the  dissolution of the Ministry of Spatial Planning and Environment into the Ministry of  Infrastructure and Environment in 2010.  Third, a shifting emphasis can be observed from an initial focus on potential climate  change impacts, to climate change mitigation through globally reducing greenhouse gas  emissions, to an increasingly important nationally scaled storyline about adapting the  Dutch delta to climate change impacts (Dewulf, 2013). Although reference to climate  change was already made in the 1996 policy announcement of the Room for the River  flood defense program, it was not until the Delta Committee’s advice in 2008 that  adaptation to climate change was firmly placed on the public agenda (Vink et al., 2013).  The direct link made with the strongly institutionalized water management sector led to a  quick translation of these ideas into the creation of a delta commissioner, a Delta Fund,  and a Delta Program. In response to the controversy about climate change in 2009–2010,  adaptation to climate change was reframed into a technical water management issue and  also into a business case. A national “water ambassador” is employed to sell delta  technology to deal with a changing climate and associated sea-level rise in delta areas  around the world. Due to this quick institutionalization process, the decreasing attention  for climate change after 2010 has affected adaptation much less than mitigation.  Click to view larger  Figure 2.  Media framing of climate change between  1990 and 2015 as “global warming,” “climate  change” or “greenhouse effect.” Based on the  number of news articles published in each year in  the Dutch newspaper NRC Handelsblad containing  the search terms climate change  (klimaatverandering or klimaatsverandering),  greenhouse effect (broeikaseffect) or global warming  (opwarming van de aarde), as a percentage of the  total number of climate articles per year given in  Figure 1.  (Source: compiled by the authors based on the Lexis- Nexis Academic database).    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 20 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Climate Change Communication in the Science-Policy-Society  Triangle  Communication on climate change has been scienticized from its early arrival on the  Dutch agenda, in which international scientific and political debates have been dominant  and the precautionary principle has been a leading rationale for legitimizing policy  responses. Although domestic environmental and climate science developed from the  start in close relation to environmental policy (Van de Kerkhof & Leroy, 2000; Van  Eijndhoven et al., 2001), postmillennial shifts can be observed in the arrangements  between science, politics, and society (Hoppe et al., 2013; Halffman & Hoppe, 2005). In  general, the distance between science and policy is short, and expert agencies as well as  issued reports sometimes function as resources in inter-departmental politics.  Nevertheless, in the Dutch corporatist policy tradition, Netherlands Environmental  Assessment Agency (PBL) usually plays a role of “linesman,” demarcating the playing  field for political actors to bargain in, while its assessments are remarkably seen as  reliable, neutral, and “true” across the board (Halffman, 2009; Halffman & Hoppe, 2005).  Besides assessing scientific evidence for climate policy, it monitors progress and  contributes to the IPCC. Other standing boundary organizations include the Royal Dutch  Meteorological Institute (KNMI) that develops climate scenarios, Deltares as an applied- science water consultancy, and Energy Center Netherlands for energy consultancy. The  Rathenau institute does science and technology assessment to stimulate political and  societal debate on controversial issues (e.g., geoengineering) (Riphagen & Brom, 2013),  while the Scientific Council for Government Policy (WRR) has a long tradition of signaling  future issues. Also, climate knowledge centers are based at Wageningen and Amsterdam  universities. In addition, ad hoc commissions within parliament (e.g., the 1995 Temporary  Committee Climate Change) or to advise government (e.g., the 1999 Committee Water  Policy 21st Century, and the 2007 Delta Committee) (Boezeman et al., 2013), are formed to  translate climate science into meaningful policy strategies.  The politicization of climate science in the Netherlands is observable but in no way  comparable to its politicization in the United States. Early in 1999, the PBL came under  siege when an internal expert criticized the agency in a major Dutch newspaper, which  triggered a public debate on the credibility of environmental statistics that spilled over  into parliament (Van der Sluijs, 2002). In line with the corporatist Dutch state tradition,  authority was restored by adopting guidelines for dealing with uncertainties in 2003  (Janssen et al., 2005) and institutionalized stakeholder participation in 2007 (Hage et al.,  2010). After the “climategate” controversy, the agency attempted to restore its legitimacy  by inviting in skeptical scientists and citizens to weigh in via the blog CimateDialogue.org  and the investigation into IPCC mistakes (Hajer, 2012; Tuinstra & Hajer, 2014) using the  aforementioned guidelines.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 21 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  In the 1990s, with concepts of Mode 2 (Gibbons et al., 1994) and post-normal science  (Funtowicz & Ravetz, 1993), scholars pointed to the complexity and inherent uncertainties  of environmental issues and suggested (among other things) a more close collaboration  with societal stakeholders to strengthen both relevance and quality. Changing patterns of  participation in scientific practice can also be observed in large climate research  programs such as National Research Program Global Air Pollution and Climate Change I  (1989–2001), Climate Changes Spatial Planning (2004–2011), Knowledge for Climate  (2007–2014), and national knowledge program Water and Climate (2014) (Van de Kerkhof  & Leroy, 2000; Wardenaar, 2015; Reinecke et al., 2013). Although stakeholder involvement is  observed, critical remarks on both the organization and substance can be made.  Regarding the former, research shows (Van de Kerkhof & Leroy, 2000, Wardenaar, 2015;  Termeer et al., 2015) involvement in these programs is limited to mainly researchers and  governmental policymakers—and to a lesser extent its corporatist partners:  representatives of business and environmental NGOs. This is strengthened by pooling  research resources along the lines of the agenda of the Top Sector water. Regarding  substance, Van de Kerkhof & Leroy observed in 2000 that societal involvement was solely  on “useful knowledge” on policy solutions for environmental problems framed by science  and engineering. In Climate Changes Spatial Planning and Knowledge for Climate,  collaboration was mainly on selecting policy issues to be addressed, while participation in  knowledge production itself remained rather traditional (Termeer et al., 2015).  Communication with citizens occurs via platforms. These observations are in line with  general patterns observed elsewhere by Rayner (2003) and Stirling (2007). In particular for  adaptation, political order and scientific knowledge are co-produced (Jasanoff, 2004), with  blind spots outside dominant water knowledge (Boezeman, 2015; Bauer & Steurer, 2015).  Regarding the role of actors other than scientists and policymakers in the science-policy- society triangle, the environmental movement and members of parliament played  interesting roles. The “classical” environmental movement initially had an ambivalent  relationship with climate change, and were not dominant in framing the issue (Pleune,  1997). Reluctant to embrace and advance the CO  argument, environmental NGOs feared  it would interfere in antinuclear campaigns while having key people of the movement  involved in ending the nuclear energy option (Van Eijndhoven et al., 2001, p. 121); yet  many organizations considered the issue too global, complex, and distant for mobilization  activities. Duyvendak (2011, p. 31) claims the environmental movement, preoccupied with  nuclear energy and acid rain, was surprised by the rise of the greenhouse effect issue on  the political agenda. It would only later develop into one of the emblematic issues for  NGOs, while only the Dutch branches of Friends of the Earth, and to a lesser extent  Greenpeace, are consistently engaging the issue (Van der Heijden, 2009). Besides  involvement of coalitions of “classical” environmental organizations, after 2006 other  types of organizations and initiatives can be observed involving other kinds of societal  actors. The “Hier” campaign involves a coalition of 40 societal organizations, while   2    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 22 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Urgenda was founded by concerned scientists aiming at acceleration sustainability and  energy transitions.  The role of politicians in advancing the issue of climate change is remarkable.  Parliamentarians with a scientific background signaled the issue in the 1970s (Jaap  Boersma) and regularly kept giving the issue attention, most often in relation to energy  issues (Van Eijndhoven et al., 2001, p. 125). When the issue was debated in the national  parliament in 1978 in relation to increasing fossil fuel use and the cabinet’s intention to  reintroduce coal, the minister answered on the basis of state-of-the-art knowledge and  notably the 1978 IIASA conference on “Carbon Dioxide, Climate, and Society.”  Interestingly, policy and policy actors at that time draw upon international science  (Dinkelman, 1995), as domestic climate science was underdeveloped at the time (Van  Eijndhoven et al., 2001). While skeptical voices can be heard during the entire climate  change episode, politicians usually aligned positions with the IPCC consensus,  depoliticizing the debate (Van der Sluijs et al., 2010).  Online Communication about Climate Change in the Network Society  To understand online and social media communication about climate change, we need to  consider the nature of the network society (Castells, 2007). The institutions of the nation- state gradually lost their unitary capacity to control and regulate, while the digital  networking technologies of the information age powered social and organizational  networks in ways that allowed their endless expansion and reconfiguration. In a society  governed by a variety of public and private networks, media have become the social  space where power relations are played out. Two phenomena stand out in this respect:  media politics and mass self-communication. Media politics involves an intricate relation  between politics and media: “What does not exist in the media does not exist in the public  mind, even if it could have a fragmented presence in individual minds. Therefore, a  political message is necessarily a media message” (Castells, 2007). At the same time, mass  media are confronted with the mass self-communication (Castells, 2007) made possible by  Internet and social media, both in its traditional and mobile forms. Individuals, groups,  and networks have nearly unlimited possibilities to communicate among themselves and  with a potentially global audience. Mass self-communication is “self-generated in content,  self-directed in emission, and self-selected in reception by many that communicate with  many” (Castells, 2007). Driven by the combined phenomena of media politics and mass  self-communication through new social media, the public sphere has to a large extent  shifted from the institutional realm to the new communication space. As a result, power  relations as well as the processes challenging institutionalized power relations are  increasingly shaped and decided in the communication space, leading to new forms of  informational governance (Mol, 2006).    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 23 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Early online communication in the Netherlands about Al Gore’s movie An Inconvenient  Truth took place on personal, popular culture, and journalistic weblogs (Bekkers et al.,  2008). A search engine for Dutch blogs returned over 100,000 hits for the query “An  Inconvenient Truth” in July 2008 (Bekkers et al., 2008). While the personal and popular  culture weblogs mostly framed the movie positively, the journalistic weblogs were much  more critical of climate change as being an “elite concern” of the “progressive-liberal  establishment.” At the time, however, weblogs were largely invisible in comparison to the  prominence of traditional media, particularly for policymakers (Bekkers et al., 2008).  The peak in media attention in 2009 around the COP15 summit in Copenhagen, together  with the so-called Climategate affair—and particularly the ensuing controversy about the  Fourth IPCC Assessment Report—can be considered a critical juncture in climate change  communication in the Netherlands (Edwards et al., 2011). The controversy has a longer  history in the international blogosphere, where a number of rivaling websites (including  RealClimate.org, ClimateAudit.org, Wattsupwiththat.com, and Blackboard) had been  arguing for years over issues such as the hockey-stick graph with reconstructed  temperatures, access to temperature data and software code, the urban heat island  effect, the soundness of the peer review process in climate science, the functioning of the  IPCC, and the presumed hidden agendas and reprehensible intentions of their opponents.  In the Netherlands klimatosoof.nl and klimaatgek.nl were early climate-skeptic websites  (Edwards et al., 2011). With Climategate, this international network of climate-skeptic  blogs that had become increasingly active and organized entered into the spotlight.  Although it is unclear who put the set of climate scientists’ e-mails online that started  Climategate, this network of blogs was effective in using quotes from the e-mails for  getting more attention for their skeptical views. There was attention for the skeptics in  major Dutch newspapers and on television shows as well (Hajer, 2012). The polarization of  this online debate (Bekkers et al., 2013) is reflected in the names that the sides use for  each other and themselves. “Alarmists” call their opponents “deniers,” accuse them of  links with the oil industry, and liken them with dinosaurs or people who think the earth is  flat. “Deniers” call their opponents “alarmists” and accuse them of being environmental  activists and liken them to fear mongers and doom prophets. Both sides call themselves  “realists.” The label “skeptics” is often used as a more neutral term for “deniers.”  Before 2009, mass media and policymakers in the Netherlands largely ignored the online  climate change debate, but this changed quickly after Climategate. Major newspapers  and policymakers started to monitor online climate change communication to avoid being  taken by surprise again (Edwards et al., 2011; Bekkers et al., 2013). Two scientific  journalists who had been actively following the climate skeptic blogosphere started their  own Dutch blog, climategate.nl, which quickly became the reference point for Dutch  climate skeptics and for anyone interested in real-time discussion of developments in  climate science or policy. In their mission statement they aim to provide “daily reports in  Dutch on the consequences of climategate” and to “surprise the readers with original  analyses,” referring to scientific literature, foreign media, and climate-related blogs and  websites. They framed the state of climate science in terms of manipulation of data,     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 24 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  exclusion of skeptic views from the scientific literature, and refusal by climate scientists  to openly share data (Edwards et al., 2011). An important part of the online discussion on  climate change shifted from the web forums of the written press to thematic blogs such  as climategate.nl. These discussions were strongly polarized, not so much in terms of  confrontations on the websites but rather in terms of differentiation between the websites  (Edwards et al., 2011).  While still condemned by the international scientific community (see e.g., Editor, 2009),  attempts were made in the Dutch policy world to involve and organize climate skeptic  voices in climate change communication, both online and offline. The Netherlands  Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL), the primary boundary organization at the  climate change science-policy interface, played an important role in this process by  taking a deliberative approach (Hajer, 2012). Already before COP15, in cooperation with  the Dutch public news agency, they had organized a blog discussion between a climate  skeptic economist and one of their own climate scientists (Strengers & Labohm, 2010). In  response to the controversy on errors in the IPCC report, the PBL was asked to examine  the IPCC report for more errors, which led to radio and television appearances but also to  the creation of a website where the public was invited to contribute to the search for  errors. They engaged directly with both climate scientists, who disagreed with the idea  that the PBL was going to identify errors in their work, and climate skeptics, who accused  the PBL of judging their own work as contributor to the IPCC assessment reports (Hajer,  2012). Through creating spaces for deliberation, and thereby recognizing the legitimacy of  these different actors, a more structured and less polarized climate change debate  became possible. This was also apparent when the initiators of climategate.nl were  invited to a hearing on climate change science and policy organized by the Dutch  parliament, where the tone of the debate was much more benign than in many of the  online discussions. As a results, some of the climate skeptics became legitimate  spokespersons for climate skeptic views in media and policy circles (Edwards et al., 2011).  More recently, mobile Internet and social media platforms have become increasingly  important in climate change communication (Schäfer, 2012). The Netherlands has always  been a forerunner in terms of Internet connectivity and adoption of social media  platforms, starting with the Netherlands-based Hyves platform, founded in 2004 and  totaling over 10 million user accounts on a population of 16 million by 2010. The network  was officially discontinued in 2013, after being gradually overtaken by Facebook and  Twitter. The Netherlands also ranks high on the list of countries with the most active  Twitter and Facebook users, but research studies on the role of social media platforms in  climate change communication in the Netherlands are rare. Indirect evidence can be  found in an analysis of the global set of over 1.8 million tweets mentioning climate  change or global warming (in English, German, Russian, Spanish and Portuguese) in the  year 2012 (Kirilenko & Stepchenkova, 2014). The Netherlands contributed a modest 32  tweets per day, compared to 1,837 tweets per day from the United States. However,  taking into account that the five analyzed languages only represent 32% of the total  amount of tweets from the Netherlands, and adjusting for different degrees of Internet     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 25 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  and Twitter penetration, the Netherlands ranks 7th among the countries with the most  discussions on climate change (Kirilenko & Stepchenkova, 2014, p. 175). Based on Twitter  monitoring by the authors using Meltwater in the three weeks surrounding the COP21  meeting in Paris, some basic numbers can be distilled. Between 11 November 11, 2015,  through to December 17, 2015, over 1 million English-language tweets were produced  mentioning “COP21,” usually in the form of the hashtag #COP21. During the same period  over 10, 000 COP21 tweets were in the Dutch language, and over 20,000 COP21 tweets  originated from the Netherlands.  Conclusion This article aimed to chart and understand the variety of communication efforts since the  1970s through which climate change became an issue of public interest in the  Netherlands. The cross-cutting issues of framing and agenda setting, science-policy- society relations, and online communication in the network society have guided this  analysis.  Attention for climate change developed slowly and intermittently in the 1950s and 1960s,  and in the early 1970s it was still not considered to be a significant political problem and  mainly of popular scientific interest. In line with increasing scientific evidence and  growing public interest in energy issues, the anthropogenic greenhouse effect  increasingly appeared in societal and policy discussions in the 1980s. The first wave of  peak attention for climate change (1987–1989), mainly driven by policymakers and part  of an environmental consciousness wave, put the issue firmly on the public agenda as  global greenhouse gas emissions problem. Throughout the 1990s climate changed stayed  on the public agenda but with much lower levels of public attention, and the early 2000s  were dominated by the rise of the rise of a new populist party and the assassination of its  leader. The second climate change wave (2006–2007), triggered mainly by the movie An  Inconvenient Truth, led to unprecedented public attention for the issue and to broad  mobilization in politics, business, and society. The increased attention due to the  Copenhagen summit (COP15) and the public controversy about climate science triggered  by Climategate were followed by lower levels of public attention. The year 2015 saw  again an increase in media attention for climate change, linked to climate change lawsuit  and the Paris Agreement (COP21).  Not unlike developments in other countries (Brick & Cawley, 2008), the framing of the  issue developed from an emphasis on the scientific understanding of the term  “greenhouse effect” (broeikaseffect), as part of a broader set of environmental issues  (first climate change wave), toward a more encompassing understanding captured by the  term “climate change” (klimaatverandering), which at its high point started to subsume  other environmental issues (second climate change wave). Driven by increasing     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 26 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  circulation of skeptic views on climate change, climate change subsequently turned into a  controversial issue and therefore of much lower political relevance.  Communication on climate change has been scientized since its inclusion on the Dutch  agenda, with the precautionary principle a leading rationale for legitimizing policy  responses. The increasing involvement of Dutch scientists in climate change research has  contributed to the position of the Netherlands in international climate change  discussions. For a long time, climate science was uncontested and translated into policy- relevant knowledge at the strongly institutionalized Dutch science-policy interface. More  direct relations between science and society were present in the form of informing  citizens and popularizing science but more strongly when climate science was directly  contested by skeptic bloggers and journalists. Rather than challenging climate policy  directly, climate skeptics that had no place in the institutionalized science-policy interface  challenged the underlying climate science directly. To understand developments in the  Netherlands, the notion of the science-policy interface needs to be expanded into a  science-policy-society triangle, with significant interactions taking place at each side of  this triangle.  Not unrelated to these developments involving a decreasing authority of science are the  quickly expanding possibilities of online communications, which created a new playing  field for climate change communication in the network society. The international  blogosphere developed in the 2000s and became the preferred platform for climate  skeptics to share information and build a case against climate science. Skeptic bloggers  played a key role in fueling controversy about climate change science in the wake of  Climategate, as well as gaining access to the mass media and to the science-policy  interface in the Netherlands. The blogosphere has been largely overshadowed by new  social media such as Twitter and Facebook in the 2010s, which seem to have become  particularly active around COPs, but systematic research on the roles of these platforms  in climate change communication in the Netherlands has yet to be undertaken.  This analysis is the result of collecting evidence that is fragmented across a variety of  published research studies. Several topics deserve more scholarly attention so as to  corroborate or challenge the present analysis with more systematic studies taking a  broader chronological perspective. While the fluctuations in mass media’s attention to  climate change since the 1990s could be analysed (see Figure 1), media attention in  earlier decades has not been mapped quantitatively, making it difficult to systematically  compare, for example, the first climate change wave to the second. The analysis should  also be extended to include other newspapers whose digital archives do not go as far  back in time. Changes over time in the crucial roles played by boundary organizations at  the Dutch science-policy interface constitute another interesting topic for a future  research agenda on climate change communication in the Netherlands. Finally, while the  Netherlands has been a forerunner in terms of Internet connectivity and adoption of  social media platforms, 21st-century climate change communication on social media such  as Twitter and Facebook has not been well documented yet.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 27 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Suggested Readings  Hajer, M. A. (2012). A media storm in the world risk society: Enacting scientific  authority in the IPCC controversy (2009–10). Critical Policy Studies, 6(4), 452–464.  Keijzers, G. (2000). The evolution of Dutch environmental policy: The changing  ecological arena from 1970–2000 and beyond. Journal of Cleaner Production, 8(3),  179–200.  Pettenger, M. E. (2007). The Netherlands’ climate change policy: Constructing  themselves/constructing climate change. In M. E. Pettenger (Ed.), The social construction  of climate change: Power, knowledge, norms, discourses (pp. 51–73). Aldershot, U.K.:  Ashgate.  Van Der Sluijs, J. P., Est, R. Van, & Riphagen, M. (2010). Beyond consensus: Reflections  from a democratic perspective on the interaction between climate politics and  science. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 2(5–6), 409–415.  Vink, M. J., Boezeman, D., Dewulf, A., & Termeer, C. J. A. M. (2013). Changing climate,  changing frames. Dutch water policy frame developments in the context of a rise  and fall of attention to climate change. Environmental Science & Policy, 30, 90–101.  References  Bauer, A., & Steurer, R. (2015). National adaptation strategies, what else?  Comparing adaptation mainstreaming in German and Dutch water management.  Regional Environmental Change, 15(2), 341–352.  Bekkers, V., Beunders, H., Edwards, A., & Moody, R. (2008). De virtuele lont in het  kruitvat. Welke rol spelen de oude en nieuwe media in de micromobilisatie van burgers?  Rotterdam: Erasmus Universiteit Rotterdam.  Bekkers, V., Edwards, A., & de Kool, D. (2013). Social media monitoring: Responsive  governance in the shadow of surveillance?Government Information Quarterly, 30(4),  335–342.  Bekkers, V., Moody, R., & Edwards, A. (2011). Micro-mobilization, social media and  coping strategies: Some Dutch experiences. Policy & Internet, 3(4), 1–29.  Berg, M. van de. (2013). Translating the global climate change discourse to the  local: An analysis of Dutch storylines on adaptation. In C. De Boer, J. V. Vinke-de  Kruijf, G. Ozerol, & H. Bressers (Eds.), Water governance, policy and knowledge transfer (pp. 207–222). London: Routledge    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 28 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Berkhout, F. (2010). Reconstructing boundaries and reason in the climate debate.  Global Environmental Change, 20(4), 565–569.  Bodansky, D. (2001). The history of the global climate change regime. In U. Luterbacher  & D. F. Sprinz (Eds.), International Relations and Global Climate Change (pp. 23–40).  Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.  de Boer, J. (2007). Framing climate change and spatial planning: How risk  communication can be improved. Water Science and Technology: A Journal of the  International Association on Water Pollution Research, 56(4), 71–78.  Boezeman, D. (2015). Transforming adaptation - Authoritative knowledge for climate  change governance. Nijmegen: Radboud University. Available at http:// repository.ubn.ru.nl/bitstream/handle/2066/141636/141636.pdf?sequence=1.  Boezeman, D. (2016). Understanding the transformation of climate futures. A  conceptual framework illustrated with urban adaptation policy. Futures, 76, 30–41.  Boezeman, D., Leroy, P., Maas, R., & Kruitwagen, S. (2010). The (limited) political  influence of ecological economics: A case study on Dutch environmental policies.  Ecological Economics, 69(9), 1756–1764.  Boezeman, D., Vink, M. J., & Leroy, P. (2013). The Dutch Delta Committee as a  boundary organisation. Environmental Science & Policy, 27, 162–171.  Boezeman, D., Vink, M., Leroy, P., & Halffman, W. (2014). Participation under a spell of  instrumentalization? Reflections on action research in an entrenched climate  adaptation policy process. Critical Policy Studies, 8(4), 407–426.  Breeman, G. E., Dewulf, A., Pot, W. D., & Timmermans, A. (2009). Evolutie van het  klimaatvraagstuk: agendadynamiek en framing van het klimaatprobleem in de media.  Bestuurskunde, (4), 27–37.  Breeman, G. E., & Timmermans, A. (2008). Politiek van de aandacht voor milieubeleid.  Wageningen, Wettelijke Onderzoekstaken Natuur & Milieu, Wot-report 77, 68 pp.  Brick, P., & Cawley, R. M. (2008). Producing political climate change: the hidden life  of US environmentalism. Environmental Politics, 17(2), 200–218.  Castells, M. (2007, June). Communication, power and counter-power in the network  society. Journal of Communication, 1, 238–266.  Cox, J. R. (2010). Beyond frames: Recovering the strategic in climate  communication. Environmental Communication: A Journal of Nature and Culture, 4(1),  122–133.  Deltares (2008). Waterbeheer in een veranderend klimaat. Feiten en fictie van tachtig  beweringen in de media. Delft: Deltares.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 29 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  De Vries, J., & Wolsink, M. (2009). Making space for water: Spatial planning and  water management in the Netherlands. In S. Davoudi, J. Crawford, & A. Mehmood  (Eds.), Planning for climate change: Strategies for mitigation and adaptation for spatial  planners (pp. 191–204). Department of Human Geography, Planning and International  Development Studies, University of Amsterdam, Netherlands: Earthscan.  Dewulf, A. (2013). Contrasting frames in policy debates on climate change  adaptation. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 4(4), 321–330.  Dewulf, A., Brugnach, M., Termeer, C. J. A. M., & Ingram, H. (2013). Bridging knowledge  frames and networks in climate and water governance. In J. Edelenbos, N. Bressers, & P.  Scholten (Eds.), Water governance as connective capacity (pp. 229–247). Aldershot, U.K.:  Ashgate.  Dinkelman, G. (1995). Verzuring en broeikaseffect: De wisselwerking tussen problemen  en oplossingen in het Nederlandse luchtverontreinigingsbeleid (1970–1994). Utrecht, The  Netherlands: Van Garkel.  Driessen, P. P. J., Leroy, P., & Vierssen, W. van. (2010). From climate change to social  change: Perspectives on science-policy interactions. Utrecht, The Netherlands:  International Books.  Dunlap, R. E., & Jacques, P. J. (2013). Climate change denial books and conservative  think tanks exploring the connection. American Behavioral Scientist, 57(6), 699–731.  Dupuis, J., & Biesbroek, R. (2013). Comparing apples and oranges: The dependent  variable problem in comparing and evaluating climate change adaptation  policies. Global Environmental Change, 23(6), 1476–1487.  Duyvendak, W. (2011). Het groene optimisme. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.  Editor. (2009). Climatologists under pressure. Nature, 462(7273), 545.  Edwards, A., Bekkers, V., Kool, D. de, & Straten, G. (2011). Recent developments in Dutch  climate policy: the role of the Dutch climate sceptical weblog Climategate.nl: A critical  juncture. Paper for the 6th ECPR General Conference, August 24–27, 2011, Reykjavik,  Iceland (pp. 24–27).  van Eijndhoven, J., Dinkelman, G., van der Sluijs, J., Pleune, R., & Worrell, C. (2001).  Finding your place: A history of the management of global environmental risks in the  Netherlands. In The Social Learning Group Learning to Manage Global Environmental  Risks - Volume 1: A Comparative History of Social Responses to Climate Change, Ozone  Depletion, and Acid Rain (pp. 115–138). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.  Entman, R. M. (1993). Framing: Toward clarification of a fractured paradigm. Journal of  Communication, 43(4), 51–58.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 30 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Ford, J. D., & King, D. (2015). Coverage and framing of climate change adaptation in  the media: A review of influential North American newspapers during 1993–2013. Environmental Science & Policy, 48, 137–146.  Funtowicz, S. O., & Ravetz, J. R. (1993). Science for the post-normal age. Futures,  25(7), 739–755.  Gauchat, G. (2012). Politicization of science in the public sphere: A study of public  trust in the United States, 1974 to 2010. American Sociological Review, 77(2), 167– 187.  Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwartzman, S., Scott, P., & Trow, M. (1994). The  new production of knowledge: The dynamics of science and research in contemporary  societies. London: SAGE.  Gulbrandsen, L. H., & Skjærseth, J. B. (2014). Implementing the EU 2020 Climate and  Energy Package in the Netherlands: Mixed instruments, mixed results (FNI Report).  Lysaker, Norway: Fridtjof Nansens Institute.  Hage, M., Leroy, P., & Petersen, A. C. (2010). Stakeholder participation in  environmental knowledge production. Futures, 42(3), 254–264.  Hajer, M. A. (2012). A media storm in the world risk society: Enacting scientific  authority in the IPCC controversy (2009–2010). Critical Policy Studies, 6(4), 452–464.  Halffman, W. (2009). Measuring the stakes: The Dutch planning bureaus. In J. Lentsch &  P. Weingart (Eds.), Scientific advice to policy making: International comparison (pp. 1–25).  Opladen, Germany: Verlag Barbara Budrich.  Halffman, W., & Hoppe, R. (2005). Science/policy boundaries: A changing division of  labour in Dutch expert policy advice. In S. Maasen & P. Weingart (Eds.), Democratization  of expertise? Exploring novel forms of scientific advice in political decision-making (Vol.  24, pp. 135–151). Heidelberg, Germany: Springer.  Hoppe, R., Wesselink, A., & Cairns, R. (2013). Lost in the problem: The role of  boundary organisations in the governance of climate change. Wiley  Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 4(4), 283–300.  van der Heijden, H. (2000). Environmental problems, the European union and the  utilisation of scientific knowledge. Environmental Politics, 9(4), 141–145.  Van der Heijden, H. A. (2009). Zandzakken, notenbomen en een taart: Nederlandse  sociale bewegingen en mondiale klimaatverandering. In De Kraker & Van der Windt  (eds.), Jaarboek Ecologische Geschiedenis, 2008 (pp. 117–143), Gent, Belgium: Academia  Press.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 31 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Janssen, P. H., Petersen, A. C., van der Sluijs, J. P., Risbey, J. S., & Ravetz, J. R. (2005). A  guidance for assessing and communicating uncertainties. Water Science and Technology,  52(6), 125–131.  Jasanoff, S. (2004). States of knowledge: The co-production of science and the social  order. New York: Routledge.  Jones, B. D., & Baumgartner, F. R. (2004). A model of choice for public policy. Journal  of Public Administration Research and Theory, 15(3), 325–351.  Kabat, P., van Vierssen, W., Veraart, J., Vellinga, P., & Aerts, J. (2005). Climate proofing  the Netherlands. Nature, 438(7066), 283–284.  Keijzers, G. (2000). The evolution of Dutch environmental policy: The changing  ecological arena from 1970–2000 and beyond. Journal of Cleaner Production, 8(3),  179–200.  van de Kerkhof, M. (2004). Debating climate change: A study of stakeholder participation  in an integrated assessment of long-term climate policy in the Netherlands. Utrecht:  Lemma Uitgevers.  van de Kerkhof, M., & Leroy, P. (2000). Recent environmental research in the  Netherlands: Towards post-normal science?Futures, 32(9), 899–911.  Kern, F., & Howlett, M. (2009). Implementing transition management as policy  reforms: A case study of the Dutch energy sector. Policy Sciences, 42(4), 391–408.  Kickert, W. J. M. (2003). Beneath consensual corporatism: traditions of governance  in the Netherlands. Public Administration, 81(1), 119–140.  Kingdon, J. W. (1995). Agendas, alternatives, and public policies (2d ed., Vol. 2). New  York: HarperCollins College Publishers.  Kirilenko, A. P., & Stepchenkova, S. O. (2014). Public microblogging on climate  change: One year of Twitter worldwide. Global Environmental Change, 26, 171–182.  Kwadijk, J. C. J., & Rotmans, J. (1995). The impact of climate change on the river  Rhine: A scenario study. Climatic Change, 30(4), 397–425.  Liefferink, J. D., Boezeman, D. F. & Coninck, H. C. de (2017). The Netherlands: A case of  fading leadership. In R. K. W. Würzel, J. Connelly & J. D. Liefferink (Eds.), The European  Union in international climate change politics. Still taking a lead? (pp. 131–144). New  York: Routledge.  Luedecke, G., McAllister, L., Nacu-Schmidt, A., Andrews, K., Boykoff, M., Daly, M., and  Gifford, L. (2016). World newspaper coverage of climate change or global warming,  2004–2016. Center for Science and Technology Policy Research, Cooperative Institute for     Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 32 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Research in Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado, Web. Retrieved from http:// sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/media_coverage.  Middelkoop, H., Daamen, K., Gellens, D., Grabs, W., Kwadijk, J. C. J., Lang, H., et al.  (2001). Impact of climate change on hydrological regimes and water resources  management in the Rhine Basin. Climatic Change, 49(1/2), 105–128.  Mol, A. P. J. (2006). Environmental governance in the Information Age: The  emergence of informational governance. Environment and Planning C: Government  and Policy, 24(4), 497–514.  Mudde, C. (2004). The populist zeitgeist. Government and Opposition, 39(4), 542–563.  Nerlich, B., Koteyko, N., & Brown, B. (2010). Theory and language of climate change  communication. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 1(1), 97–110.  Nisbet, M. C. (2009). Communicating climate change: Why frames matter for public  engagement. Environment: Science and Policy for Sustainable Development, 51(2), 12–23.  Nisbet, M. C., & Huge, M. (2007). Where do science debates come from? Understanding  attention cycles and framing. In D. Brossard, J. Shanahan, & T. C. Nesbitt (Eds.), The  media, the public and agricultural biotechnology (pp. 193–230). Wallingford, U.K.: CAB  International.  Nisbet, M. C., & Mooney, C. (2007). Science and society: Framing science. Science,  316(5821), 56.  Pettenger, M. E. (2007). The Netherlands’ climate change policy: Constructing  themselves/constructing climate change. In M. E. Pettenger (Ed.), The social construction  of climate change: Power, knowledge, norms, discourses. Aldershot, U.K.: Ashgate.  Pleune, R. (1997). The importance of contexts in strategies of environmental  organizations with regard to climate change. Environmental Management, 21(5),  733–745.  Pralle, S. B. (2009). Agenda-setting and climate change. Environmental Politics, 18(5),  781–799.  Purnhagen, K. (2015). Climate law: Dutch decision raises bar. Nature, 523(7561), 410.  Rayner, S. (2003). Democracy in the age of assessment: Reflections on the roles of  expertise and democracy in public-sector decision making. Science and Public  Policy, 30(3), 163–170.  Reinecke, S., Bauer, A., Pregernig, M., Tony, A., Pistorius, T., & Hogl, K. (2013). Scientific  climate policy advice: An overview of national forms of institutionalization. Vienna:  University of Natural Resources and Life Sciences (BOKU).    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 33 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Riphagen, M., & Brom, F. (2013). Klimaatengineering: Hype, hoop of wanhoop? The  Hague: Rathenau Instituut.  Schäfer, M. S. (2012). Online communication on climate change and climate  politics: A literature review. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change, 3(6),  527–543.  Stirling, A. (2007). “Opening up” and “closing down”: Power, participation, and  pluralism in the social appraisal of technology. Science, Technology & Human  Values, 33(2), 262–294.  Strengers, B., & Labohm, H. (2010). Wetenschapper versus scepticus Verslag van een  weblogdiscussie tussen een klimaatonderzoeker en een klimaatscepticus. Bilthoven:  Planbureau voor de Leefomgeving.  Termeer, C., van Buuren, A., Knieling, J., & Gottschick, M. (2015). Reconciling  collaborative action research with existing institutions: Insights from Dutch and German  climate knowledge programmes. Journal of Water and Climate Change, 6(1), 89–103.  Tol, R. S. J., & Langen, A. (2000). A concise history of Dutch river floods. Climatic  Change, 46(3), 357–369.  Torfing, J., Peters, B. G., Pierre, J., & Sorensen, E. (2012). Interactive governance:  Advancing the paradigm. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  Tuinstra, W., & Hajer, M. (2014). Deliberatie over klimaatkennis. Bestuurskunde, 23(2),  38–45.  Van der Sluijs, J. P. (2002). A way out of the credibility crisis of models used in integrated  environmental assessment. Futures, 34(2), 133–146.  Van Der Sluijs, J. P., Van Est, R., & Riphagen, M. (2010). Beyond consensus: Reflections  from a democratic perspective on the interaction between climate politics and  science. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability, 2(5–6), 409–415.  Van Der Sluijs, J. P., Van Est, R., Riphagen, M., & Van Der Sluijs, J. P. (2010). Ruimte voor  klimaatdebat Zicht op interactie tussen klimaatpolitiek, wetenschap en media. The  Hague: Rathenau.  Van Der Sluijs, J. P., & Van Eijndhoven, J. C. M. (1998). Closure of disputes in  assessments of climate change in the Netherlands. Environmental Management,  22(4), 597–609.  Van Holsteyn, J. J. M., & Irwin, G. A. (2003). Never a dull moment: Pim Fortuyn and  the Dutch parliamentary election of 2002. West European Politics, 26(2), 41–66.    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 34 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  Verduijn, S. H., Meijerink, S. V, & Leroy, P. (2012). How the second delta committee set  the agenda for climate adaptation policy: A Dutch case study on framing strategies for  policy change. Water Alternatives, 5(2), 469–484.  Verkerk, J., & van Buuren, A. (2013). Integrated water resources management in the  Netherlands. Historical trends and current practices in the governance of  integration. International Journal of Water Governance, 1(3), 427–452.  Vink, M. J., Benson, D., Boezeman, D., Cook, H. E., Dewulf, A., & Termeer, C. J. A. M.  (2015). Do state traditions matter? Comparing deliberative governance initiatives  for climate change adaptation in Dutch corporatism and British pluralism. Journal  of Water and Climate Change, 6(1), 71–88.  Vink, M. J., Boezeman, D., Dewulf, A., & Termeer, C. J. A. M. (2013). Changing climate,  changing frames. Dutch water policy frame developments in the context of a rise  and fall of attention to climate change. Environmental Science & Policy, 30, 90–101.  Wardenaar, T. (2015). The dynamics and long-term effects of multi-actor research  programs. The Hague: Rathenau Instituut.  Wesselink, A., Vriend, H. de, Barneveld, H., Krol, M., & Bijker, W. (2009). Hydrology and  hydraulics expertise in participatory processes for climate change adaptation in  the Dutch Meuse. Water Science & Technology, 60(3), 583–595.  Wynne, B. (1993). Implementation of greenhouse gas reductions in the European  Community. Institutional and cultural factors. Global Environmental Change, 3(1),  101–128.  Art Dewulf  Wageningen University and Research Centre  Daan Boezeman  Radboud Universiteit  Martinus Vink  Wageningen University and Research Centre    Climate Change Communication in the Netherlands  Page 35 of 35  PRINTED FROM the OXFORD RESEARCH ENCYCLOPEDIA, CLIMATE SCIENCE (climatescience.oxfordre.com). (c) Oxford  University Press USA, 2016. All Rights Reserved. Personal use only; commercial use is strictly prohibited. Please see  applicable Privacy Policy and Legal Notice (for details see Privacy Policy).  date: 24 July 2017  View publication statsView publication stats  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/318654513  