                                           Indicators of Climate Change  for British Columbia  2016 Update  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS CENTRAL  INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  +1.1  +0.8  +1.6  +1.7+1.8  +1.0  +2.0  +1.1  +0.9  Change in Average  Temperature    1900-2013  (ºC per century)       Indicators of Climate Change  for British Columbia  2016 Update  Revised J U N E  2 0 1 6    ABOUT THE COVER Air temperature is an important property of climate and the most easily measured, directly observable,  and geographically consistent indicator of climate change. Historical data show that the average annual  temperature increased in most parts of British Columbia between 1900 and 2013. Temperatures increased  by 0.8°C to 2.0°C throughout BC. Northern and interior regions of BC have warmed more rapidly than  coastal regions. Atmospheric warming of this magnitude affects other parts of the climate system, including  precipitation, air, wind and ocean currents, and the hydrological cycle. Climate change affects ecosystems and  species, and has both positive and negative impacts on human communities.  National Library of Canada Cataloguing in Publication Data Main entry under title: Indicators of climate change for British Columbia, 2002  Cover title. Also available on the Internet. ISBN 0-7726-4732-1  1. Climatic changes - British Columbia. 2. Greenhouse effect, Atmospheric. 3. Global warming. I. British Columbia. Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection.  QC981.8.C5I52 2002 551.69711 C2002-960055-3  PRODUCTION TEAM 2002: Dr. Risa Smith, Jenny Fraser, Beacon Hill Communications Group Inc. 2015: Thomas White, Kari Tyler, Dr. Faron Anslow, Reber Creative 2016: Thomas White, Dr. Johanna Wolf, Dr. Faron Anslow, Arelia Werner, Reber Creative  Please email comments to: climateactionsecretariat@gov.bc.ca    1  CONTENTS  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 2  INTRODUCTION Indicators of Climate Change for British Columbia  About the Trends  3  6  CHANGES TO TEMPERATURE  AND PRECIPITATION  Average Temperature, rev. 2015  Maximum and Minimum Temperature, rev. 2015  Precipitation, rev. 2015  Snow, rev. 2016  8   11  14  17  CLIMATE CHANGE AND   FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS  Glaciers, rev. 2015  Freezing and Thawing  Timing and Volume of River Flow, rev. 2016  River Temperature  Salmon in the River  20  22  24  27  29  CLIMATE CHANGE AND  MARINE ECOSYSTEMS  Sea Level, rev. 2016  Sea Surface Temperature, rev. 2016  Salmon at Sea  Seabird Survival  31  33  36  38  CLIMATE CHANGE AND  TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS  Growing Degree Days, rev. 2015  Mountain Pine Beetle Range  40  42  CLIMATE CHANGE AND  HUMAN COMMUNITIES  Heating and Cooling Requirements, rev. 2015  Human Health  44  46  APPENDICES Appendix A: Climate Change: Past Trends and   Future Projections  Appendix B: Data and Methods: Long-term Trends   in Temperature, Derived Temperature Variables,  Precipitation, and Glacier Change  Appendix C: Data and Methods: Snow, Timing and   Volume of River Flow, Sea Level, and Sea Surface  Temperature, new 2016  48   51     53    2  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  2015/2016 Report Updates: The Ministry of Environment thanks the following individuals who have  provided analysis, reviewed drafts, and contributed their time, ideas, and  support to the update of this document:  Faron Anslow, Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium; Patrick Cummins,  Department of Fisheries and Oceans; Thomas James, Natural Resources  Canada; Brian Menounos, University of Northern British Columbia; Trevor  Murdock, Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium; Arelia Werner, Pacific Climate  Impacts Consortium; Francis Zwiers, Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium.  2002 Report: The Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection thanks the following  individuals, who have provided technical papers, reviewed papers and drafts,  provided images, or otherwise contributed their time, ideas, and support to   the development of this document:   Peter Ashmore, University of Western Ontario; Diane Beattie, Ministry of Water,  Land and Air Protection; Elisabeth Beaubien, University of Alberta; Doug  Bertram, Simon Fraser University; Allan Carroll, Natural Resources Canada;  Stewart Cohen, Environment Canada; Bill Crawford, Institute of Ocean Sciences;  Mike Foreman, Institute of Ocean Sciences; Howard Freeland, Institute of  Ocean Sciences; Richard Gallacher, Vancouver Cancer Centre; John Garrett,  2WE Associates Consulting Ltd.; Jeff Grout, Fisheries and Oceans Canada; Brian  Hanlon, energy consultant; Rick Lee, Canadian Institute for Climate Studies;  Steve Macdonald, Fisheries & Oceans, Canada; Robin McNeil, Ministry of  Sustainable Resource Management; Eva Mekis, Environment Canada; John  Morrison, Institute of Ocean Sciences; Philip Mote, Joint Institute for the Study  of the Atmosphere and Ocean; Trevor Murdock, Canadian Institute for Climate  Studies; Michael Quick,University of British Columbia; Dr. Schwartz, University  of Wisconsin; Walter Skinner, Environment Canada; Heather Smart, Ministry  of Water, Land and Air Protection; Dan Smith, University of Victoria; Daithi  Stone, University of Victoria; Bill Taylor, Environment Canada; Rick Thomson,  Institute of Ocean Sciences; Andrew Weaver, University of Victoria; David  Welch, Fisheries and Oceans, Canada; Paul Whitfield, Environment Canada;  Rick Williams, Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection; Bob Wilson, 2WE  Associates Consulting Ltd.  This update was made possible with the support from Natural Resources  Canada through the Adaptation Platform.    3  I N T R O D U C T I O N  Both the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change and the US National Academy of Science have concluded that the global atmosphere is warming. They agree, moreover, that most of the  warming observed over the last 60 years can be attributed to human  activities that release greenhouse gases into the atmosphere.   Atmospheric warming affects all parts of the climate system,  including precipitation, air, wind and ocean currents, cloud cover,   and the hydrological cycle. Climate change in turn affects other   closely related physical systems, as well as biological systems, and   the human communities that depend on these systems.  This report documents how the climate in British Columbia has  changed during the 20th and early part of the 21st centuries and the rates at which these  changes are occurring. It outlines some of the potential impacts of these changes on  freshwater, marine, and terrestrial ecosystems and on human communities.   CLIMATE CHANGE TRENDS The trends described in this report are based on a set of environmental indicators that  represent key properties of the climate system, or important ecological, social, or  economic values that are considered sensitive to climate change. The report describes  changes in these indicators over time. Past trends are based on analysis of historical data.   Details of these trends are presented in the body of this report, but some highlights  are as follows:  Past trends  Analysis of historical data indicates that many properties of climate have changed   during the 20th and early 21st centuries, affecting marine, freshwater, and terrestrial   ecosystems in British Columbia.  • Average annual temperature warmed by 1.4ºC per century across the province.  • The northern regions of BC warmed more than the provincial average.  • Night-time temperatures increased across all of BC in all seasons.  • The night-time minimum average temperature in winter in BC increased by 3.1ºC   per century.  • Annual precipitation has been increasing across the province overall.  • Lakes and rivers become free of ice earlier in the spring.  • The bulk of river flow is occurring earlier in the year.  Indicators of Climate Change   for British Columbia  2015/2016 UPDATES Portions of this report have  been updated in 2015 and  2016 with new data and  analysis. Each section is  labelled to indicate whether  the content is from the   2002 version or current.    4  I N T R O D U C T I O N  • Average sea level has risen along most of the BC coast.  • Sea surface temperatures have increased along the BC coast.  • Water in the Fraser River is warmer in summer.  • More heat energy is available for plant and insect growth.  Projected impacts  Climate models and scenarios suggest that the climate in British Columbia will   continue to change throughout and beyond the 21st century. This will have ongoing  impacts on ecosystems and communities. Some of the impacts we may experience by   the final decades of the 21st century are:  • Average annual temperature in BC may increase by 1.7ºC to 4.5ºC from   1961-1990 temperatures.  • Average annual precipitation may increase by 4 to 17 percent from   1961-1990 levels.  • Most small glaciers in southern BC will likely disappear.  • Some of the smaller rivers in southern BC may dry up during the summer and  early fall.  • Salmon migration patterns and success in spawning are likely to change.  The indicators presented in this report document some of the changes that have  occurred during the past century or more. Many more potential indicators remain  to be explored. For example, climate change influences the frequency of extreme  weather events, the extent of permafrost, ecosystem structures and processes, and  species distribution and survival. It will continue to affect provincial infrastructure,  forestry, energy and other industries, insurance and other financial services, and human  settlements. In addition, the impacts may vary from one region, ecosystem, species,  industry, or community to the next. Research into the regional impacts of climate change  is ongoing, and this report is therefore designed to be updated and expanded as new  information becomes available.  FOR MORE INFO Information on historical trends is available on the Environmental Reporting BC  website (gov.bc.ca/environmentalreportingbc). More information on projected   impacts is available through the Plan2Adapt online tool (www.pacificclimate.org/ analysis-tools/plan2adapt)    5  I N T R O D U C T I O N  RESPONDING TO CLIMATE CHANGE The impacts of climate change on British Columbians will depend on the time, the place,  and the individual. For example, homeowners may see a warmer climate as a benefit if it  means lower home heating bills. Resort operators may see it as a cost if it means a shorter  ski season. Farmers may see it as a benefit if it allows them to introduce new crops,  and as a cost if it increases the need for irrigation. Overall, however, the risk of negative  impacts increases with the magnitude of climate change.  Much attention has been paid over the last decades to slowing down the rate of  climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Success in this area has been  mixed. Even if mitigation efforts are successful in reducing greenhouse gas emissions,  they cannot prevent the impacts of climate change. The greenhouse gases humans have  already added to the atmosphere will likely continue to drive sea level rise and other  aspects of global climate change for centuries to come. British Columbia and other  jurisdictions will therefore have to adapt.  In Canada, the federal, provincial, and territorial governments are developing  adaptation frameworks and strategies. British Columbia’s Adaptation Strategy  was developed in 2010 and is available online. Many municipal governments are  incorporating potential climate change impacts into long-term plans for drinking water  supply, drainage, storm-water infrastructure and land-use.  A greater understanding of climate change trends and impacts is expected to help  British Columbians prepare for and adapt to climate change at the same time as the  province works to reduce the scale of future impacts through renewable energy, energy  efficiency, sustainable transportation, new technology, water conservation,   and other sustainable practices.  GLOBAL TRENDS Where current global trends and future global projections are mentioned  throughout the body of this report the information is from the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) AR5 report (available at www.ipcc.ch/). The key  topics and trends that are referred to are easiest to find in the shorter report titled:  Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report; Summary for Policymakers (available at  http://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr).    6  I N T R O D U C T I O N  About the data and trends This report was originally written in 2002 to document changes over the previous century  in some of the key properties of the climate system and in some ecological, social or  economic values that are considered sensitive to climate change. Sections of this report  were brought up to date in 2015 and 2016, using new information about changes in  temperature and precipitation from 1900 to 2013. These changes are referred to as trends.  Where possible, the report identifies trends for each region of the province. The  geographical unit used is the ecoprovince – an area delineated by similar climate,  topography, and geological history. Trends are identified when the changes are found to be  statistically significant at the 95 percent confidence interval, which means that there is a less  than 5 percent probability that the results ocurred by random chance.  For these updates the Pacific  Climate Impacts Consortium  (PCIC) assessed trends in  annual and seasonal means  of daily minimum, maximum,  and mean temperature, precipitation,  growing degree days, heating degree  days, and cooling degree days. Trends were  computed for the interval from 1900 through  2013 and for both BC as a whole and the nine  terrestrial ecoprovinces of BC. PCIC also supplied  assessments, based on remote sensing  data, of glacier change from roughly the  1980s through the early 2000s through  a collaboration with the University of  Northern British Columbia (UNBC). PCIC  also assessed trends in snow, river flow, sea  level, and sea surface temperature.  DATA One reason to update BC’s climate indicators is the increase  in the amount of data available since the original analysis. Data  quantities have increased both through the passage of time, but more importantly through  the development of a comprehensive database of observations in BC. The Ministry of  Environment’s Climate Related Monitoring Program (CRMP) has negotiated an agreement  to allow PCIC to assemble, store, and deliver data collected by BC Ministries, BC Hydro and  RioTinto AlCan. The data set also includes de-activated historical networks. This assessment  was conducted using the data from CRMP and Environment Canada. Altogether, the dataset  comprises 6721 measurement locations and roughly 400 million observations, roughly   Ecoprovinces of  British Columbia  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB-BOREAL INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR SOUTHERN  INTERIOR MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIORGEORGIA  DEPRESSION  Fort St John  Fort Nelson  Cassiar  Prince George  Quesnel  Kamloops  Nelson  Victoria  Vancouver  Prince Rupert  Queen Charlotte City    7  I N T R O D U C T I O N  double the data available in 2002. The data from Environment Canada, BC Hydro, the  Ministry of Forests Lands and Natural Resource Operations Wildfire Management Branch,  and Ministry of Transportation’s observational network are incorporated in near real time  for future analysis. For this analysis, only temperature and precipitation measurements were  used from the station observational dataset.  This analysis requires stations with relatively long records. The early part of the analysis  (early 1900’s) are based on a sparse network of stations so any understanding of the detailed  climate at that time is less certain than for more recent years when there are more stations  distributed broadly across the province. This issue is most critical for precipitation. Precipitation  distributions are hard to estimate across a larger area, and this is further complicated by British  Columbia’s complex topography. In this report we have chosen to report trends for the full  period for precipitation, but acknowledge that the statistical uncertainty in the trends may not  fully capture the uncertainty that arises from changes in the observational network over time.  However, the trends reported here are broadly consistent with other analyses carried out at a  coarser spatial resolution and at individual stations.   The changes to glaciers that have occurred in the past several decades and which are  projected to occur with climate change were intensively studied through the Western  Canadian Cryospheric Network which involved researchers from most universities in British  Columbia. This report, relies on two separate studies; the first looked at the change in volume  of the glaciers in British Columbia from roughly 1985 until winter 1999-2000. The second  investigated the changes in glacier area from the period 1985 through 2005. Both resultant  datasets cover all glaciers in British Columbia and thus provide an excellent snapshot of both  the state of glaciers in the early 2000s as well as the changes those ice masses underwent  during a very warm climatological period.   INTERPRETING THE TREND INFORMATION • This report presents only those results that were found to be significant at    the 95 percent confidence interval. This means that there is a less than  5 percent probability that the results arose randomly.  • Where the data do not reveal a trend that is statistically significant at the  95 percent confidence interval, the report presents this as “NS” to indicate  that the trend is not statistically significant.  • If there is insufficient data to calculate a trend the report presents no result.    8  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  warm faster than the ocean. The IPCC 2014   Climate Change Report Summary for Policy Makers  identifies the years from 1983 to 2012 as likely the  warmest 30 year period in the last 1400 years in the  Northern Hemisphere.   SEASONAL TEMPERATURE TRENDS Most of the annual warming trend has occurred in  the winter in BC. The average temperature increase  in winter across the province is 2.2ºC per century.  Winter temperatures in the north of BC have increased  by 3.0ºC to 3.8ºC per century. In the North-Central  region, winters are 2.6ºC to 2.9ºC warmer than  they were a century ago. In central, interior and  southeastern BC, average winter temperatures have  warmed 1.5ºC to 1.7ºC per century.  There is a province-wide warming trend in the  spring and summer. The spring warming trend was  1.8ºC per century in the Northern Boreal Mountains  ecoprovince. The northeastern plains warmed 1.6ºC  per century in the spring. Spring has warmed by  1.0ºC per century in both the coastal and southern  interior mountains. Summer temperatures in most of  northern BC have warmed 1.4ºC to 1.6ºC per century.  In southern and central BC summer temperatures  have warmed 0.6ºC to 0.8ºC per century.  Change   in Annual  Temperature,  1900-2013  (ºC per century)   ABOUT THE INDICATOR This indicator measures changes in average annual  temperature and average temperature in each of   the four seasons. Trends are based on available   data from 1900 to 2013 for each of the nine  terrestrial ecoprovinces. Seasonal trends are based  on averages for spring (March-May), summer   (June-August), fall (September-November), and  winter (December-February).  ANNUAL TEMPERATURE TRENDS The province of BC has warmed an average of 1.4ºC  per century from 1900 to 2013, higher than the  global average rate of 0.85ºC per century. Southern  coastal regions of BC have warmed 0.8ºC per  century, roughly equivalent to the global average rate.  The Northern regions of BC have warmed 1.6ºC to  2.0ºC per century or twice the global average.  Average global temperatures increased by  0.85ºC from 1880 to 2012 according to the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).  The higher rate of warming in BC is consistent with  findings in the IPCC reports that mid and higher  latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere are warming  faster than the global average and that land areas   BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS CENTRAL  INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  +1.1  +0.8  +1.6  +1.7+1.8  +1.0  +2.0  +1.1  +0.9  Indicator:   AVERAGE TEMPERATURE  Average temperature increased over    all of BC from 1900 to 2013. Winter is   warmer on average than it was 100 years   ago. Higher temperatures drive other   changes in climate systems and affect   physical and biological systems in BC.   They can have both positive and    negative impacts on human activities.  SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring Program  and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013 conducted by  PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment Climate Action Secretariat.   NOTES: All statistically significant trends are positive and indicate warming.   Revised 2015    9  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  There is no statistically significant province-wide  warming trend in the fall. However, the coastal  regions warmed by 0.6ºC to 0.8ºC per century  in the fall and the sub-boreal interior warmed by  1.0ºC per century. There was no significant trend  for the rest of the province in the fall.  The date when each season arrives varies from  one part of BC to the next, depending on climate,  latitude, and elevation. Spring comes earlier to the  coast, to southern BC, and to valley bottoms, for  example, than it does to the north and alpine areas.  The seasonal trends described in this document are  based on calendar months, and as such may not  reflect the way that disparate seasons are experienced  in different parts of BC.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Air temperature is one of the main properties of  climate and the most easily measured, directly  observable, and geographically consistent indicator  of climate change. Atmospheric warming affects  other parts of the climate system, and in BC is linked  to sea surface warming and increased precipitation in  some regions.  Changes in climate can affect other physical  processes, including the duration of ice on rivers and  lakes, the proportion of snow to total precipitation,  and temperature in freshwater ecosystems. Such  changes can in turn affect biological systems.   Water temperature, for example, affects the date  of emer gence of the young of many aquatic species.  Warming may drive broad-scale shifts in the  distribution of ecosystems and species. Trees may   be able to grow in areas once too cold for them.  Some alpine meadows may disappear as high- elevation areas become warmer. Beneficial and   pest species may appear further north, or higher   in elevation, than their historic range.  The impacts of warmer temperatures will vary  from one part of BC to another and from one season  to another. They will have both positive and negative  impacts on human activities.  Warmer springs may promote earlier break up  of lake and river ice, and resulting changes in river  hydrology including possible flooding. They may  mean a longer season for warm-weather outdoor  recreation activities and a longer growing season   for crops.  Warmer summers may increase rates of  evaporation and plant transpiration. Reduced moisture  may contribute to dust storms and soil erosion,  increased demand for irrigation, loss of wetlands,  slower vegetation growth, forest fires, and the  conversion of forest to grasslands. It may contri bute   to declines in ground-water supplies and in water  quality in some areas. Higher temperatures may  increase temperatures in freshwater ecosystems,  creating stressful conditions for some fish species.  SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring  Program and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013  conducted by PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment Climate Action  Secretariat. NOTES: All statistically significant trends are positive and  indicate warming. NS indicates that trend is not statistically significant.  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  spring  winter fall  summer  +1.6  +2.6  +1  +1.7 +.6  +1.1  +.8  +.6  L E G E N D  +1.2  +.7  no trend  +1 +.8 NS+1.7  +1  +1.6  +.6 +1.5 NS NS  +1.4 +2.9 NS NS  +1.6+1.5 NS+3.8  +1.8+1.5 NS+3  +.8 +.8 NS+1.6  Change in   Seasonal  Temperature,   1900-2013  (ºC per century)     10  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  Warmer winters may mean that less energy is  required to heat buildings. They may mean a shorter  season for skiing and other winter sports and losses  in the winter recreation sector.  WHY IS TEMPERATURE INCREASING? Air temperature in BC is strongly affected by  El Niño and other natural changes in air and ocean  currents (see Appendix), which cause year-to-year  and decade-to-decade variability in weather and  climate across the province. The warming trends  observed during the 20th and 21st century are  above and beyond trends that could have been  produced by such natural variability, and almost  certainly reflect long-term climate change. The rate  of warming is greater in more northerly regions.  As air temperature increases, snow and ice melt,  exposing more of the ground and sea surface. While  snow and ice tend to reflect solar energy back into  space, newly exposed rocks, soil, and water tend to  absorb and retain it as heat.  The IPCC has concluded that most of the  observed global atmospheric warming of the last   50 years is due to increases in atmospheric  greenhouse gas concentrations. Greenhouse gas  emissions resulting from a variety of human  activities, including the burning of fossil fuels  and the clearing of land for agriculture and urban  development, are responsible for this increase.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Average annual temperature across BC will continue  to vary from year to year in response to natural cycles  in air and ocean currents. However, what are now  considered to be relatively warm years will almost  certainly increase in frequency.  Plan2Adapt projects further warming in BC   of 1.7ºC to 4.5ºC by the 2080s compared to the  1961-1990 historical average. The interior of   the province will warm faster than other areas and  will experience higher rates of warming than in  the past. The north will continue to warm at rates  consider ably greater than the global average. Ocean  tempera tures have a moderating effect on the climate  of the coast, which will warm more slowly than the  rest of BC. More information about expected future  climate indicators in BC is available at Plan2Adapt  (www.pacificclimate.org/analysis-tools/plan2adapt).  Although temperature increases of a few degrees  may seem small, they are associated with important  physical and biological changes. A rise in average  temperature of 5ºC about 10,000 years ago was  enough to melt the vast ice sheets that once covered  much of North America.    11  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  +1.5  +1.2  +2.1 +.7  +2.0  +1.8 +.6  maximum  minimum  NS  NS  NS  L E G E N D  +2.6 +.9 +2.8  +.9  +2.6 +1.3  +2.0 +1  ABOUT THE INDICATORS The indicators measure change in the annual  average daily (day-time) maximum temperature  and the annual average daily (night-time) minimum  temperature. They also measure changes in  maximum and minimum temperature in each of  the four seasons. Trends are based on available data  from 1900 to 2013. Seasonal trends are based on  averages for spring (March-May), summer (June-  August), fall (September-November), and winter  (December-February).  TRENDS IN MAXIMUM TEMPERATURE From 1900 to 2013, annual day-time maximum  temperatures increased in BC by an average   of 0.7°C per century. Annual day-time   maximum temperatures increased by 1.0ºC   to 1.3ºC per century in the Taiga plains and  Northern Boreal Mountains ecoprovinces. In   the Sub-Boreal and Boreal Plains ecoprovinces   the annual day-time maximum temperatures  increased by 0.9ºC per century. In three other  ecoprovinces (Georgia Depression, Coast and  Mountains, Central Interior) the data do not   reveal statistically significant trends in annual  maximum temperature.  Change  in Annual  Maximum  and Minimum  Temperature,  1900-2013   (ºC per century)   Seasonal data indicate that day-time maximum  winter temperatures increased across most of BC.  The average winter day-time maximum temperature  increased by 1.9ºC per century. Maximum day-time  spring temperatures are increasing in the north of  BC, but data do not reveal a statistically significant  trend in the southern half of the province. For all of  BC, data do not reveal a trend in day-time maximum  temperature in the summer and fall.  The greatest increases in maximum day-time  temperatures are found in the north. Winter day- time maximum temperatures increased by 3.0ºC  to 3.3ºC per century in the Boreal Plains and Taiga  Plains ecoprovinces. In the Sub-Boreal Interior and  the Northern Boreal Mountains ecoprovinces the  winter day-time maximum temperatures increased  by 2.3ºC to 2.6ºC per century. In the three interior  ecoprovinces the winter day-time maximum  temperature increased by 1.2ºC to 1.6ºC per century.  In the spring the northern ecoprovinces (Sub-boreal  Interior, Boreal Plains, Taiga Plains, Northern Boreal  Mountains) warmed by 1.1ºC to 1.5ºC per century.  The southern half of BC showed no trend in the spring  for changes in day-time maximum temperature.  In the Georgia Depression ecoprovince there  was no trend in the data for day-time maximum  temperature for any season.  Indicators:  MAXIMUM AND MINIMUM   TEMPERATURE  Night-time minimum temperatures in BC are   warmer on average than they were a century   ago. The increase in minimum temperature   is particularly noticeable in the winter season   and the northern regions of BC. In winter and   spring, higher minimum temperatures may   reduce heating costs and in some parts of BC   may also increase the frequency of freeze-  thaw cycles. In the summer they may prevent   buildings from cooling down during the night. SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring Program   and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013 conducted by PCIC,  2014 for the Ministry of Environment Climate Action Secretariat. NOTES: All trends   are positive and indicate warming. NS indicates that trend is not statistically significant.  Revised 2015    12  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  TRENDS IN MINIMUM TEMPERATURE Annual night-time minimum temperatures  increased across BC an average of 2.0ºC per  century from 1900 to 2013. The greatest  increase in minimum temperature has been  recorded in the Boreal Plains ecoprovince, where  daily minimum temperature increased at a rate  equivalent to 2.8ºC per century. In the Taiga  Plains and Sub-Boreal Interior ecoprovinces the  annual daily minimum temperature increased  2.6ºC per century. On the coast (Georgia  Depression and Coast and Mountains) the  annual night-time minimum temperatures  increased 1.2ºC to 1.5ºC per century.   Seasonal data indicate that night-time  minimum temperatures increased across all  of BC for all seasons. The average night-time  minimum temperature increased in winter for  the province at 3.1ºC per century.   In the Boreal Plains the night-time  minimum temperature increased at the  greatest rate for all ecoprovinces, in all  seasons. In the winter, in the Boreal Plains  ecoprovince, the night-time minimum  temperature increased by 4.8ºC per century,  in spring it increased by 2.2ºC per century, in  summer by 2.4ºC per century and in fall by  1.9ºC per century. In contrast, in the Georgia  Depression ecoprovince, the night-time  minimum temperature increased at a   rate equivalent to 1.2ºC in the winter, 1.2ºC  in the spring, 1.5ºC in the summer and  0.8ºC in the fall. In the interior (Central  Interior, Southern Interior and Southern  Interior Mountains) the night-time minimum  temperature increased by 2.4ºC to 2.9ºC  per century in the winter, in the spring it  increased by 1.7ºC to 1.8ºC per century, in   the summer by 1.9ºC to 2.0ºC per century   and in the fall by 1.1ºC to 1.3ºC per century.   The night-time minimum temperature  increased in the winter in the Taiga Plains  ecoprovince by 4.7ºC per century, and in the  Sub-Boreal Interior ecoprovince by 4.2ºC per   Change in  Maximum  Temperature,  by season,  1900-2013  (ºC per  century)   SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring  Program and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013  conducted by PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment Climate   Action Secretariat. NOTES: All statistically significant trends are positive  and indicate warming. NS indicates that trend is not statistically significant.  Change in  Minimum   Temperature  by season,  1900-2013  (ºC per  century)   SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring  Program and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013  conducted by PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment Climate Action  Secretariat. NOTES: All statistically significant trends are positive and  indicate warming.  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  spring  winter fall  summer  NS  NSNS  NS  L E G E N D  NS  NSNS  +1.1 NS  NSNS  +1.6  NS  NSNS  +1.2  NS  NSNS  +1.4  +1.1 NS  NS+2.3  +1.5 NS  NS+3.3+1.4 NS  NS+2.6 +1.3 NS  NS+3  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  spring  winter fall  summer  +1.7+1.9 +1.1+2.4  +1.3+1.3 +.9+2.1  +2.0+2.1 +1.6+4.7+1.6+1.5  +1.2+3.8  +1.8+1.9 +1.2+2.9  +2.2+2.4 +1.9+4.8+2.1+2.1  +1.7+4.2  +1.8+2 +1.3+2.9  +.8  +1.5  +1.2  +1.2  L E G E N D    13  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  century. In both ecoprovinces the summer night- time minimum temperature increased by 2.1ºC   per century.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? The strong, increasing trends in minimum  temperature, especially during the winter, have likely  made the greatest contri bution to the general warming  trends across the province. In regions and in seasons  where trends in both minimum and maximum  temperatures were observed, minimum temperatures  increased faster than maximum temperatures over  the record period. As a result, the temperature range  during the average day has decreased.  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC) has concluded that the increase   in minimum temperatures has lengthened the  freeze-free season in many mid-and high-latitude   regions. Higher night-time minimum temperatures  in fall, winter, and spring may enhance the  growing conditions for both valuable and pest  plant and insect species and decrease heating  costs. In summer, they may increase heat-related  stress in humans and other species because  buildings and habitats may not be able to cool  down adequately at night. In some parts of BC,  freeze-thaw cycles may increase in frequency.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Climate models project that in the 21st century,  night-time lows in many areas will continue to  increase more than day-time highs. A number of  models suggest that in the Northern Hemisphere  the gap between the daily maximum and the   daily minimum will decrease in winter and   increase in summer.    14  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB-BOREAL INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  +10  +14  +17  +17 +21  +14  +14  +11  NS  SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring   Program and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through   2013 conducted by PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment.   NOTES: All statistically significant trends are positive and indicate increasing  precipitation. NS indicates that trend is not statistically significant.  ABOUT THE INDICATOR The indicator measures changes in annual average  daily precipitation at weather stations across BC. It  also measures changes in average daily precipitation  in each of the four seasons. Trends are based on  data from 1900 to 2013. While these trends are  reported for the whole period from 1900 to 2013,  at the beginning of that time period the network of  weather stations was relatively sparse through BC.  The statistical uncertainty in the trends may not fully  capture the uncertainty that arises from changes  in the observational network over time. However,  the precipitation trends reported here are broadly  consistent with other analyses carried out at a coarser  spatial resolution and at individual stations.   Seasonal trends are based on averages for spring  (March-May), summer (June-August), fall (September- November), and winter (December-February).   ANNUAL PRECIPITATION TRENDS Province-wide average annual precipitation has  increased by 12 percent per century. Average annual  precipitation increased by 17 percent per century in   the Southern Interior and by 21 percent per century  in the Southern Interior Mountains ecoprovinces.  Precipitation in the Central Interior increased by   17 percent per century. Precipitation increased in  the Coast and Mountains ecoprovince by 10 percent  per century. In the Georgia Depression ecoprovince,  precipitation increased by 14 percent per century.  In the Sub-Boreal Interior and the Boreal   Plains ecoprovinces average annual precipitation  has increased by 14 percent per century. The data  do not indicate a statistically significant trend for  the Northern Boreal Mountains.  SEASONAL PRECIPITATION TRENDS Trends in seasonal precipitation are varied through  BC. Through most of the province, the data do  not indicate statistically significant trends in  winter precipitation. And, the data do not indicate  seasonal trends in the Coast and Mountains  ecoprovince.  In the Georgia Depression ecoprovince,  precipitation has increased by 23 percent per  century in the spring, and the data do not indicate   Change   in Average  Precipitation,  1900-2013   (% per century)  Indicator:   PRECIPITATION  Average precipitation increased over   most of southern BC from 1900 to   2013. More water may be available to   recharge groundwater aquifers, maintain   river flows, and replenish soil moisture.   Hydroelectric power generation,   irrigation, and domestic water use may   benefit. In some seasons, increased   runoff may increase the chance of   landslides and debris torrents, or exceed   the capacity of municipal drainage and   sewage systems.  Revised 2015    15  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  any seasonal precipitation trends in other seasons.  In the Boreal Plains ecoprovince, precipitation has  increased by 18 percent per century in the summer  and the data do not indicate any seasonal trends for  any other seasons.  In the interior and southern coast of BC,  precipitation is increasing in the spring months.  In the Taiga plains and the Northern Boreal  Mountains ecoprovinces, the precipitation trends  indicate an increase in precipitation in the winter,  summer and fall, but not in the spring. In the four  interior ecoprovinces in BC there is a trend towards  increasing precipitation in the spring, summer and  fall, but not in the winter.  The date that each season arrives varies from  one part of BC to the next, depending on climate,  latitude, and elevation. The seasonal trends  described here are based on calendar dates, and  may therefore fail to reflect the seasons well for  some parts of BC.  Change in Seasonal Precipitation,  1900-2013 (% per century)  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Precipitation is a fundamental aspect of climate and   a key indicator of climate change. It is highly variable  across BC as a consequence of topography and  natural climate variability. Mountain slopes that face  the prevailing westerly winds receive considerably  more rain than leeward slopes or adjacent valleys.   Natural and human systems are adapted to such  variability. Climate change, however, may mean a  shift to warmer, wetter years, more frequent wet  years, greater year-to-year variability, and more  extreme precipitation events. Long-term changes in  the amount, form, and timing of precipi tation have  significant impacts on freshwater and terrestrial  ecosystems as well as on human activities. The  impacts will vary depending on season, and some  impacts may carry over from one season to the next.   In general, an increase in precipitation suggests  that more water is available for natural systems,  to recharge groundwater aquifers, maintain river  flows, replenish soil moisture, maintain wetlands  and marshes, and support plant growth. Human  activities that depend on water supply – including  hydro electric power generation, irrigation, domestic  water use, and some industrial processes – may  benefit. Increased precipitation may also be  responsible in some areas and in some seasons for  increased flooding and damage to ecosystems and  infrastructure. Increased year-to-year variability in  precipitation may have adverse impacts on wetlands  and other ecosystems and make water planning  more complex. • Where winter precipitation falls as snow – in    the interior and north of BC, for example –  an increase in precipitation may help local  economies based on skiing and other winter  recreation activities, but increase the cost of road  maintenance and acci dents. Snow build-up during  the winter may increase the amount of water  released into streams and rivers in spring and  summer when the snow melts.  • Where winter precipitation falls as rain – on the  coast, for example – an increase in precipitation  may increase winter runoff, exceeding the capacity   BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB-BOREAL INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  +23 NS  NSNS  spring  winter fall  summer  L E G E N D  +21 +18  NS +19  +16 +15  NS +20  +32 +22  NS +17  NS NS  NS NS +34 +24  NS +19  +13  +21+27  NS  +12  +18+14  NS  NS  NS NS  +18  SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring   Program and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through   2013 conducted by PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment.   NOTES: All statistically significant trends are positive and indicate increasing  precipitation. NS indicates that trend is not statistically significant.    16  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  of municipal drainage and sewage systems and  reducing water quality.  WHY IS PRECIPITATION INCREASING? Atmospheric warming is a component of climate  change. Warmer air can hold more water vapour,  pick up water faster from the earth, lakes, and  oceans, and carry more moisture to the land, where   it falls as rain or snow. Thus atmospheric warming   is associated with a global increase in precipitation  over land.  In BC, prevailing winds carry moisture inland  from the Pacific Ocean. As the air rises over coastal  mountains, it cools, releasing moisture. Average  surface temperatures of the ocean and the land  increased during the 20th century. As a result, winds  carry more moisture from the ocean to the coast and  the interior of the province.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Average annual precipitation across BC will continue  to vary from year to year in response to natural  cycles in air and ocean currents. Relatively wet years,  however, will almost certainly increase in frequency  through the end of the century.  Climate models project that average annual  precipitation in the mid-latitudes of the Northern  Hemisphere will continue to increase. Precipitation  is projected to increase by 4 to 17 percent by  the 2080s compared to the 1961-1990 historical  average, according to PCIC’s Plan2Adapt tool.  Winter precipitation is projected to increase from  5 to 23 percent in the province as a whole by the  2080s. As temperatures increase, more winter  precipitation will fall as rain rather than snow.   More information about future climate in BC   can be found online at Plan2Adapt (http://  www.pacificclimate.org/analysis-tools/plan2adapt).  Annual averages for precipitation do not tell us  a lot about how and when that precipitation occurs.  According to the IPCC, frequency and intensity of  heavy precipitation events has likely increased in  North America since 1950 due to climate change.  The frequency and intensity of heavy precipitation  events is likely to increase in BC through the 21st  century. This could result in an increase in extreme  precipitation events (heavy rain and snow) and the  possibility of increased localized flooding.    17  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  Indicators:   SNOW  The water content and the depth of   snow is decreasing, resulting in higher   snow density in some parts of BC.   Changes in snowpack affect the amount   of water that is stored over the winter   and released to groundwater aquifers,   streams, and rivers in the spring and   summer. These changes may affect   the timing of snowmelt and local heat   exchange processes.  Change in  Snow Water  Equivalent,  1950-2014   (% per decade)  SOURCE: Data provided by the River Forecast Centre, Ministry of Forests, Lands   and Natural Resource Operations, and Ministry of Environment. Analysis by PCIC,   2016, for Ministry of Environment. Notes: All statistically significant trends are negative  and indicate decreasing SWE. NS indicates that trend is not statistically significant.  ABOUT THE INDICATOR The indicators measure changes in snow depth  and snow water equivalent (SWE), the amount of  water that is contained in the snow pack. Together,  the measures provide information about snow  density. Trends are based on data collected at  provincial snow survey stations in spring (April 1)  between 1950 and 2014. Most stations are located  between 1,000 and 2,000 metres above sea level.   SNOW TRENDS IN BRITISH COLUMBIA Trends in SWE and snow depth in BC are not  uniform across the regions studied.  In the Southern Interior Mountains, SWE  decreased at a rate of 5 percent per decade. Snow  depth decreased at a rate of 7 percent per decade.  In the Central Interior, SWE decreased at a rate of  5 percent per decade. Snow depth decreased at a rate  of 10 percent per decade.  In the Southern Interior SWE decreased at a rate  of 7 percent per decade. Snow depth decreased at a  rate of 11 percent per decade.  In the Boreal Plains, Georgia Depression, the  Northern Boreal Mountains, and Taiga Plains  ecoprovinces, there have not been significant SWE   trends. Snow depth in the Georgia Depression  decreased by 6 percent per decade.   Together, SWE and snow depth provide   infor mation about snow density. In general, as   SWE increases for the same volume of snow, or  as depth decreases while SWE remains constant,  density increases. Snow density has increased in four  ecoprovinces; the three where snow depth decreased  at a faster rate than SWE, and the one where SWE  showed no significant trend but depth decreased.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Snow acts as a temporary storage system for winter  precipitation, and SWE is a measure of how much  water is stored as snow. When snow melts in spring  and early summer, this water becomes available to  recharge groundwater aquifers, fill reservoirs, and  replenish soil moisture.  Many rivers in BC are snowmelt-fed, meaning  they are characterized by a surge of water when  snow melts in the spring and early summer. This  influx of meltwater helps keep temperatures at  a comfortable level for fish and other aquatic  organisms. In many parts of BC, it also ensures that  enough water is available in summer for irrigation,   BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  -5  NS  -5  -7  NS  NS  NS  NS NS  Revised 2016    18  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  hydro-electric power generation, industry, fisheries,  and domestic water use.  Snow depth affects the capacity of snow to act  as an insulator. In general, the deeper the snow, the  greater its insulating value. Changes in snow depth  may therefore affect the local rate of heat exchange  between the land and water and the atmosphere, and  the rate and time at which ice melts.  Snow density can affect the timing and rate of  melting. Denser snow is closer to its melting point.  Increasing density may signal earlier or more rapid  spring melting. Heavy rainfall on top of dense, wet  snow can trigger rapid melting and flooding and  damage to eco systems and infrastructure.   The geographical extent of snow cover is as  impor tant as its physical characteristics. Satellite   data show that in the Northern Hemisphere, the  extent of early spring snow cover has decreased  by about 10 percent from pre-1970 values. This  has adverse implications for recreational winter  sport activities and related economies. It may also  contribute to local warming as exposed ground  absorbs and retains heat.  Change in   Snow Depth,  1950-2014   (% per decade)  WHY IS THE SNOWPACK CHANGING? Snow accumulation and its characteristics are   the result of air temperature, precipitation, storm  frequency, wind, and the amount of moisture in the  atmosphere. Changes in these and other climate  properties can therefore affect snowpack.  Winter warming is the most likely cause of  increasing snow density. As winter temperatures  warm, more winter precipitation is likely to fall as  heavy “wet” snow. Rain or sleet may compact snow  already on the ground. Warmer air temperatures can  cause snow already on the ground to melt onto itself.  Temperature also affects the altitude of the  snowline in mountainous areas and hence the  total size of the area above the snowline. As  temperature increases, the area above the snowline  shrinks. This in turn affects the proportion of  total precipitation that falls and is stored as snow  and the amount of runoff in spring and summer.   BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  -10 -7  -11  -6  NS NS  NS  NS  NS  SOURCE: Data provided by the River Forecast Centre, Ministry of Forests, Lands   and Natural Resource Operations. Analysis by PCIC, 2016, for Ministry of Environment.  Notes: All statistically significant trends are negative and indicate decreasing snow  depth. NS indicates that trend is not statistically significant.    19  C H A N G E S  T O  T E M P E R A T U R E  A N D  P R E C I P I T A T I O N  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC) has concluded that there is a highly  significant correlation between increases in surface  temperatures and decreases in the extent of snow  and ice in the Northern Hemisphere.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? The amount of precipitation that falls as snow will  continue to vary from year to year in response to  natural climate cycles. Climate models project,  however, that as the Earth continues to warm, the  extent of snow cover in the Northern Hemisphere  will continue to decrease during the 21st century.  The IPCC has concluded that in mountainous  regions of North America, particularly at mid-  elevations, higher temperatures could lead to a  long-term reduction in peak snow-water equivalent,  with the snowpack building later in the year and  melting sooner.  Projected Change in Snow- Water-Equivalent in the Canadian  Portion of the Columbia River  Basin, 2011-2100  Projections of April 1 snowpack for three future periods show reductions at lower  elevations and increases at higher elevations as the 21st century progresses. The  snowpack retreats to higher elevations, reducing its area progressively through the  century. The lowest elevations are projected to lose the majority of their snowpack  by volume by the end of the century while higher elevations will see modest gains in  snow. Overall, less water will be stored as snow in the future and this storage will occur  at higher elevations than historically. SOURCE: Adapted from Werner, et al. (2013).  April 1 SWE Change  -100 to -85  -85 to -70  -70 to -55  -55 to -40  -40 to -25  -25 to -10  -10 to -5  -5 to 5  5 to 10  10 to 25  25 to 40  40 to 55  55 to 70  70 to 85  85 to 100  >100  % change    20  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  ABOUT THIS INDICATOR Glaciers advance and retreat in response to changes  in climate over time scales from decades to centuries.  Glaciers thus respond to long-term changes in climate.  This report includes two indicators of change in glacier  coverage in BC. The first indicator is a measure of the  change in area covered by glaciers in BC. Glacier area  change was assessed by comparing the mapped extents  of glaciers from the BC Terrain Resource Information  Management (TRIM) program in 1985 with Landsat  satellite imagery from 2005. The second indicator  is the rate of change in the volume of glacier ice.  Glacier volume change was assessed by differencing  the topography measured during the TRIM campaign  from the topography measured during the shuttle radar  tomography mission (SRTM) in 2000.  Note that there are no glaciers in the Taiga Plains  or Boreal Plains ecoprovinces of BC, so no results are  reported for those regions.   GLACIER AREA CHANGES From 1985 to 2005 the glacier coverage in the  province as a whole decreased by 2525 km2. Most  of the glaciers in BC are in the Coast and Mountains  ecoprovince, so while there was a large area of  ice coverage lost, it corresponded with a smaller  percentage area loss than southern and central   regions of BC. The glaciers in the Georgia Depression  ecoprovince are primarily on Vancouver Island,  and those had the greatest percent area loss in the  province. The area of glaciers in this region is small,  however, so this represents a small change in the  overall glacier ice cover of BC. The Central Interior  ecoprovince lost 12 percent of the area of glacier ice  coverage from 1985 to 2005. The Northern Boreal  Mountains, Sub-Boreal Interior and Southern Interior  Mountains lost 15 to 16 percent of the area of glacier  ice coverage.  Indicator:   GLACIERS  All glaciers in BC retreated from 1985   to 2005. In the short term, retreating   glaciers add water to glacier-fed streams   and rivers. In the long term, this retreat   will decrease late summer to early   autumn runoff for these rivers.  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB- BOREAL  INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  -15-494  -16-233  -16-459  -6-1197 -12-94  -34-3  -12-45  km2 %  L E G E N D  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB-BOREAL INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  -15.4 -0.7  -0.3 -1.8  -1.1  -2.6  NT  Glacier Volume  Loss Rate   1985-2000   (km3/year)  SOURCE: Data from Schiefer et al. (2007) NOTES: All changes are negative and  indicate loss of volume. NT indicates that there was no trend.  Change in  Glacier Area  1985-2005   (km2 and %)  SOURCE: Bolch et al. (2010) NOTES: All changes are negative and indicate decreasing area.  Revised 2015    21  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  TRENDS IN GLACIER VOLUME LOSS RATE From 1985 to 2000 the province of BC lost 21.9 km3  per year of ice from glaciers. As the Coast and  Mountains ecoprovince has the most ice by volume,  it also experienced the greatest volume loss rate.  The Northern Boreal Mountains have the second  largest area of ice in the province and are currently  experiencing the second largest volume loss. We  see from the temperature indicators that this is also  where the most dramatic warming is occurring and  this is likely driving the volume loss. The volume  loss rate in the Sub-Boreal Interior and Southern  Interior Mountains ecoprovinces equaled 1.1 and   1.8 km3 per year, respectively.  Although the glaciers on Vancouver Island (Georgia  Depression ecoprovince) had the greatest percentage  area change, they are small glaciers so estimates of the  volume loss rate are uncertain. The estimated volume  change is near zero for the period, but confidence in  this number is low.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Glacial meltwater feeds many mountain streams   and rivers in BC, including the Cheakamus River,  Pemberton Creek, Slesse Creek, Homathko River,  Lillooet River, and Squamish River. In glacier-fed  rivers, the highest flows tend to occur in early or  mid-summer, depending on latitude, and glacier  runoff can account for a significant portion of the  available water supply.  Glacier retreat is therefore likely to cause  changes in the flow timing and temperature of  some streams and rivers. These changes – along  with other climate-driven changes to hydrological  systems (see “Freezing and Thawing”) – will  likely have significant impacts on freshwater and  estuarine ecosystems and on aquatic species. They  will affect other biological systems and human  activities that depend on water.  In the short term, melting glaciers will likely  discharge more water into some BC streams and  rivers. This may provide short-term benefits to  hydroelectric power generation, water-based  recreation, irrigation, fisheries, and other water   users. Higher flows may also, however, increase  stream turbidity and damage fish habitat and  riparian areas.  In the longer term, glacier retreat will likely  mean reduced water volume in glacier-fed streams  and rivers, especially during the summer months.  In water-short regions, this could generate increased  competition between various water users.  WHY ARE GLACIERS MELTING? The advance or retreat of a glacier represents the  integration of many climate-related events that may  occur over a period as short as one year or as long  as centuries.  Climate models suggest that for most glaciers,  changes in temperature, rather than changes in  precipitation, control the evolution of glacier ice  volume. Although winter precipitation fuels the  growth of a glacier, a warm summer can melt large  gains from more than one previous year. The IPCC  assesses that warmer temperatures associated with  climate change are the cause of world-wide glacial  melting.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Glaciers and ice caps are projected to continue  their widespread retreat through the 21st century.  Globally, the actual rate of retreat will depend on  the rate at which the temperature increases. The  retreat of most glaciers will accelerate, and many  small glaciers may disappear. Areas that are currently  marginally glaciated are likely to become ice-free in  future.  In BC, glaciers will continue to retreat throughout  the province. The smaller glaciers in the southern   ecoprovinces are likely to disappear by the end of the   21st century. Even glaciers with a high proportion of  their surface at high elevations will continue to retreat.    22  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  ABOUT THE INDICATORS The indicators measure changes in the dates on   which key freezing and thawing events occur on   lakes and rivers in British Columbia. They are: • date of first melt • ice-free date (when rivers and lakes are    completely free of ice) • first date of permanent ice • date of complete freezing  Trends are based on data from six (and for   one indicator, seven) stations. The records span   27 to 51 years, and most cover approximately   three decades.  MELTING AND FREEZING TRENDS Lakes and rivers now start to melt earlier in spring,  on average, than they did several decades ago. First  melt has become earlier by 9 days per decade in  Dease Lake, 5 days per decade in Fort Nelson, 7 days  per decade in Omineca River, and 8 days per decade  in the Thompson River region.  Lakes and rivers also become free of ice earlier,  on average, than they did several decades ago. The  ice free date has become earlier by 6 days per decade  in the Thompson River region, 3 days per decade in  Omineca River, 4 days per decade at Charlie Lake,   north of Fort St. John, 3 days per decade at Dease  Lake, and 2 days per decade at Fort Nelson.  Lakes and rivers in northern BC may freeze later  in the fall, on average, than they did several decades  ago. At Charlie Lake, the first permanent ice appears  5 days per decade later. At Fort Nelson, lakes freeze  over com  pletely 4 days per decade later. These  trends are not replicated in adjacent stations and  are considered weak.  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC) has concluded that the annual duration  of lake and river ice in the mid-latitudes of the  Northern Hemisphere probably decreased by about  two weeks during the 20th century, or at a rate of   1 to 2 days per decade. It is difficult to compare the  BC trends with this global average because the BC  trends are based on data collected during a shorter,  relatively warm period. The BC trends likely reflect  climate variability rather than climate change.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? The duration of ice on lakes and rivers is important   for transportation. Vehicles involved in winter  logging and oil and gas exploration can move about  more easily when water bodies are frozen. Skiers  and snowmobilers can use frozen lakes and rivers as  backcountry roads.  Change in   Date of   First Melt,  1945-1993  (days per  decade)   SOURCE: Data from Meteorological Service of Canada, Environment  Canada. Analysis by Canadian Institute for Climate Studies, 2001, for  Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection. NOTES: A negative trend  means that water bodies start to melt earlier in the year.  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  -8 North and South Thompson Rivers  -5 Fort Nelson and Muskawa River  -9 Dease Lake  -7 Omineca River  Indicators:   FREEZING AND THAWING  Ice on lakes and rivers in BC melts earlier   now than it did several decades ago.   When ice melts earlier in the spring,   it can affect lake productivity, aquatic   ecosystems, and winter activities.  2002 edition    23  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  The duration of ice can also affect the  productivity of freshwater ecosystems. The  temperature of most lakes varies depending on  depth. When lakes are cold – at high latitudes, at  high elevations, or in winter – water at the bottom of  the lake is warmer than water at the top. When lakes  are warm – in low- to mid-elevations and latitudes,  and in summer – water at the bottom of the lake is  colder than water at the top. In spring and fall, many  lakes go through a period in which temperature  differences and thermal stratification disappear. This  allows the water, and the nutrients, oxygen, and  micro-organisms it contains, to mix throughout the  lake, increasing productivity.  In lakes that currently undergo thermal  stratification in summer, a longer ice-free period  means that stratification develops earlier in the year  and lasts longer. Periods of mixing during spring   and fall may be reduced in length. Increasing  temperatures mean that some lakes that currently  freeze over in winter may no longer do so. They   may move from a regime that includes winter  stratification to one that includes winter mixing.  The IPCC has concluded that changes in thermal  regimes and lake-mixing properties may have a  significant effect on the concentration of dissolved  oxygen in the deeper layers of many lakes, and  consequently on available fish habitat. They may   also affect primary productivity – the growth of  phytoplankton – in the upper layers of these lakes,  with impacts on fish production. The direction and  magnitude of these effects will vary depending on the  unique characteristics of the lake.  Many aquatic systems are sensitive to  temperature, and thawing and freezing events may  mark milestones in their life cycles. A longer ice-free  season may mean a longer growing season for these  organisms. It may allow some species to move into  new areas that were previously not habitable to them.  WHY IS THE ICE MELTING EARLIER? Climate affects the formation, thickening, and  melting of ice – processes that reflect the beginning  and end of the cold season and its severity. Air  temperature is the main influence on the rate of  heat loss and gain from water bodies and the timing  of freeze-up and melt. Other contributing factors  include cloudiness, solar radiation, wind speed,  humidity, precipitation, the depth and composition  of snow on top of the ice, and water temperature. All  of these factors reflect local climate conditions.  During the past century, almost all regions of BC  have experienced warmer spring temperatures (see  “Average Temperature”). Earlier dates of first melt  and ice breakup are consistent with these trends.  The IPCC attributes the reduction in the duration   of ice during the 20th century to climate change.   The BC trends, however, are based on short data  records. Most begin during a slightly cooler period –   the 1940s and 50s – and end during a warmer  period – the 1990s. They are therefore very likely to  have been influenced by natural climate variability. If  longer records were available, they would probably  show slower rates of change in BC.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Climate models project that globally, atmospheric  warm ing associated with climate change will  continue to be more pronounced in winter and  spring than in summer and fall. This warming will  likely continue to cause earlier thawing of ice on  provincial lakes and rivers.  Change in   Ice Free Date,   1945-1993  (days per  decade)   SOURCE: Data from Meteorological Service of Canada, Environment Canada. Analysis by  Canadian Institute for Climate Studies, 2001, for Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection.  NOTES: A negative trend means that water bodies are ice-free earlier in the year.  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  -6 North and South Thompson Rivers  -2 Fort Nelson and Muskawa River  -4 Charlie Lake  -3 Dease Lake  -3 Omineca River    24  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S   June, July, August (JJA) mean flow trends between 1958 and 2012.  SOURCE: Data from the Water Survey of Canada, Environment and  Climate Change Canada (1958-2012). Station list see Appendix C.   Analysis by PCIC for Ministry of Environment, 2016.  ABOUT THE INDICATORS The indicators measure changes in the timing as well  as volume of water. Timing is quantified as trends  in the dates by which one-half of the total annual  volume of each river has passed. Volume changes  are quantified by trends in seasonal minimum,  maximum, and mean flows. To better assess trends  in rivers for more of the province, and for rivers  that are rainfall- or snowmelt-fed, daily river flow  measurements were analyzed for basins across the  province over a 55-year period from 1958 to 2012.  In some places it was also possible to analyze a   101-year period from 1912 to 2012.  TRENDS IN RIVER FLOW IN BC Long-term records are available for five sub-basins  of the Fraser River watershed (Adams, Stellako,  Stuart, Lillooet, and Clearwater) and the Fraser  River at Hope, which drains roughly a quarter of the  province. At the Stellako and Fraser at Hope, the  date when half the annual water volume has passed  advanced nine and six days respectively over 1912  to 2012, while in the Adams the date became seven  days later over the 101-year record. Minimum daily  flow increased at four of the six sites which, for the   Indicators:   TIMING AND VOLUME    OF RIVER FLOW  Seasonal changes in the timing and   volume of river flow have occurred in   several locations. The bulk of water   flow is occurring earlier in the year on   average. At many locations, river flow   has decreased in late summer and early   fall. This could contribute to water   shortages for humans and ecosystems.  Revised 2016  St iki  ne  R   Peace R  Fraser R  Fraser R Kooten a  y R  Colum bia R  Signi�cant Increase  Signi�cant Decrease Chemainus Koksilah  Stellako Stuart  Clearwater Adams  Fraser  Lillooet  Columbia  Kootenay  Swift  Campbell  Fraser River watershed and its sub-basins, occurs in  late winter prior to the onset of spring melt. Three  sites demonstrated significant decreases in mean  summer (June, July and August) flow, ranging from  a 16% to 40% decrease and two sites (Stellako and  Lillooet) had significant decreases in minimum flow  in late summer (July, August, and September) by  31% and 39%, respectively. Annual minimum, late  spring maximum, and spring mean showed increased  flow for some sites. All other indicators showed  declining trends.  Data was available at stations on the Chemainus,  Koksilah, Stellako, Stuart, Clearwater, Adams, Fraser,  Lillooet, Columbia, Kootenay, and Swift for the more  recent 1958 to 2012 record. Of these rivers, the  Chemainus and Koksilah are rainfall-fed, while the  others are snowmelt-fed. Declines were seen in most  metrics for most rivers, reinforcing the pattern found  over the 101-year record with fewer stations. Late  spring maximum flows (April, May, June) decreased  at the Koksilah and Columbia (at Donald) and late  summer minimum flows (July, August, September)  decreased at four stations (Chemainus, Stellako,  Clearwater, and Fraser). Mean summer flow volume  (June, July, August) also decreased between 17% and  39% at four stations (Stellako, Clearwater, Fraser,   Trends for  summer (JJA)  mean flows,   1958-2012    25  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  and Columbia). Because summer flow makes up  a relatively small proportion of total annual flow,  these large percentages have smaller impacts on  total annual flows. However, mean annual flow  decreased by 16% in the Fraser at Hope, which is  important considering the expanse of BC this basin  covers. Over this same period, precipitation showed  a statistically non-significant decline of 3% (+/-17%)  per century. The discrepancy between the declining  river flow and modest to no declines in precipitation  indicates the influence of rising temperatures over  this period. Warmer temperature leads to greater  rates of evapotranspiration which reduces water  available for streamflow. Maximum daily flow did not  change significantly at any of the stations examined,  whereas minimum daily flows decreased at two sites  (Columbia and Koksilah) and increased at one (Swift  River). Over this period, only one indicator at one  river showed significant increases in flow; the Swift  River’s annual minimum flow. All other significant  trends show flow reductions. Comparing average  daily streamflow for the Fraser River at Hope for two  27-year periods illustrates the type of changes driving   seasonal streamflow trends for many stations across  BC. Flows are modestly reduced in winter, increased  during spring, and strongly decreased during summer  and fall in the latter 1986-2012 period versus the  earlier 1958-1984 period. These data have been  naturalized to correct for water diverted from the  Fraser River catchment to the Nechako reservoir,  which started in 1958.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Changes in the timing and volume of flow can affect  both natural ecosystems and human communities.  Lower flows in summer and later in the season  may reduce the amount of water available for  agriculture, hydroelectric power generation,  industry, and communities in some parts of the BC  interior. This is a potentially significant problem  in drier areas such as the Okanagan basin, where  most streams are already fully allocated to water  users and water shortages already exist. Low late- season flows are especially a concern in years when  below-average spring and summer rainfall coincides  with below-average summer flows. Lower flows  are also associated with declining water quality  including warmer water temperatures (see “River  Temperature”) which further threaten the health  of aquatic ecosystems and their organisms such as  salmon (see “Salmon in the River”).  WHY HAS RIVER FLOW CHANGED? Many factors affect trends in these indicators,  such as changes in temperature, precipitation,  and evapotranspiration. They also depend on the  location, size, elevation, and regime of a basin, be it  predominately rainfall- or snowmelt-fed and whether  substantial glacier cover exists. Thus, trends in river  flow are not uniform over the province for every  indicator. Ten of the 11 stations evaluated are part  of the Reference Hydrometric Network where direct  human influence and land use change have not  significantly altered the flow regime over time.  Detecting changes in streamflow and attributing  them to the effects humans have had on climate is   20 00  40 00  60 00  80 00  10 00  0  D is  ch ar  g e   (m 3 /  s)  Decreased Winter (DJF)  Flow   Decreased Summer (JJA)  Flow   Decreased Fall (SON)  Flow   Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec  median 1958-1984 0.1 / 0.9 percentiles median 1986-2012 0.1 / 0.9 percentiles  Comparison of flow of the Fraser River at Hope for two equal-length time periods,   1958-1984 and 1986-2012, showing median and 10th and 90th percentiles. Seasonal flows  have decreased between the first and the second time period during winter (December,  January, February), summer (June, July, August), and fall (September, October, November).   SOURCE: Data from the Water Survey of Canada, Environment and Climate Change   Canada (1958-2012), Fraser River at Hope (08MF005), augmented with data received from   Alan Chapman in 2007, which were adjusted for extractions via the Nechako Reservoir.  Analysis by PCIC for Ministry of Environment, 2016.  Changes to Fraser River Flow between 1958 and 2012    26  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  more difficult than attributing changes in temperature  and precipitation. Soil moisture and runoff changes  are difficult to isolate from the difference in  precipitation and evaporation alone. Other factors,  such as changes in land use, stream management,  water withdrawal and varying water use efficiency by  plants under different levels of CO  2 , also play a role. In   BC, snow storage and melting are important to runoff.  Winter temperature has increased significantly across  the province over the past century leading to less  winter precipitation falling as snow and earlier melting  of winter snow cover. The earlier passage of the  majority of water in snowmelt-fed rivers in the nearby  US is detectably different from natural variability since  the 1950s and can be attributed to human-caused  warming. There is some evidence that declining April  1 Snow Water Equivalent (SWE) in British Columbia  has a detectable human influence in simulations  that compare human-caused warming with natural  variability. This change is consistent with the expected  influence of warming on the hydrological cycle.  Warming is substantial in a study of the Fraser, Peace,  Columbia, and Campbell basins and attributable to  human causes. Natural variability alone is not a likely  explanation for the observed SWE changes.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Future streamflow in the Fraser, Peace, upper  Columbia, and Campbell rivers have been  investigated up to 2098 using multiple Global   Climate Models corrected to match the characteristics  of observed temperature and precipitation data for  British Columbia. These climate scenarios were used  as inputs to a hydrologic model covering 100-gauge  sites in the province.  During the 2050s (between 2041 and 2070)  in the Fraser River, annual streamflow is projected  to increase. Winter and spring flows are projected  to increase, summer flows to decrease and smaller  changes, in either direction, are projected in the fall.  Mean annual peak flow is projected to occur between  5 and 15 days earlier. Most of the trends described  above were analyzed for sub-basins of the Fraser  River where the majority of long-term records are  available over the 101-year period discussed earlier.  In the 2050s in the Campbell River, changes in annual  streamflow are expected to be negligible, but warmer  temperatures in future are expected to result in a  significant change in the hydrological regime relative  to the 1970s (1961-1990). This watershed is expected  to transition from being mixed rainfall- and snowmelt- fed to predominantly rainfall-fed, with increased  flow during the winter season and decreased flow in  spring and summer. Similar changes have already been  observed in other coastal watersheds such as   the Chemainus.   Total annual streamflow is expected to increase for  the upper Columbia River for the 2050s, regardless  of the model or emissions scenario investigated, but  there are important seasonal changes that are expected  to occur. Monthly streamflow is expected to increase  during the late fall and winter period, the spring melt  to occur earlier, and flow to be higher during spring  and early summer and lower in late summer and early  fall. Annual streamflow is expected to increase for the  Peace River for the 2050s, regardless of the model  considered. Monthly streamflow projections for the  Peace River show consistently higher future discharge  during fall and winter. Like the upper Columbia, there  is some indication that the Peace River may experience  an earlier onset of the spring melt and reductions in  streamflow to occur during late summer and early  fall. Some of the trends in observed data mimic the  projected changes with climate change, suggesting that  some effects are underway.  The half flow day is defined as the day of the calendar year on which one-half of the  total annual water flow has occurred. The solid line indicates that there is a trend at  the 5% significance level. Data from the Water Survey of Canada, Environment and  Climate Change Canada, augmented with data received from Alan Chapman, adjusted  for extractions via the Nechako Reservoir. Analysis by PCIC for Ministry of Environment,  2016. See Appendix C for methodology and references.  Change in Timing of One-half of  Fraser River Annual Flow, 1912-2012  1/ 2   Fl o  w  D  ay  1920 1940 1960 1980 2000 Jun 10  Jun 30  Jul 20  Aug 9  Trend Line    27  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  SOURCE: Historical temperature data from the Pacific Salmon Commission,  1941-1998. Historical weather data from Meteorological Service of Canada,  Environment Canada 1953-1998. Analysis by John Morrison, Institute of  Ocean Sciences, 2001 for the Ministry of Water, Land and Air Protection.  NOTES: Results are statistically significant. (R2 = 0.1151, p = .0226).  Change in Average Fraser River  Temperature, 1953-1998  ABOUT THE INDICATOR This indicator measures changes in the average  summer temperature of the Fraser River at Hell’s  Gate. It is based on daily measurements of water  temperature taken from July 1 to September 15 for  the years 1953 to 1998.  TRENDS IN RIVER TEMPERATURE The temperature of the Fraser River at Hell’s Gate in  summer warmed during the period 1953 to 1998 at  a rate equivalent to 2.2ºC per century.  The Fraser River is subject to seasonal and year- to-year variations in temperature that are related to  short-term natural climate variability. In general,  summer river temperatures are warmer after an   El Niño event and cooler after a La Niña event.  Because the period of record is only 45 years, these  short-term climate variations may have as much  influence on the observed trend towards river  warming as climate change.  The average temperature of the Columbia River   at or near the international boundary during the  summers of 1959 to 1997 also appears to have  warmed, but the data are not sufficient to establish a  trend. In addition, because the Columbia is a highly   regulated river system, any apparent trend might   be due to human-induced changes in the timing  and volume of river flow, or to the temperature   and volume of water reservoirs, rather than to  climate change.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? The Fraser River flows 1,370 kilometres from its  headwaters in the Rocky Mountains to the Pacific  Ocean. It supports ecologically important salmon  runs, including the majority of Canadian sockeye  stocks. Almost all runs must pass through Hell’s Gate  in their migration upriver to spawn. Warmer river  temperatures are expected to affect salmon and other  aquatic organisms.  In general, warm water temperatures reduce  salmon fitness, survival, and reproductive success  and promote potential long-term population declines  (see “Salmon in the River”). Declines in Fraser River  salmon stocks have negative impacts on provincial  fishing and tourism industries and aboriginal and  other communities that rely on fish. They affect  predators such as bald eagles and bears and coastal  ecosystem processes that depend on the nutrients  provided by salmon carcasses.  Te m  p er  at u  re  (  C )  12  14  16  18  20  200019901980197019601951  Trend Line  Indicator:   RIVER TEMPERATURE  The average summer temperature of   the Fraser River has warmed over the   past five decades. River warming can   have negative impacts on the health,   distribution, and survival of salmon but   positive impacts on aquatic species that   can tolerate warmer water.  2002 edition    28  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  In addition, many provincial salmon stocks are  classified as at moderate to high risk of extinction.  The United National Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC) believes that, without  appropriate management, climate change will  lead to changes in freshwater ecosystems that will  cause some species currently classified as “critically  endangered” to become extinct and the majority of  species classified as “endangered” or “vulnerable” to  approach extinction in the 21st century.  Over the long term, higher temperatures are  expected to result in a shift in the distribution of  salmon and other cold-water species to higher  latitudes and elevations, together with increased  population fragmentation in more southerly parts of  their ranges. If other factors were to limit these range  shifts, an overall reduction in the distribution of  certain species would be the result.  River warming may have positive impacts on  aquatic species that can tolerate warmer water  temperatures. Native warm-water species may be  able to expand their range into higher-altitude lakes  and more northerly regions. For example, a 4ºC  increase in average air temperature is projected to  expand the ranges of smallmouth bass and yellow  perch northward across Canada by about 500  kilometres. There is also an increased likelihood of  successful invasion by non-native species that require  warmer water temperatures.  WHY IS RIVER TEMPERATURE  INCREASING? River temperature is the result of complex  interactions between the characteristics of the river  itself, climate, and adjacent land-use practices.  Many streams and rivers in the Fraser system are  snowmelt-fed. In these river systems, climate change  is associated with earlier melting of ice in spring,  an earlier spring freshet, and lower summer flow  volume (see “Timing and Volume of River Flow”).  The average summer temperature of the Fraser River  is increasing because the average annual temperature  is getting warmer and because there is less water  in the river to heat. In addition, when snow melts   earlier in the season, it reduces the buffering effect  of the cold spring freshet on stream temperature in  early summer.  Examination of weather records suggests that  long-term changes in climate are responsible for   55 percent of the Fraser River warming. During the  period studied (1953-1998), summer climate as  measured upriver of Hell’s Gate at Prince George   and Kamloops changed in the following ways: air  temperature increased; cloud cover decreased; solar  radiation (the amount of sunlight reaching the  ground) increased; wind speed decreased; and dew  point temperature increased. Each of these changes  favours river warming.  Changes in adjacent land use over the record  period may also have affected river temperatures.  Forestry, agriculture, industrialization, and hydro- electric generation tend to decrease the amount of  vegetation cover along rivers and streams, exposing  more of the river surface to the sun’s heat. The  impacts of these events are small, however, in  comparison to the impact of climate.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? River temperatures will continue to vary from one  year to the next in response to short-term natural  climate variability. If the climate is warming,  however, years with warmer river temperatures are  expected to occur more frequently. In addition, river  temperatures may more often exceed those that are  optimal for fish.  Atmospheric temperature and other aspects of  climate affect river temperature. Climate models  project that air temperatures in British Columbia will  increase by 1ºC to 4ºC from 1961-1990 historical  average by the 2080s. The higher rate of warming  is projected to occur over the interior – the region  of the province that contains most of the rivers and  streams that feed the Fraser River system.    29  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  SALMON IN THE RIVER  Natural year-to-year variations in river flow and temperature affect the survival of sockeye  salmon stocks. Long-term changes in river flow  and temperature associated with climate change are  therefore likely to have an impact on Fraser River  sockeye populations over time.  Fish are sensitive to temperature, which regulates  many of their physiological processes. When  their environment is warmer, their metabolic rate  increases, speeding up internal processes such as  oxygen consumption, digestion, and mobility.  Salmon tolerate temperatures of up to about  24.5ºC but prefer temperatures from 12ºC to 15ºC.  Because sockeye prefer colder  temperatures than other salmon  species, sockeye may be the  species that is most sensitive to  climate change. Temperatures  above 15ºC can cause stress  in sockeye, depleting their  energy reserves, making them  more susceptible to disease  and reducing their capacity to  produce viable eggs and sperm. Temperatures above  18ºC can impair their swimming ability. They can  die from several days’ exposure to temperatures  between 22ºC and 24ºC or from brief exposure to  temperatures above 24ºC.  Fraser River Watershed  SOURCE: Ocean Science and   Productivity, Fisheries and Oceans   Canada.  Each summer and fall, adult  sockeye return from the ocean  to spawn in more than 150 natal  stream, river, and lake spawning  areas in the Fraser River water  -shed.  Different stocks start their long  swim upriver at different times.  The summer run group, including  stocks that originate in the Quesnel   and Chilko rivers, starts its migration upriver in  late July and August. The late run group, including  Shuswap stocks, arrives at the mouth of the Fraser  River in August, but typically waits four to six weeks  before entering the river to start migration.  Stuart L.  C hi l c o  L.  Lytton  Kamloops  Kamloops L .  F  R      A  S  E R  F R  R  A  E  S    R  I  V  E  R  Williams Lake  R I V  E R  Prince George  Stua tr  R.  Kenney Dam  Lillooet  Sh  us w  ap L.  Chilcotin R.  Quesnel R. Qu  es ne  l L .  Ad am  s R .  N ec  ha ko  River  Bon aparte   R.  Nechako Reservoir  Horsefly R.  Nicola R.  Fraser River Watershed  Strait  of  Georgia  V a n c o u v e r   I s l a n d  HELL‘S GATE  Blue R.  R.  Jasper  HOPE  N. Thompson  Quesnel  Th om  p s on  Th om ps  on R.River  N. Th  om ps  on Rive r  S.  VANCOUVER  British Columbia  K E Y  M A P  Tom Hall  Warmer river temperatures are  associated with increased mortality   in migrating salmon stocks. Changes  in river flow and temperature   linked to climate change are  expected to have profound negative  impacts on some salmon stocks.  2002 edition    30  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  F R E S H W A T E R  E C O S Y S T E M S  HOW DOES RIVER TEMPERATURE  AFFECT SOCKEYE SALMON? Most Fraser River sockeye stocks must pass through  Hell’s Gate, above Hope, in their migration upriver.  Measurements taken at Hell’s Gate show considerable  year-to-year variability in river flow and temperature.  Research has established a link between water  flow and temperature and mortality in Fraser River  spawning stocks. Fish may die while in transit up the  river (“en route mortality”) or they may not spawn  when they arrive at their spawning grounds (“pre- spawning mortality”).  In several years during the past decade, en   route mortality in several runs has been greater than  50 percent. Records from 1978 to 1998 indicate   that en route losses have been greatest in years   with warm river temperatures. The connection is  particularly strong in the summer run group, which  migrates when river temperatures are at their highest.  In recent years the late run group has been starting  migration early and is therefore also at risk.  Pre-spawning mortality across all Fraser River  sockeye stocks over a five-decade period ranged from  0 to 85 percent. Studies suggest a weak link between  higher rates of pre-spawning mortality and warmer- than-average river temperatures.  Long-term trends in river flow and temperature  associated with climate change are therefore reasons  to be concerned about the prospects for many  Fraser River salmon stocks. Records show that the  Fraser River is now discharging more of its annual  volume earlier in the year (see “River Flow and  Timing’). Earlier spring runoff is associated with  lower summer flows and higher water temperatures  (see “River Temperature”).  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? While river flow and temperature will still vary from  one year to the next, summers with lower flow and  warmer temperatures will likely occur more often  in the future. This is expected to have profound  negative impacts on Fraser River sockeye stocks   over the long term. More research is needed to  determine whether stocks in more northerly rivers –   the Skeena, Nass, and Somass – and the Rivers  Inlet and Smith Inlet areas will experience the same  temperature extremes and will face the same threats  as a result of climate change.  SOURCE: Data and analysis by S. Macdonald and J. Grout, Fisheries and Oceans  Canada, 2001. NOTES: En route mortality is the difference between estimates   of the number of fish entering the Fraser River, and the number reaching the  spawning grounds. A negative number represents fish lost en route. A positive  number represents uncertainties in estimation, and/or en route fishing activities.  Results are statistically significant at the 95% level.  Migration Success of  Summer Run Sockeye   and Temperature at   Hell’s Gate, 1978-1998.  En -r  o u  te  m  o rt  al it  y  1,500,000  1,000,000  500,000  0  -500,000  -1,000,000  -1,500,000  93  96  92  97  81  94  98  15 16 17 18 19  Temperature at Hell's Gate (C)  SOURCE: Burghner, R.L. 1991. Life History of Sockeye Salmon. In Pacific Salmon Life  Histories. University of British Columbia, p.3-117. Graphic from Temperature Rising:  Climate Change in Southwestern British Columbia, 1999.  R i v e r  O c e a n  H ig  h  s  tr es  s  Sa lm  o n   s tr  es s-  o -m  et er22C  21C 20C 19C 18C 17C 16C 15C 14C  warmer waters increase bacterial/ fungal infections  of salmon  warmer winter reduced snowpack,  and snowmelt longer  summer drought  warmer river  temperature  lower summer  flow  warmer waters cause salmon to  burn energy faster  salmon die en route due to exhaustion and infection  stressed salmon reach spawning  grounds, but fail to spawn    31  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  +13 Prince Rupert  -12 Tofino  +4 Vancouver  +7 Victoria  Change   in Average   Sea Level,   1910-2014   (cm per century)   ABOUT THE INDICATOR This indicator measures changes in the average level  of the sea relative to the adjacent land. It is based on  records from 1910-2014 (with some gaps) from four  tide gauges that monitor water levels, located along  the British Columbia coast.   The trends identified for coastal BC reflect the  combined impacts of climate change and vertical  land movements caused by geological processes.  The coast of BC is still rising from a process called  post-glacial rebound, which refers to the rising of  land due to past thinning and retreat of the massive  ice sheet that once covered much of the province.  In addition, the shifting of tectonic plates generates  vertical land motion in coastal BC that is causing  parts of Vancouver Island to rise.  SEA LEVEL TRENDS Average relative sea level rose at the rate of  13.3 centimetres per century at Prince Rupert,  6.6 centimetres at Victoria, and 3.7 centimetres  at Vancouver. In contrast, relative sea level fell at  Tofino at the rate of 12.4 centimetres per century.  These trends reflect the combined impacts of vertical  movements of the shoreline and a rise in average  global sea level.   The variation in sea level change between the  four sites is largely explained by different amounts  of vertical land motion. The southwest coast of  Vancouver Island is rising at about 25 centimetres  per century, while the vertical land motion of  Prince Rupert is negligible, thus explaining the  approximately 25 centimetres difference in sea-level  change between Tofino and Prince Rupert.  Tide gauge measurements from around the  world suggest that global sea level rose about  1.7 millimetres per year (17 centimetres per century)  on average during the 20th century. Over the past  two decades, tide gauge and satellite measurements  indicate that the rate of global sea-level rise  has increased to about 3.2 millimetres per year  (32 centimetres per century).  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Rising sea level will likely contribute to increased  flooding of low-lying coastal areas. This may threaten  wetlands, beaches, dunes, and other sensitive  coastal ecosystems, and sites of cultural importance  to Aboriginal peoples. It may also strain drainage  and sewage systems in some coastal communities.  Salt water may intrude into groundwater aquifers,  making the water they contain unfit for household   Indicator:   SEA LEVEL  Average sea level has risen along most   of the BC coast over the past century.   Higher sea levels increase the risk of   flooding of low-lying coastal areas,   may contribute to increased erosion   of coastlines, and may damage coastal   ecosystems and infrastructure.  Revised 2016  SOURCE: Data from the Canadian Hydrographic Service, Department  of Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Analysis by PCIC for Ministry of  Environment, 2016. NOTES: A positive trend indicates a rise in sea level.    32  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  or agricultural use. Even before they are actually  inundated, low-lying agricultural lands may become  too saline for cultivation.  Higher mean sea level and more frequent extreme  high-water events, such as king tides, will increase the  likelihood that storms will damage waterfront homes,  wharves, roads, and port facilities and contribute to  coastal erosion.  Areas particularly at risk are the Fraser River delta,  where 100 square kilometres of land are currently  within one metre of sea level, and Prince Rupert,  which experiences extreme high water events more  frequently than other areas of the coast.  Changes in the height and direction of prevailing  ocean waves, storm waves, and storm surges as a  result of climate change may also have serious impacts  on some coastal areas.  Coastal Regions  at Risk  WHY IS SEA LEVEL RISING? The rise in average global sea level observed during the  20th century is very likely due to climate change. As the  atmosphere warms, sea water warms and expands in  volume. Thermal expansion is a major influence on past  changes in sea level. It is expected to make the greatest  contribution to a rising sea level over the next century.  Sea level also changes when the overall volume of  water in the ocean increases or decreases. As glaciers,  ice caps, and ice sheets lose mass from melting and  calving, water previously stored on land as ice and  snow is added to the ocean. This additional water is  expected to contribute substantially to a rise in global  sea level over the next century.  Processes not related to climate change also influence  relative sea level. These include vertical movements  of the land and short-term natural changes in ocean  temperature and circulation patterns. For example,   El Niño events can cause water levels to increase by a   few tens of centimetres in winter months.   WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Climate models project a further rise in global mean  sea level of 26 to 98 centimetres by 2100. The rate and  magnitude of this rise in sea level will not be uniform over  the globe. It will vary from one basin to another, reflecting  variations in the amount of ocean warming and the way  in which ocean currents redistribute heat and mass.   In most areas, climate change is expected to  produce mean and extreme water levels higher than  any yet recorded. Where relative sea level is projected  to rise, extreme high water levels are expected to occur  with increasing frequency.   Sea level is expected to continue to rise, even if  greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere  stabilize. The deep ocean responds slowly to climate  change, and thermal expansion of the ocean is likely  to continue for hundreds of years. As well, ice masses  (glaciers, ice caps, and ice sheets) are expected to  continue to shrink with the melted ice increasing the  volume of water in the ocean.  Shoreline  Inundation  SOURCE: Clague J.J. and  B.D. Bornhold. 1980.  Morphology and littoral  processes of the Pacific  Coast of Canada. In The  Coastline of Canada:  Littoral Processes and Shore  Morphology; Geol. Survey  of Canada Paper 80-10,  p.339-380. Graphic from  Temperature Rising, 1999.  C lag  u e an  d  B  o rn  h o  ld , 1980  Shoreline  vulnerable  to erosion  Fraser  River  delta  Other  low-lying areas  F R  A S  E R   R .  S T R A I T  O  F  G E O  R G I A  Nanaimo  Vancouver  Victoria  FRASER RIVER  CANADA  USA  Vancouver Island  L E G E N D  SOURCE: Clague and Bornhold.  1980. Graphic from Temperature  Rising, 1999.  higher sea level  Future Inundation  Today  eroded marsh  Richmond  dyke  marsh  Richmond  dyke  Delta sediment    33  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  +1.1LangaraIsland  NSDepartureBay  +1.0RaceRocks  +1.4EntranceIsland+0.8PineIsland  +0.8 AmphitritePoint  +0.6 KainsIsland  SOURCE: Data from Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada.   Analysis by PCIC for Ministry of Environment, 2016. NOTES: All  statistically significant trends are positive and indicate a rise in SST.  ABOUT THE INDICATORS Sea surface temperature is measured manually at  light stations along the BC coastline. Measurements  are taken at the first daily high tide using a collection  bucket and thermometers. Of the 19 stations with  sea surface temperature records, only seven have a  sufficient record for long-term analysis. Trends were  calculated on data from the years 1935 through 2014  on a seasonal and annual basis.  SEA SURFACE TRENDS IN   BRITISH COLUMBIA Annual average sea surface temperatures have  warmed significantly between 1935 and 2014 at all  stations examined. Seasonal sea surface temperatures  have warmed significantly at some stations and  seasons and not significantly for others. For fall  and winter, only three of the seven stations report a  statistically significant trend (Entrance Island near  Nanaimo, Langara Island off the NW coast of Haida  Gwaii, and Race Rocks in the Strait of Juan de Fuca  west of Victoria). Warming trends increase in spring  and are strongest in summer. In spring, four stations  reported significant trends (Amphitrite Point on  the west coast of Vancouver Island near Ucluelet,   Entrance Island, Pine Island off the northeast coast of  Vancouver Island, and Race Rocks south of Victoria).  In summer, five stations show significant warming  (Amphitrite Point, Entrance Island, Kains Island  off the northwest coast of Vancouver Island, Pine  Island, and Race Rocks). Only Entrance Island and  Race Rocks stations show seasonal trends that are  significant in all seasons.  The results show seasonal warming trends from a  low of 0.7°C per century for Race Rocks’ winter trend  to a high of 2.2°C per century for Entrance Island’s  summer trend. Trends in annual average temperature  vary substantially from a low of 0.6°C per century  for Kains Island, to a high of 1.4°C per century for  Entrance Island. The lack of trends for any season  at Departure Bay contrasts with results from other  stations that reveal a significant trend in at least one  season of the year. Departure Bay is in a location of  limited tidal mixing and strong influences from nearby  freshwater outfalls. Other nearby stations, such as  Entrance Island, are more exposed to the Strait of  Georgia where substantial tidal mixing and exposure  to Fraser River waters occurs that minimize other local  effects. These results differ slightly from published  period of record analysis of annual trends. This is  discussed in the report’s appendix.  Indicators:   SEA SURFACE  TEMPERATURE  Sea surface temperature in BC’s coastal   waters increased during the 20th century.   Higher temperatures are associated    with reduced ocean productivity and   potential adverse impacts on marine   resources and the human communities   that depend on them.  Revised 2016  Change in   Sea Surface  Temperature,  1935-2014,   (ºC per century)    34  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC) suggests that average global sea  surface temperature has increased at a rate of 1.1°C  per century between 1971 and 2010. The rate of  warming along the west coast of Vancouver Island –  the coastal area most exposed to trends in the Pacific  Ocean – is similar to the global average.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Ocean temperature, salinity, and density are  important measures of marine ecosystem health and  productivity. Long-term changes in one or more of  these measures are likely to affect marine species  and ecosystems and the human communities and  resource industries that depend on the sea.  Higher sea surface temperatures are linked to  changes in salmon distribution and migration patterns  and subsequent potential declines in reproductive  success (see “Salmon at Sea”). They are also associated  with reduced availability of food for and declines  in seabird populations (see “Seabird Survival”). In   addition, sea temperature is important because it  affects the stability of the water column, which in   turn affects ocean productivity via nutrient supply.  The upper 100 metres or so is the most  biologically productive part of the ocean. In this  zone, sunlight drives photosynthesis, supporting the  growth of microscopic plants. These phytoplankton  become food for microscopic animals – or  zooplankton – that in turn support fish and other  marine animals.  In spring and summer, as phytoplankton  populations grow, they use up nutrients in the upper  layer of the ocean. These nutrients are typically  replaced in the fall through mixing processes that  bring mineral-rich water from the ocean depths  to the surface. Such mixing is the result of waves,  storms, tides, and prevailing winds. The deeper  the mixing, the more nutrients rise to the surface,  and the greater the productivity of the ocean the  following year.  Temperature affects the stability of the water  column and therefore the depth to which mixing can   Increasing Density (g/cm3) 1.023 1.024 1.025 1.026 1.027 1.028 1.029  Increasing Temperature (ºC) 0º 3º 6º 9º 12º 15º  Increasing Salinity (‰) 34.0 34.5 35.0 35.5 36.0 36.7  DISPHOTIC ZONE  APHOTIC ZONE  intertidal  low tidehigh tide  subtidal  sp la  sh  z  on e  NERITIC OCEANIC Phytoplanktonand zooplankton    BENTHIC ZONE  EUPHOTIC ZONE  0-200m  700-1,000m  2,000-4,000m  6,000-8,000m  Ocean light zones and generalized temperature, salinity, and density-depth profile for ocean water.   SOURCE: Adapted from Windows to the Universe, University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR), 2004.    35  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  occur. Temperature and salinity in the deep Pacific  Ocean are stable on decade to century timescales.  The sea surface is typically warmer, less saline, and  less dense than the deeper water and therefore tends  to “float” on top of the deeper, denser water. When  the sea surface is warmer than usual, the difference  in density between the surface and deeper water is  greater, the surface sits more securely on top of the  deeper water, and mixing becomes more difficult.  Natural cycles of climate variability are associated  with cycles in ocean productivity. In an El Niño year,  the sea surface near the BC coast is warmer than  usual in summer, and the upper water column is  more stable. Mixing may therefore occur to a depth of  only 100 metres. In a La Niña year, the sea surface in  summer is cooler than usual, and the water column  is less stable. Mixing may occur down to 140 metres,  which results in greater ocean productivity.  The trends towards warmer temperatures may lead  to a more stable ocean near our coast, which would  reduce nutrient supply and be of great concern.  WHY IS THE SEA SURFACE CHANGING? The ocean is an integral and responsive  component of the climate system. At its surface,  it exchanges heat, water (through evaporation  and precipitation), and carbon dioxide and other  gases with the atmosphere. The 20th century trend   towards higher sea surface temperatures is related  to increasing atmospheric temperatures and is  symptomatic of the warming ocean, including its  interior. It is estimated that more than 90% of  the increase in heat energy stored by the climate  system as a result of increased GHGs is stored in  the ocean.  Of BC’s three regions of coastal waters, the west  coast of Vancouver Island is the most exposed to the  Pacific Ocean and the most likely to reflect oceanic  trends. In the other two regions (Georgia Basin and  Queen Charlotte Sound), local evaporation and  precipitation rates and freshwater runoff from rivers  and streams may affect temperature.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Sea surface temperature will likely continue to vary  from year to year and from decade to decade in  response to natural cycles. Climate models project,  however, that the Earth will continue to warm  and that average global sea surface temperature  will increase by 0.6°C to 2°C in the top 100m by  the end of the 21st century. The ocean will warm  more slowly than the land. Current models do not  yet allow scientists to project with confidence the  future frequency, amplitude, and spatial pattern of  El Niño events.     36  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  Natural variations in sea surface temperature are associated with changes in the distribution and  survival of sockeye salmon. As a result, the effect of  climate change on long-term increases in average  ocean temperature is likely to have an impact on  sockeye populations over time.  Salmon and other fish are cold-blooded, and  the temperature of their environment regulates  many of their physiological processes. Warmer  water temperatures raise their  metabolic rate and speed up  movement and internal processes  such as growth, oxygen  consumption, and digestion.  Studies suggest that salmon  prefer a temperature very  close to the temperature that  promotes optimal growth.  When food is abundant, they can afford – from  a biological perspective – to stay in warmer  waters. The abundance of food makes up for the  higher requirements needed to fuel a more active  metabolism. When food is limited, however, fish  move into cooler waters, where they need less food  to grow and survive.  The temperature range that fish prefer is species- specific. In general, salmon like cold water, and  sockeye prefer colder water than other salmon  species. For this reason, sockeye may be the salmon   species most sensitive to climate change. Fraser River  sockeye stocks are of particular concern because they  are already close to the southern boundary of the  range for sockeye and are thus more likely than other  sockeye stocks to be exposed to water temperatures  outside their preferred range.  Most Fraser River sockeye stocks enter the ocean  as smolts in the spring and spend a few weeks in  the Strait of Georgia before migrating northwards  along the coast of British Columbia to Alaska in  early summer. During this migration, they stay on  the continental shelf – a relatively shallow zone  extending 20 to 30 kilometres offshore. In late  autumn and winter, after reaching the Aleutian  Islands, they move southwards into the open ocean.  They spend one to three years at sea before they  return as adults to the Fraser River in late summer  and swim upstream to spawn and die.  HOW DOES SEA TEMPERATURE AFFECT  SOCKEYE SALMON? The sea surface is subject to natural cycles of  warming and cooling and corresponding periods  of lower and higher ocean productivity (see “Sea   Surface Temperature”). These  cycles are associated with year- to-year variability in sockeye  production. Warmer sea surface  temperatures are associated  with increased juvenile sockeye  mortality, changes in ocean  distribution, changes in the timing   of migrations, and smaller returning adult fish. During warm years, ocean productivity is rela-  tively low and may result in slower growth in juv- enile salmon, making them vulnerable to predation  for a longer period of time. In addition, subtropical  fish such as mackerel migrate northwards during  warm years and can compete for food with, or prey  upon, young salmon in coastal waters.  Some researchers have associated increasing sea  surface temperatures with a decrease in the habitable  area for sockeye in the North Pacific. During their  years in the open ocean, sockeye undertake extensive   S. Kirkvold  SALMON AT SEA  For sockeye salmon, warm years are  associated with increased juvenile  mortality, reduced distribution,   increased competition, and reduced  spawning success.   2002 edition    37  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  migrations within a region bounded by the Bering  Sea in the north and 40ºN latitude in the south.  Within this region, the area used by sockeye varies  by season and is closely associated with water  temperature. The southern limit of their distribution  varies from between the 6ºC and 7ºC isotherms  in winter, to the 9ºC isotherm in spring and early  summer, and the 13.5ºC isotherm in summer. In  years when sea surface temperature is higher, the  habitable area for sockeye is smaller.  Ocean temperature appears to affect the timing  of sockeye migrations from the ocean back to the  Fraser River. Evidence suggests that in warm years,  sockeye arrive later at the mouth of the river. Salmon  that arrive later than normal at the mouth of the  river may also arrive late at their spawning grounds.  Late spawning can have a negative effect on the time  when young salmon emerge the following spring and  their subsequent survival.  Ocean temperature also appears to affect the size of  the returning fish. In warmer years, if fish congregate  within a smaller habitable area and compete for  the same amount of food, individual growth may   be slower, and returning fish may be smaller than  normal. In addition, warmer years are associated   with reduced ocean productivity and the potential   for increased competition for food. In 1997 –   a particularly warm year in the northeast Pacific  Ocean – returning sockeye were much smaller than  normal. Smaller fish may not be able to migrate  upstream through the Fraser River system to their  spawning grounds as effectively as larger fish.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Coastal waters in BC have warmed during the past  century, and climate models suggest that ocean  warming associated with climate change will  continue. While sea surface temperature will still  vary from one year to the next, it will be “warm”  during proportionally more years. For sockeye, warm  years are associated with increased juvenile mortality,  restricted distribution, increased competition for  food, and reduced spawning success. An increase  in the proportion of warm years can therefore  reasonably be expected to have a profound long-term  negative impact on Fraser River sockeye stocks.  Winter and Summer  Distribution of  Sockeye Salmon in  the Pacific Ocean,  Under Current (1XCO2)  and Future (2XCO2)  Concentrations of  Atmospheric CO2  December  2XCO2  1XCO2  July  1XCO2  2XCO2  SOURCE: Welch, D.W., Y. Ishida, and   K. Nagasawa. 1998. Thermal Limits and Ocean Migrations of Sockeye Salmon  (Oncorhynchus nerka): Long-Term Consequences of Global Warming.   Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 55:937-948. NOTES: 1XCO2 refers to the current  atmospheric concentration of CO2.   2XCO2refers to the doubling of   atmospheric CO2 concentration from   this baseline. Climate models predict   that 2XCO2 will occur during the 21st   century. As CO2 concentration increases,  atmospheric and ocean temperature  increase, and fish move northwards into  cooler water.    38  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  The reproductive success of the Cassin’s auklet  (Ptychoramphus aleuticus) is sensitive to ocean  temperature. Increases in sea surface temperature  associated with climate change may therefore  threaten the long-term survival of this seabird.  The auklet breeds in a few large colonies along  the western coast of North America. Triangle   Island, an ecological reserve off the northern tip   of Vancouver Island, is home to the world’s largest  colony, consisting of 1.1 million  breeding birds.  Some populations of Cassin’s  auklet have declined in recent  years. A colony on the Farallon  Islands in California experienced a  65 percent decline between 1972  and 1997. The Triangle Island  population declined between 1989  and 1999, and in several years, breeding success  was poor. However, a third population that breeds  on Frederick Island off the coast of northern  British Columbia showed no signs of population  decline during the 1990s and has had consistently  good breeding success.  WHY ARE POPULATIONS DECLINING? The evidence suggests that population declines   are linked to a long-term reduction in the availability   of zooplankton – a major food source for Cassin’s  auklet chicks – in the marine ecosystem that ex       tends   from California northwards as far as north     ern  Vancouver Island. Research has docu mented a   rela  tionship between warmer spring ocean   tempera tures, reduced availability of zooplankton,  and decreased growth rates and survival of   seabird chicks.  Cassin’s auklets attempt to raise a single chick   per year, and the survival of each chick is therefore  important to the long-term survival of the entire  population. Cassin’s auklet parents care for their  chick for 40 to 60 days after it hatches, feeding it  zooplankton – primarily small shrimp-like organ isms  called copepods. Both parents use their wings   to “fly” underwater in search of food for their chick,  transporting the food within a throat pouch and  regurgitating it for the chick when they get back  to the burrow. The growth and survival of Cassin’s  auklet chicks depend on the availability of copepods  in the top 30 metres of the ocean – the depth to  which the auklet parents are able to dive.  Copepods inhabit the sea surface  for only a brief period during the  spring. Their meta  bolic rate, growth,  and development are synchronized  with temperature. As surface  temperatures warm up, copepod  larvae migrate from deep ocean  waters to the surface, where they  feed on phytoplankton and grow to   adult size before returning to the deeper waters of  the ocean. When spring surface waters warm earlier  in the season, the copepods develop more quickly,  become adults faster, and migrate back to deeper  waters sooner than they do in years when spring  surface waters are cool.  SOURCE: BC Parks  SEABIRD SURVIVAL  Higher ocean temperatures will  affect the long-term survival of  Cassin’s auklet populations in BC  because warmer surface water  decreases the food supply for  developing chicks.  2002 edition    39  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  M A R I N E  E C O S Y S T E M S  In warm years, the times when seabirds breed   and when food is most available are poorly matched.  By the time the Cassin’s auklet chicks hatch, the  copepods are already returning to deeper water, and  there is a diminishing food supply for the chicks. As   a result, the chicks grow slowly and often starve to  death later in the season.  In contrast, when spring surface-water   tempera tures are cool, the copepods persist longer   in the surface waters, so that food is available for  chicks throughout the development period, from  hatching to the time when they are ready to leave  the burrow. The location of Frederick Island explains  the health of its Cassin’s auklet population. Because  the island is so far north, the sea surface temperature  during the period when chicks are growing and  developing remains cool enough – even in warmer  years – to ensure that they have enough food.  Climate change is linked to an increase in  average sea surface temperature in waters off the  coast of BC. In the 1990s, these temperatures were  some of the highest ever observed in the 20th  century. In years such as 1996 and 1998, when  spring was early and sea surface temperatures were  warmer than usual, the growth rates of Cassin’s  auklet chicks on Triangle Island were much lower  than in cooler years such as 1999.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Average global sea surface temperature has increased  by 0.4ºC to 0.8ºC since the late 19th century and is  expected to continue to rise during the next century.  Populations of Cassin’s auklet on Triangle Island are  therefore likely to continue to grow slowly, and chick  mortality is likely to continue to increase. If the adult  birds cannot replace themselves, the population will  continue to decline.  The story of the Cassin’s auklet is one example  of how climate change may affect the distribution  and survival of individual species in BC. Many other  species – marine, freshwater, and terrestrial – may be  similarly affected during the decades to come.  Average Growth Rate (grams/day)  of Cassin’s Auklet Chicks and   Sea Surface Temperature near  Triangle Island  SOURCE: Original data and analysis from Doug Bertram,  Simon Fraser University, Centre for Wildlife Ecology and  Canadian Wildlife Service, 2001 for Ministry of Water, Land  and Air Protection. NOTES: Average growth rate (grams/day)  of Cassin’s Auklet chicks is based on weight change between  5 and 25 days from date of hatching. Cassin’s Auklet chick  growth rates and survival decline as ocean temperature  increases (April SST > 7.5ºC). The slope of the line is statistically  significant (F1, 7=12.5; P=0.009).  April Sea Surface Temperature  G ro  w th   R at  e  G  ra m  s/ D  ay  7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 9.0 9.5  6  5  4  3  Trend Line  1999 2000  1978 1891  1995  1997  1994  1998  1996    40  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  T E R R E S T R I A L  E C O S Y S T E M S  ABOUT THE INDICATOR This indicator measures changes in the amount of  heat energy available for plant growth, expressed in  units called Growing Degree Days (GDD).   Assessment of annual GDD is based on available  temperature records from 1900 to 2013.  GDD TRENDS IN BRITISH COLUMBIA Annual Growing Degree Days increased from   1900 to 2013 across the province. On average  there are 190 more GDD in BC than at the  beginning of the 20th century. These trends   are consistent with trends over the past century  toward higher average annual temperatures   across British Columbia.  The greatest increase in GDD has occurred on  the coast. The Coast and Mountains and Georgia  Depression ecoprovinces have both experienced  an increase in energy available for plant growth of  220 GDD per century. Heat energy has increased in  the Sub-Boreal Interior ecoprovince by 220 GDD  per century as well. The annual trend in both the  Southern Interior and Southern Interior Mountains  ecoprovinces is an increase of 120 GDD per century.  In the north of BC (Boreal Plains, Taiga Plains, and   Annual GDD  (%change/  century)    Change in   Average   Annual GDD   1900-2013  (GDD per century)  Northern Boreal Mountains) annual average heat  energy has increased by 160 to 190 GDD per century.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Plants and invertebrates require a certain amount  of heat to develop from one stage in their life cycle  to another. The measure of accumulated heat is  known as “physiological time” and is measured in  units called “degree days.” All individuals of the  same species require the same number of degree  days to develop from one life stage to another. When  temperatures are warmer, they develop faster.   Each plant species – and each insect species –   has its own minimum temperature requirement   for growth. For example, spinach can grow when  average daily temperatures are as low as 2.2ºC,   while corn requires temperatures of at least 10ºC.   Because of these differences, agrologists   some times refer to an average minimum temperature  of 5ºC when they talk about the heat requirements   of agricultural plants as a group. For the typical  agricultural plant, GDD for one day is calculated   as the difference between the average temperature  and 5ºC. For example, a day when the average  temperature is 12ºC contributes 7 GDD to the   SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring  Program and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013  conducted by PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment Climate Action  Secretariat. NOTES: A positive sign indicates an increase in GDD.  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB-BOREAL INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  +220  +120  +180  +190  +220  +160  +160  +220  +120  Indicator:   GROWING DEGREE DAYS  The average heat energy available   for plant growth and development   has increased over the past century,   particularly in Coastal BC.  Revised 2015    41  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  T E R R E S T R I A L  E C O S Y S T E M S  annual total number of GDDs for that location. GDD  is calculated for only those days when the average  temperature is higher than 5ºC.   A significant increase in available heat energy could  allow farmers to introduce new varieties of crops that  were previously marginal or not viable in their regions.  If adequate soil moisture, soil fertility and light are also  available, this could allow agricul ture to expand to  new regions and sites within the province.  Some of the other impacts of climate change  could have negative impacts on agriculture. Changes  in hydrological systems combined with warmer  temperatures and greater evapotranspiration, for  example, may mean less available soil moisture in  some regions. And warmer temperatures may also  mean that new insect pest species are able to move  into a region. Further, warmer temperatures may  threaten crops that are not tolerant of extreme warm  temperatures above certain fixed thresholds that  reflect the crop’s physiology.  WHY IS GDD INCREASING? From 1900 to 2013 average annual tempera tures   warmed in BC at a rate of 1.4ºC per century. Because  GDD is related to average daily temperature, it is not  surprising that the amount of energy available for  plant growth and development has also increased.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Climate models indicate that temperatures will  continue to rise in BC by 1.7ºC to 4.5ºC by the  2080s. The higher rate of warming is projected  to occur over the interior of the province. Annual  GDD should continue to increase as the climate  continues to warm.  The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change (IPCC) suggests, however, that  increases in average annual temperature of more  than a few degrees centigrade will result in a general  reduction, with some variation, in potential crop  yields in mid-latitudes.  Heat requirements   of Agricultural Crop   and Pest Species  Species Minimum   Threshold  Degree Day   Requirements   (over threshold   temperature)  Sweet corn 10C 855  Thompson grape 10C 1600-1800  Codling moth 11C 590  Pea aphid  5.5C 118    42  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  T E R R E S T R I A L  E C O S Y S T E M S  The mountain pine beetle is a native insect with an important role in maintaining many  pine ecosystems. It is also the most important  forest pest in western Canada and has killed an  estimated 300 million trees in British Columbia  over the last 20 years and damaged timber worth  an estimated six billion dollars.  While mountain pine beetle will attack most  western pines, its primary host throughout most of its  range is lodgepole pine. Mountain pine beetles burrow  into the bark of the host tree and  lay their eggs there in summer.  The eggs hatch inside the tree  and larvae remain there over the  winter. During the following spring,  larvae complete their development.  Burrowing and feeding activities  of the larvae create networks of  channels known as galleries beneath  the bark, causing the death of the tree.  Adult beetles emerge from their host tree in mid-  to late summer and disperse in search of new trees  to colonize. Dispersal may be within the same stand  or over distances of 100 kilometres or more. Once  the beetles find a new host tree, mated females bore  through the bark to lay their eggs, starting a new cycle.  SOURCE: Canadian Forest Service  Endemic populations of mountain pine beetle   are common throughout lodgepole pine forests. They  tend to inhabit individual trees dispersed throughout  a stand that are weaker and less resistant to invasion.  In these endemic populations, births and deaths are   in balance. Predators, disease, and competition for  food and space control population size. The capacity  of most healthy trees to resist a normal beetle attack  also helps control the beetle population.  Mountain pine beetle populations increase  from time to time within a stand when conditions  allow – for example, when trees are stressed by  crowding, flooding, or root disease. Such stand-level  infestations can quickly become a full-scale outbreak  under ideal conditions, with beetles invading – and  ultimately killing – many trees across the forest  landscape. Periodic mountain pine beetle outbreaks  like this created ideal conditions for fire, which  has historically played a vital role in maintaining  native pine eco systems by eliminating competing  vegetation, preparing the seedbed, and releasing  seeds from cones, which require heat to open.   HOW DOES TEMPERATURE AFFECT  MOUNTAIN PINE BEETLES? Temperature is one of the primary sources of  mortality for mountain pine beetles.  When temperatures in the summer and fall are  warm enough, larvae hatch and  grow adequately before the onset  of winter. When they are at the  late larval stage, mountain pine  beetles are resistant to cold and can  withstand temperatures close to  -40ºC for long periods of time.  When temperatures in the  summer and fall are relatively cool,   however, the larvae grow more slowly and may not  reach the ideal life stage before winter. As a result,  many will die. For this reason, the mountain pine  beetle cannot establish populations at high elevations  or at northern latitudes. Its distri bu tion is bounded  by the -40ºC isotherm, which joins sites where the   MOUNTAIN PINE BEETLE  RANGE  Temperature limits the range  and size of mountain pine beetle  populations. Warmer temperatures  may allow the beetles to move  northwards into new regions and  upwards into new ecosystems.   2002 edition    43  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  T E R R E S T R I A L  E C O S Y S T E M S  average of the lowest temperature recorded each year  (1921-1950) is -40ºC.  Lodgepole pine ecosystems – the preferred forest  of the mountain pine beetle – extend north into the  Yukon and the Northwest Territories and east into  Alberta. Climate limitations currently prevent the  mountain pine beetle from establishing itself in these  regions. Warmer temperatures, in particular warmer  winter temperatures associated with climate change,  may allow the mountain pine beetle to extend its  range northwards and eastwards into these eco- systems. With warming, regions that are currently   too cold for the mountain pine beetle will become  more suitable.  A 2.5ºC increase in temperature would likely  shift the northern boundary of the region suitable  for the mountain pine beetle a further 7 degrees of  latitude north. A range expansion of this size would  allow beetles potential access to formerly unoccupied  lodgepole pine habitat. It would also give them the  potential to invade jack pine forests, a major compo- nent of the boreal forest that is currently free of beetles.  Warmer winter temperatures may also allow the  mountain pine beetle to extend its range upwards  into high-elevation pine forests – for example,  whitebark and limber pine forests in southeastern   BC – that are not adapted to the beetle’s impacts.  An additional concern is the possibility that  climate change may allow mountain pine beetle  infestations and outbreaks to occur more regularly  and with greater severity within the beetle’s current  range. At present, mountain pine beetle outbreaks  in BC are limited to the southern portion of the  province. Outbreaks occur almost exclusively in  regions where it is warm enough for mountain  pine beetles to complete their development within  a year. In such regions, when weather conditions  are warmer than usual, a large number of larvae  can survive the winter. Larger populations of adult  beetles can more easily overcome the resistance of  healthy trees, allow ing the development of stand- level infestations and of outbreaks. Consequently,  it is highly possible that an increase in winter  temperatures associated with climate change could  increase the potential for outbreaks.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Monitoring indicates that average temperatures over  most of British Columbia warmed during the past  century, with the greatest increases occurring in the  north. Climate models project that this warming  trend will continue. Most importantly, the data show  that minimum temperatures have warmed during  this time period.   Because minimum temperatures delineate the  northern range of the mountain pine beetle, this  increase in minimum temperatures provides forest  managers with reason for concern.  Distribution of Mountain Pine Beetle  Infestations, 1910-1970  SOURCE: A. Carroll, Pacific Forestry Centre, 2001. Adapted from Safranyik, L. 1990.  Temperature and insect interactions in western North America. Proceedings of the Society of  American Foresters National Convention. Washington DC. SAF Publication 90-02. pp. 166-170.  Isotherms from Department of Mines and Technical Surveys. 1957. Atlas of Canada.  A L B E R T A  B R I T I S H    C O L U M B I A -30  -40  L E G E N D  Areas where there is not enough accumulated heat for beetles to complete development  on a one-year cycle. (i.e. average degree-day accumulation <833 above 5.6C)  Range of lodgepole pine  Recorded MPB infestations 1910-1970  -30C isotherm -40C isotherm    44  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  H U M A N  C O M M U N I T I E S  ABOUT THE INDICATORS These indicators measure changes in the annual  energy requirements for heating and cooling. The  figures in this section show the average rate of  change in annual Heating Degree Days and Cooling  Degree Days over a century for all the ecoprovinces  in BC. The trends are based on temperature records  from 1900 to 2013 from weather observation stations  throughout the province.  Heating requirements are measured in units  called Heating Degree Days (HDD). HDD for one  day is calculated as the difference between 18ºC  and the average outdoor temperature for that day  when the outdoor temperature is less than 18ºC.  For example, a day with an average temperature of  8ºC has an HDD of 10. Over a month of similar days  the monthly HDD would be about 300. The HDD  calculation looks only at days when the average  outdoor temperature is less than 18ºC. Annual HDD  represents the sum of daily HDD for the year.  Energy requirements for cooling are measured  in units called Cooling Degree Days (CDD). CDD  for one day is calculated as the difference between  the average outdoor temperature for that day and  18ºC when the outdoor temperature is warmer  than 18ºC. For example, a day with an average  temperature of 21ºC has a CDD of 3. A month of  similar days would have a monthly CDD of about  90. The CDD calculation looks only at days when the   Change in   Annual  Heating  Requirements,  1900-2013,   (HDD per  century)  SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring Program  and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013 conducted by PCIC,  2014 for the Ministry of Environment. NOTES: A negative sign indicates a decrease  in heating requiremernts.  average temperature is more than 18ºC and cooling  is required. Annual CDD represents the sum of daily  CDD for the year.  HEATING AND COOLING TRENDS There is a province-wide trend towards lower annual  heating requirements. The annual Heating Degree  Days (HDD) in the province as a whole have decreased  by 600 HDD per century with the greatest reduction  in energy requirements for heating in the northern  parts of BC. In the Taiga Plains ecoprovince, the  annual HDD have decreased by 670 HDD per century  from 1900 to 2013. The Boreal Plains and Sub- Boreal Interior ecoprovinces experienced a decrease  in HDD of 630 to 640 HDD per century. In the  Georgia Depression ecoprovince the heating energy  requirements have decreased by 310 HDD per century.   Cooling energy requirements have increased  modestly throughout the province by an average of  13 Cooling Degree Days (CDD) per century. The  greatest increase in energy required for cooling has  occurred in the southern part of the province. The  Southern Interior ecoprovince has experienced the  greatest increase in annual CDD, at a rate of 25 CDD  per century. The two ecoprovinces that experience  the second highest rates of increasing cooling  energy requirements are the Georgia Depression   BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB-BOREAL INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  -630  -460  -310  -330 -400  -420  -640  -670-590 Indicators:    HEATING AND COOLING  REQUIREMENTS  Throughout BC, but especially in the   north, the amount of energy required for   heating similarly constructed and insulated   buildings decreased during the past   century. The amount of energy required for   cooling increased the most in southern BC.  Revised 2015    45  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  H U M A N  C O M M U N I T I E S  and the Southern Interior Mountains. Both of these  regions have experienced an increase in annual cooling  requirements at a rate of 21 CDD per century. The  Northern Boreal Mountains have experienced an  increase in cooling energy requirements at 11 CDD per  century. The Taiga plains are experiencing an average  annual CDD increase at 15 CDD per century.  WHY IS IT IMPORTANT? Building managers, owners, and residents often  begin interior heating when the outdoor temperature  is below 18ºC (although this threshold may be lower  for homes constructed more recently). As outdoor  temperature goes down, the amount of energy  required for heating goes up.  The energy supply industry uses annual HDD  figures extensively to measure and project heating  requirements. Annual HDD figures help the energy  industry estimate demand for residential and other  heating and maximum demand on energy supply  systems during extremely cold periods. All else being  equal, when annual HDD decreases, there is less  demand for energy for heating.  With respect to cooling, residents of warmer  climates often turn on their air conditioners when  the average daily outdoor air temperature, averaged  over a 24-hour period, exceeds 18ºC.  CDD affects energy demand because most air  conditioning and refrigeration systems use electricity to  operate fans and pumps. In most of BC, however, cooling  places minor demands on the energy system, and CDD  is not a significant factor in energy management and  planning decisions. However, CDD may become more of  an issue for regional energy use planning in southern BC.  WHY ARE HEATING AND COOLING  REQUIREMENTS CHANGING? During the 20th century, average annual tempera tures  increased across most of BC. Because heating and  cooling requirements are directly linked to temperature,  it is not surprising that they too should have changed  during the same period.  This rise in average annual temperature is only part  of the story, however. Surface warming trends and  trends in daily maximum and minimum temp era ture  vary by season and from one region of BC to another  (see “Average Temperature” and “Maximum and  Minimum Temperature”), affecting heating and   cooling requirements.  In winter, less energy is required to keep build ings  warm when average daily temperatures increase, as they  have throughout BC. The trends also suggest that heating  requirements have gone down mainly because winter  nights are not as chilly as they were in the past (see  “Maximum and Minimum Temperature”).  The summer temperature trends suggest that, in the  Southern Interior, Georgian Depression and Southern  Interior Mountains, slightly more energy may be  required to keep buildings cool during the hot part of  the day because summer nights are warmer now than  in the past. Buildings therefore do not cool down as  much during the night (see “Maximum and Minimum  Temperature”).  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? Climate models indicate that temperatures will  continue to rise over BC during the 21st century and  that atmospheric warming will be more pronounced  in winter and summer than in spring and fall.  Consequently, winter heating requirements will likely  continue to decrease, and summer cooling requirements  to increase.  BOREAL PLAINS  TAIGA PLAINS  NORTHERN BOREAL   MOUNTAINS  SUB-BOREAL INTERIOR  COAST AND MOUNTAINS  CENTRAL INTERIOR  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  MOUNTAINS  SOUTHERN INTERIOR  GEORGIA DEPRESSION  NORTHEAST PACIFIC  +13  +13  +21  +25 +21  +14  +12  +15+11 Change  in Annual  Cooling  Requirements,  1900-2013,   (CDD per  century)  SOURCE: Data from Ministry of Environment Climate Related Monitoring Program  and Environment Canada. Trend Analysis for 1900 through 2013 conducted by  PCIC, 2014 for the Ministry of Environment Climate Action Secretariat. NOTES: A  positive sign indicates an increase in cooling requiremernts.    46  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  H U M A N  C O M M U N I T I E S  Warmer temperatures, and changes in  precipitation and other aspects of the climate  system have the potential to adversely affect human  health. Although at this time there are no data that  directly link climate change and health in British  Columbia, studies from other regions suggest that  such links may exist.  HOW CAN CLIMATE  CHANGE AFFECT  HUMAN HEALTH? Heat-related Illness:   Climate models predict that  over the next century summer  heat waves will occur more frequently, particularly  in urban areas, where buildings and pavement  absorb and retain heat. Between 1951 and 1980   in Victoria, an average of three days per year   were warmer than 30ºC. In the 21st century,   hot days are expected to more than quadruple,   to 13 days per year. Hot days will be even   more frequent in the Lower Mainland and the  interior of BC. As a result, heat-related health  impacts – including heat stroke, dehydration,   and cardiovascular and respiratory illness –   are expected to increase.  Respiratory Illness: Heavy emissions from  motor vehicles and industrial activities can  contribute to the development of smog. This is  particularly a problem in Vancouver and the Fraser  Valley. A component of smog – ground level ozone –  is linked to respiratory irritation, affecting individuals  with asthma and chronic lung disease. Even healthy  individuals can experience chest pain, coughing,  nausea, and lung congestion when exposed to low  amounts of this ozone.  On hot days, the reactions that produce smog and  ground level ozone occur more quickly. The rise in  average temperature associated with climate change  will likely increase the incidence of smog. The  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  has therefore concluded that ongoing climate change  could exacerbate respiratory disorders associated  with reduced air quality in urban and rural areas.  Water Contamination: Water quality  deteriorated between 1985 and 1995 at 11 percent  of provincial water sampling stations. Past discharges  from mining operations, non-point source pollution,  and high waterfowl concentrations have made water   in some communities unfit  for recreation or drinking.  Climate change poses additional  threats. Sea level rise may  inundate water systems in  some low-lying coastal areas  with saltwater, chemicals,  and disease organisms.   Extreme precipitation events may strain municipal  drainage and sewage systems and increase the risk  of contamination. Summer water shortages may  exacerbate water quality problems in some areas by  increasing the concentration of contaminants.  Water-borne Disease: Increased precipitation,  runoff, and flooding associated with climate  change may increase the transmission of parasites  from other animals to humans through the  water system. In 1995 Victoria experienced an  outbreak of toxoplasmosis, a disease that causes  symptoms ranging from swollen lymph glands   HUMAN HEALTH  Climate change may increase the  frequency of heat-related and respiratory  illness, water contamination and water- borne diseases, vector-borne diseases,   and some weather-related accidents.  2002 edition    47  C L I M A T E  C H A N G E  A N D  H U M A N  C O M M U N I T I E S  to lung complications, lesions on major organs,  and disorders of the central nervous system. The  outbreak was linked to extreme preci pitation,  causing high levels of runoff that picked up the  parasite from animal feces and carried it into  drinking water reservoirs. In recent years BC has also  experienced outbreaks of cryptosporidiosis, another  serious water-borne disease transmitted through  animal feces.  Increases in marine and freshwater temperature  associated with climate change may also contribute  to the survival of pathogens. Red tide, a disease of  shellfish, is caused by a toxic algae that grows in  warm coastal waters during the summer. Shellfish  concentrate the red tide toxins in their flesh, and  humans who eat contaminated shellfish can become  seriously ill. Ocean warming associated with climate  change may increase the incidence of red tide along  the BC coast. In fresh water, warmer temperatures  may create ideal conditions for the pathogen   res ponsible for giardiasis, which is transmitted   from animals to humans through water.  Vector-borne Disease: Animals, birds, and  insects that carry human diseases are known as  disease “vectors.” Warmer temperatures associated  with climate change may enable vectors – and  the diseases they carry – to extend their ranges.  The chance of humans contacting the disease may  therefore increase. Vectors of concern in BC   include rodents, ticks, and mosquitoes.  The deer mouse is the primary vector in Canada  for hantavirus, and it transmits the virus to humans  through its feces. When the feces dry, the virus is  released into the air and can be inhaled by humans  who are in the vicinity. Six cases of hantavirus in  humans are known to have occurred in BC, two   of them resulting in death.  Various species of ticks can carry Lyme disease  and transmit it to humans. The most important  vector in BC is the western black-legged tick, which  is extremely common on the coast during the early  spring and summer. The microorganism that causes  Lyme disease has also been detected in adult ticks in  the Fraser Valley.  Mosquitoes are the primary vector in North  America for encephalitis. Viral transmission   rates from mosquitoes can increase sharply as  tempera tures rise. Studies elsewhere show a  correlation between temperature and the incidence   of tick-borne encephalitis in humans. Swedish  studies suggest that the relatively mild climate in  the 1990s in Sweden contributed to increases in  the density and geo graphic range of ticks. At high  latitudes, warmer-than-usual winter temperatures  were related to a northward shift in tick distribution.  Further south, mild and extended autumn seasons  were related to increases in tick density.  Weather-related Accidents: In general, climate  change is associated with increased precipitation,  flooding, landslides and extreme weather-related  events. Such events may increase the incidence of  accident-related injuries and deaths in BC. Other  impacts of climate change – for example, reduced  winter snowfall – may decrease the potential for  accidents. The IPCC has concluded that in some  temperate countries reduced winter deaths would  outnumber increased summer deaths from climate- related factors.  WHAT CAN WE EXPECT IN FUTURE? No cause-and-effect relationships have been  established between climate change and provincial  health impacts. More research is needed before we  will be able to assess the degree of risk that climate  change poses to the health of British Columbians.  Little information is available about possible health  benefits. The IPCC has also noted that potential  adverse health impacts of climate change could be  reduced through appropriate public health measures.    48  A P P E N D I C E S  Climate reflects weather conditions for a specified area  over a relatively long time period, usually decades or  centuries, but sometimes even millennia. It is typically  described in terms of averages and extremes in such  properties as air temperature, precipitation, humidity,  sunshine, and storm frequency.  Climate is characterised by: • temperatures of the surface air, water, land, and   ice • wind and ocean currents, humidity, cloudiness   and cloud water content, groundwater, lakes, and  water content of snow and sea ice  • pressure and density of the atmosphere and ocean,  salinity and density of the ocean, composition of  dry air, and boundaries and physical constants  These properties are interconnected through  physical processes such as precipitation, evaporation,  infrared radiation emitted by the earth and the  atmos phere, vertical and horizontal movements   of the atmosphere and ocean, and turbulence.  Historically, the climate of the earth has varied  continuously from year to year, decade to decade,  century to century, and millennium to millennium.  Such changes may be the result of climate variability,  climate change, or both.  CLIMATE VARIABILITY Much of the climate variability we experience  involves relatively short-term changes and can occur  as a result of natural altera tions in some aspect of  the climate system. For example, increases in the  concentration of aerosols in the atmosphere as a  result of volcanic eruptions can influence climate   for a few years. Climate variability can also result  from complex interactions between different  components of the climate system: for example   the ocean and the atmosphere.  The climate of British Columbia is strongly  influenced by two natural patterns in the Pacific   Ocean: the El Niño Southern Oscillation (ENSO)   and the Pacific Decadal Oscillation (PDO).   ENSO is a tropical Pacific phenomenon that  influences weather around the world. El Niño, the  so-called “warm phase” of ENSO, brings warmer  winter temperatures and less winter precipitation to  BC. La Niña, the “cool phase” of ENSO, is associated  with cooler and wetter winters. During neutral years,  ENSO is in neither a warm nor a cool phase and has  little influence on global climate. ENSO tends to vary  from the two extremes and the neutral state within  two to seven years, usually staying in the same state  for no longer than a year or two.  The PDO is a widespread pattern of sea surface  temperature in the northern Pacific Ocean. Like  ENSO, it has a warm and a cool phase. The PDO  tends to remain in one phase for 20 to 30 years.   It was in a cool phase from about 1900 to 1925   and from 1945 to 1977. It was in a warm phase  from 1925 to 1945 and from 1977 onwards.   A change from warm to cool appears to have   occurred around the end of the 1990s.  Appendix A: Climate Change   Past Trends and Future Projections  Climate variability,   oscillations and change  SOURCE: Adapted from original, courtesty of Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium.  CLIMATE VARIABILITY Short term (years to decadal)  rises and falls about the trend line (e.g. ENSO)  CLIMATE OSCILLATIONS Multi-decadal oscillations  in regional climate (e.g. PDO)  CLIMATE CHANGE Long term trends or  major shifts in climate (centuries)    49  A P P E N D I C E S  The PDO is associated with cyclical changes  in the sea surface temperature of the northern  Pacific Ocean. Because prevailing winds blow from  the North Pacific towards the BC coast and air  temperature is affected by sea temperature, average  air temperatures over coastal BC have also fluctuated  in accordance with the phase of the PDO.   CLIMATE CHANGE Climate change represents longer-term trends that  occur over many decades or centuries.  There is strong evidence that change is an  ongoing feature of the global climate system. At  present, however, it is occurring at an unprecedented  rate. According to the AR5 report by the IPCC,  global temperature, for example, has increased  by 0.85ºC since the 19th century. The IPCC also  notes that in the last three decades, each decade  has been warmer than any preceeding decade  since temperature started being recorded (1850).  Also, the last 30 years in the Northern Hemisphere  were likely the warmest 30-year period of the  last 1,400 years. Weather observations also reveal  significant changes in average global precipitation  and atmospheric moisture, as well as changes in  patterns of atmospheric and oceanic circulation and  the frequency of extreme weather.  Climate change occurs simultaneously with,   and also influences, natural climate variability. For  example, El Niño events may have become more  frequent in recent years, and four of the ten strongest  El Niño events of the 20th century have occurred  since 1980.  Some of the causes of climate change – including  long-term changes in the amount of energy radiating  from the sun and variations in the orbit of the earth  around the sun – are entirely natural. Others are  anthropogenic – of human origin. Some human  activities – in particular the burning of fossil fuels  and land-use changes – are associated with an  increase in the concentration of carbon dioxide and  other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere over the  last century and a half. There is a strong connection  between the concentration of these gases in the  atmosphere and atmospheric temperature.  Anthropogenic climate change appears to be  responsible for much of the atmospheric warming  observed during the past century, and especially  the last 60 years. The earth is currently exposed to  the highest levels of CO  2  in the atmosphere in at   least 800,000 years according to the IPCC’s AR5  report. And some greenhouse gases, including CO  2 ,   are persistent – they remain in the atmosphere for  centuries. Climate models project that even if we  stop burning fossil fuels tomorrow, the atmosphere  will continue to warm for a few centuries.  SOURCE: Adapted from IPCC, 2014, Climate Change 2014 Synthesis Report - Summary for Policy Makers, Figure SPM.1, p. 3. OBSERVATIONS:  (left) Annually and globally averaged combined land and ocean surface temperature anomalies relative to the average over the period 1986 to  2005. Colours indicate different data sets.  (right) Atmospheric concentrations of the greenhouse gases carbon dioxide (CO2, green), methane (CH4, orange), and nitrous oxide (N2O, red)  determined from ice core data (dots) and from direct atmospheric measurements (lines).  Globally averaged combined land and  ocean surface temperature anomaly  Globally averaged greenhouse  gas concentrations  (º C  )   Annual average 0.6  0.4  0.2  0.0  -0.2  -0.4  -0.6   1850 1900 1950 2000 Year    50  A P P E N D I C E S  DISTINGUISHING PAST TRENDS Even during a period of general global atmospheric  warming, climate variability can result in cooler- than-average regional temperatures. To obtain  long-term climate change trends from historical  data records it is therefore necessary to identify the  “signal” of climate change against the “background  noise” of climate variability.  Climate variability in BC is characterized  by decadal variability associated with the PDO.  Short records may be too strongly influenced by  this natural cycle to produce meaningful climate- change trends. Only data records that likely span  one or more full cycles of the PDO, can be used to  distinguish the effects of climate variability from the  effects of climate change.  The majority of the climate-change and related  trends described in this report were obtained  through the analysis of historical data collected   at weather and other monitoring stations across   BC. Where trends have been identified the data   show a clear “signal” of climate change.   MODELLING THE FUTURE This report describes how the climate in BC may  continue to change during the 21st century and  the ongoing impacts climate change may have on  marine, freshwater, and terrestrial ecosystems, and  on human communities.  Most information about future projections  is based on analysis by PCIC, data available on  Plan2Adapt, and on AR5 reports published in 2014  by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC). The findings about future climate change are  largely based on climate models – representations  of the climate system that take into account relevant  physical, geophysical, chemical, and biological  processes. While the models have been tested to  ensure that they can reasonably simulate past and  current climates, they present a range of possible  future climates rather than specific predictions.  Climate models incorporate scenarios of possible  future states of the global climate. The most common  scenarios are based on a range of socioeconomic   assumptions (for example, future global population,  gross domestic product) which drive the models.  The IPCC Representative Concentration Pathways  (RCPs) project global temperature increases ranging  from 6.0ºC to 8.5ºC by the end of this century,  accompanied by changes in precipitation and other  aspects of the climate system.  In general, the ability of climate models to  provide information about future changes in  temperature, precipitation, and other climate  variables at the regional level is improving.  Mountainous regions such as BC – where valleys  may have quite a different climate from adjacent  mountainous terrain – present particular problems.  In general, projections about temperature are more  reliable than projections about precipitation or  other weather elements.  Finally, information about how natural and  human systems respond to shorter-term climate  variability provides insights into how the same  systems might respond to climate change.  ADDITIONAL RESOURCES For more information about what climate  change is, and the science behind it please  refer to the Climate Insights (http://pics.uvic. ca/education/climate-insights-101) materials  provided by the Pacific Institute for Climate  Solutions (PICS).  For more information about future climate  projections in BC and potential impacts, please  see Plan2Adapt (http://www.pacificclimate.org/  analysis-tools/plan2adapt), an interactive  online tool provided by the Pacific Climate  Impacts Consortium (PCIC).  For more information about global  trends and projections please refer to the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC) publications, available on their website  (http://www.ipcc.ch).    51  A P P E N D I C E S  Appendix B: Data and Methods   Long-Term Trends In Temperature, Derived Temperature  Variables, Precipitation, and Glacier Change  DATA  Temperature, Derived Temperature Variables,   and Precipitation Trends Data was sourced from the Pacific Climate   Impacts Consortium (PCIC) Data Portal   (http://www.pacificclimate.org/data). The PCIC   Data Portal was established by PCIC through  a negotiated agreement with the Ministry of  Environment’s Climate Related Monitoring Program  (CRMP). The result is a single portal that stores and  delivers data collected by the BC Natural Resource  Sector Ministries, BC Hydro and RioTinto AlCan  (http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/epd/wamr/crmp.htm).   The data set also includes data from Environment  Canada and de-activated historical networks.  This project used temperature and precipitation  measurements from the station observational dataset.  This analysis requires stations with relatively  long records. The early part of the analysis (early  1900’s) are based on a sparse network of stations,  so any understanding of the detailed climate at that  time is less certain than for more recent years when  there are more stations distributed broadly across the  province. This issue is most critical for precipitation  because its distribution across the landscape is highly  complex and anomalies compared against climate  normals have more detailed spatial structure than  temperature does. This is especially true considering  the diversity of topography in BC. This analysis  reports trends for the full period for precipitation,  while acknowledging that the statistical uncertainty  in the trends may not fully capture the uncertainty  that arises from changes in the observational network  over time. However, the trends reported here are  broadly consistent with other analyses carried out at  a coarser spatial resolution and at individual stations.  Trends in Glacier Volume and Area Change Glacier area change was assessed by comparing   the mapped extents of glaciers from the BC Terrain  Resource Information Management (TRIM) data set  which are based on arial photos from the mid-1980s  through the late 1990s. Glacier volume change was  assessed by differencing the topography measured  during the TRIM campaign from the topography  measured during the shuttle radar tomography  mission (SRTM) which was flown aboard the space  shuttle during February 2000 (Jarvis et al., 2008).  ANALYSES  Temperature, Derived Temperature Variables,   and Precipitation Trends The general methodological approach: 1. Calculate monthly anomalies for the period of   record for every station that has a climate normal  associated with it. Here the climate normals were  derived from the PRISM project (Anslow et al.,   in prep.) and are for the 1971-2000 climate  normal period.  2. Compute seasonal (defined as DJF, MAM, JJA  and SON) and annual anomalies for each station  where monthly coverage is sufficient. This  requires all three months for a seasonal anomaly  and all 12 months for an annual anomaly.  Anomalies are weighted appropriately based  on the number of days in a given month when  computing the seasonal or annual mean. For  the degree day variables, number of degree days  were summed on a seasonal basis for stations  with sufficient data as determined through the  computation of the seasonal and annual means  of the temp. and precip. variables. A threshold of  5 degrees was used for growing degree days and  18 degrees was used to delineate between heating  and cooling degree days.    52  A P P E N D I C E S  3. For each season and complete year in all years  from 1900 to 2013, interpolate the available  anomalies onto a 1/2 degree grid. Then, using  shape files defining the province of BC and the  ecoprovinces, calculate the mean anomaly over  the region of interest for each year of interest.   4. Calculate trends based on the mean anomaly for  the domains of interest. Trends were calculated  using the “Robust Linear Model” in R (i.e. Huber  and Ronchetti, 2009). This choice was made to  allow the uncertainty in the splined anomalies  as well as the station density to provide weights  for each year’s mean anomaly. The probability of  the trend being significant is provided and values  greater than or equal to 0.95 may be deemed  significantly different from the null hypothesis   of no trend.  Trends in Glacier Volume and Area Change The changes to glaciers that have occurred in the past  several decades and which are projected to occur  with climate change was intensively studied through  the Western Canadian Cryospheric Network. For  this report, we rely on two separate studies; the first  looked at the change in volume of the glaciers in  British Columbia from roughly 1985 until winter  1999-2000. The second investigated the changes  in glacier area from the period 1985 through 2005.  Both resultant datasets cover all glaciers in British  Columbia and thus provide an excellent snapshot of  both the state of glaciers in the early 2000s as well  as the changes those ice masses underwent during a  very warm climatological period. Glacier area change  was assessed by comparing the mapped extents of  glaciers from the BC Terrain Resource Information  Management (TRIM) data set which are based on arial  photos from the mid-1980s through the late 1990s.   Glacier volume change was assessed by differencing  the topography measured during the TRIM campaign  from the topography measured during the shuttle  radar tomography mission (SRTM) which was flown  aboard the space shuttle during February 2000 (Jarvis  et al., 2008). Changes in volume were computed by  subtracting the earlier surface from the later surface  using control points of fixed topography to assess  error. The glacier analysis was done by Bolch et al.  (2010) for glacier area and Schiefer et al. (2007) for  glacier volume change at UNBC.  REFERENCES Anslow, F.S., C. Daly, and J.M. Hiebert: in prep.   Development of PRISM climate maps for British  Columbia 1971-2000.  Bolch, T., B. Menounos, and R. Wheate: 2010.  Landsat-based inventory of glaciers in western  Canada, 1985-2005. Remote Sensing of Environment  114: 127-137.  Huber, P.J. and E.M. Ronchetti: 2009. Robust  Statistics, 2nd Edition. 380 p. Wiley.   Jarvis A., H.I. Reuter, A. Nelson, E. Guevara, 2008,  Hole-filled seamless SRTM data V4, International  Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT), available  from http://srtm.csi.cgiar.org  Meehl, G.A., J.M. Arblaster, J.T. Fasullo, A. Hu, and  K.E. Trenberth: 2011. Model-based evidence  of deep-ocean heat uptake during surface- temperature hiatus periods, Nature Climate  Change, 1, 360-364.  Schiefer, E., Menounos, B., and Wheate R., 2007.  Recent volume loss of British Columbia glaciers,  Canada. Geophysical Research Letters 34, L16503,  doi:10.1029/2007GL030780    53  A P P E N D I C E S  Appendix C: Data and Methods   Snow, Timing and Volume of River Flow,   Sea Level, and Sea Surface Temperature  DATA  Snow Water Equivalent and Depth Analysis of snow water equivalent and depth was  done using manual snow survey data collected by  the BC Ministry of Environment, provided to PCIC  by the BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural  Resource Operations’ River Forecast Centre. These  data are collected in the field by taking repeat, direct  measurements of snow depth and water content  of the snowpack at numerous sites throughout  the province. These measurements are made at  monthly intervals starting January 1 and running  through the latter part of the winter. These data were  supplemented with April 1 snow water equivalent  data from the automated snow pillow network. The  automated snow pillow network operated by BC  Ministry of Environment collects continuous data on  snow water equivalent via its automated snow pillow  network throughout BC at 71 historical locations  with 51 currently operating. Data were gathered from  River Forecast Centre website.  Timing and Volume of River Flow Station information was downloaded using the  Environment Canada Data Explorer – HYDAT  Version 1.0 (Jan. 26, 2015). Ten stations were  selected based on their association with the Reference  Hydrometric Basin Network (Whitfield et al., 2012),  record length, representation of major hydrologic  regimes in BC and spatial location with respect to  hydrologic modelling projections from the Pacific  Climate Impacts Consortium at the University of  Victoria (http://tools.pacificclimate.org/dataportal/ hydro_stn/map/).  The Fraser River at Hope station (08MF005)  was analyzed to maintain consistency with Fraser  and Smith (2002) and also because it is a significant  watershed in the province and provides an overview  of climate-related changes to hydrology. Water  extractions from the Fraser River basin through the  Nechako Reservoir started in 1958. An adjusted  time series was created to account for flows lost. The  analyzed data are the combined 1912 to 2012 record  downloaded from HYDAT and the adjusted data,  which covers 1958 to 2007. This adjusted data was  received from Alan Chapman in 2007 who was Lead  of the River Forecast Centre at that time.  Sea Level Relative sea level data is collected at tide gauges  at numerous locations along the coast of Canada  by the Canadian Hydrographic Service, part of the  Department of Fisheries and Oceans. The analysis in  the 2002 climate indicators report calculated trends  at four long-term stations on the BC coast –   Tofino, Prince Rupert, Victoria and Vancouver –  and these same stations have been analyzed here.  These all have data as early as 1910 but large gaps  exist for some records in the 1920s and 1930s. For  example, Tofino has a gap from 1920 through 1939.  Prince Rupert has a similar length gap with a couple   Water Survey   of Canada   Station ID   Water Survey of Canada    Station Name  08HA001 Chemainus River near Westholme  08HA003 Koksilah River at Cowichan Station  08JB002 Stellako River at Glenannan  08JE001 Stuart River near Fort St. James  08LA001 Clearwater River near Clearwater Station  08LD001 Adams River near Squilax  08MF005 Fraser River at Hope  08MG005 Lillooet River near Pemberton  08NB005 Columbia River at Donald  08NF001 Kootenay River at Kootenay Crossing  09AE003 Swift River near Swift River    54  A P P E N D I C E S  of annual observations from 1924 and 1927. Our  choice of trend estimator accommodates such gaps  so infilling was not attempted. Homogenization  efforts were not applied to these data owing to no  indication of inhomogeneity in the data upon visual  inspection of plotted annual sea level. Although  sea level does change systematically with season  and with interannual variability principally due to  weather and ocean climatic state, seasonal trends  were not computed given the interest in identifying  any large scale and long-term climate driven changes.  Sea Surface Temperature Sea surface temperature data are gathered by the  Department of Fisheries and Oceans Canada as  part of routine monitoring programs. The sea  surface temperature data analyzed here is measured  manually once daily adjacent to light stations.  Water is gathered within an hour of high tide and  its temperature (and salinity) are measured with  well-calibrated instruments. In locations where light  stations are no longer manned, the work is carried  out by contractors. The program comprises 38  stations that have operated at some point since the  1930s. For this project, data were gathered from the  19 stations that have current or recent observations.  Only seven had sufficiently long records to compute  long-term trends.  Efforts were made to apply automated data  homogenization techniques to the sea surface  temperature data to correct for any potential non- climatic but systematic changes in observation  values arising from, e.g., transition to contract  observers or changes in instruments in time.  Although the DFO has made great efforts to control  the observing conditions, such issues could crop  up. It was found that most of the records were  resistant to such analysis likely because of the very  strong decadal variability in sea surface temperature  data which, makes detecting unnatural transitions  very difficult. Because of this, we left the data  unchanged, however, note that several stations  exhibit inhomogeneities in this analysis but we are  not confident enough that they are non-climatic to  warrant adjusting the data.  ANALYSES  Snow Water Equivalent and Depth The measurement taken at or near April 1 is typically  viewed as a standard indicator of snow accumulation  for a given year. This analysis follows this convention  by examining the April 1 measurements of  snow throughout the province for all years with  observational data. The manual snow survey program’s  earliest observation year is 1935 making this a long- term dataset. The methodology and instrumentation  for collecting snow depth and water equivalent has  changed very little since then, producing a data set  that is methodologically homogeneous. However,  snow depth observation sites are subject to changing  land cover conditions as vegetation changes through  time, introducing some inhomogeneity. Still, the data  represent a high quality 82 year-long record of snow   at specific locations in the province.  The target outcome of analyzing these data  is a regional quantification of changes in snow  depth and water equivalent of ecoprovinces for  as long a time-scale as the observational network  will support. The approach consists of three steps.  First, annual anomalies were computed on the  station data over the 1981 to 2010 30-year normal  period. Second, the anomalies were interpolated  into a gridded product using thin plate spline  interpolation. Finally the regional average for  each year and region was taken and trends were  computed from the timeseries of those averages for  each ecoprovince.  Timing and Volume of River Flow Data was processed and analyzed using code written  in R. Trends were computed using the ‘zyp’ R Package  (Bronaugh and Werner, 2015). Streamflow trends  were computed for Annual Date of 1/3 of Flow, Annual  Date of ½ of Flow or Centre of Timing, Annual Mean,  Annual Minimum, Annual Maximum, July-August- September Minimum, April-May-June Minimum,  December-January-February Mean, March-April- May Mean, June-July-August Mean and September- October-November Mean. Trends were provided in  trend per unit time, trend over the period, and relative  trend as per the methods of the Climate Overview     55  A P P E N D I C E S  (Rodenhuis et al., 2009), which followed that of  Mote et al. (2005) and trend as a percentage of the  mean flow for that metric (e.g., Annual Minimum).  The centre of timing (CT) is the day of the year on  which one-half of the total water flow for the year has  occurred (Barnett et al., 2008), where year refers to  calendar year. It is important to note that we do not  look at “the water year, the day between 1 October  and 30 September of the next year, on which 50%  of the water year streamflow has passed,” which is  the definition used by Hidalgo et al.(2009), who  followed Maurer et al. (2007).  Trends were computed for two time periods,  1958-2012 and 1912-2012. Some stations of  interest did not have records stretching back to  1912, the start date for trend analysis in the Fraser  River at Hope.  Relative Sea Level For trend analysis, the relative sea level data were  converted to anomalies using the 1981-2010 average  sea level for each station. Trends were analyzed using  Mann-Kendall non-parametric trend analysis and  slopes were calculated using the Sen slopes method.  These approaches are strongly resistant to outliers in  data and are better able to handle data with temporal  gaps in the record.  Sea Surface Temperature Trends in the data were analyzed on anomalies  in seasonal and annual mean values relative to a  30-year climatology. To maximize the number of  stations that could be included in the analysis, a   30-year normal period was chosen in which the  largest number of stations contained enough data  to have a climate normal calculated (requiring 75%  data coverage for the given month). This resulted in  a somewhat unusual climate normal period of 1968  to 1997. Because the anomalies themselves are not  presented, an arbitrary normal period is acceptable.  Using this approach, 15 of 19 stations had sufficient  data during the climate normal period to be further  considered in this analysis. Seasonal and annual  climatologies were based on the monthly values  and were only calculated when complete seasons  or years were available thus propagating the 75%   data requirement. The averages of months to make  seasonal or annual climatologies were weighted by  the number of days in the given month to arrive at a  correct average. Trends were analyzed using Mann- Kendall non-parametric trend analysis and slopes  were calculated using the Sen slopes method. These  approaches are strongly resistant to outliers in data  and are better able to handle data with temporal  gaps in the record.  The trend analysis performed here differs  from that in two published analyses of the same  data over earlier periods (Cummins and Masson,  2014; Freeland, 2013).This caused the numeric  trend values in those studies to differ from those  presented here. Those analyses relied on linear  regression to compute trend and two different  approaches to adjusting uncertainty estimates to  account for autocorrelation in the data. The data  in Cummins and Masson (2014) were gap-filled  prior to computing trends on the monthly data.  Despite this, the agreement between the methods  is high and the approach used for this report  allows the delivery of trends as they differ   between seasons.  REFERENCES Barnett, T.P., Pierce, D.W., Hidalgo, H.G., Bonfils,   C., Santer, B.D., Das, T., Bala, G., Wood, A.W.,  Nozawa, T., Mirin, A.A., Cayan, D.R., Dettinger,  M.D., 2008. Human-Induced Clanges in the  Hydrology of the Western United States. Science  319, 1080–1083.  Bronaugh, D., Werner, A.T., 2015. R Package “zyp.” Cummins, P.F., Masson, D. 2014. Climatic variability   and trends in the surface waters of coastal British  Columbia. Progr. Oceanogr. 120, 279-290.  doi:10.1016/j.pocean.2013.10.002  Fraser, J., Smith, R.B., 2002. Indicators of Climate  Change for British Columbia: 2002. Ministry of  Environment, Victoria, BC.  Freeland, H.J., 2013. Evidence of Change in the  Winter Mixed Layer in the Northeast Pacific  Ocean: A Problem Revisited. Atmosphere Ocean,  DOI:10.1080/07055900.2012.754330.    56  A P P E N D I C E S  Freeland, H.J., 1990. Sea surface temperatures along  the coast of British Columbia: regional evidence  for a warming trend. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  47, 346-350.  Hidalgo, H.G., Das, T., Dettinger, M.D., Cayan, D.R.,  Pierce, D.W., Barnett, T.P., Bala, G., Mirin, A.,  Wood, A.W., Bonfils, C., Santer, B.D., Nozawa, T.,  2009. Detection and Attribution of Streamflow  Timing Changes to Climate Change in the  Western United States. J. Clim. 22, 3838–3855.  doi:10.1175/2009JCLI2470.1  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2013.  Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change  2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution  of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment  Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M.  Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y.  Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge  University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom  and New York, NY, USA. https://www.ipcc.ch/ pdf/assessment-report/ar5/wg1/WGIAR5_SPM_ brochure_en.pdf  Maurer, E.P., Stewart, I.T., Bonfils, C., Duffy, P.B.,  Cayan, D., 2007. Detection, attribution, and  sensitivity of trends toward earlier streamflow in  the Sierra Nevada. J. Geophys. Res. Atmospheres  112, D11118. doi:10.1029/2006JD008088  Mote, P.W., Hamlet, A.F., Clark, M.P., Lettenmaier,  D.P., 2005. Declining mountain snowpack in  western north america*. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc.  86, 39–49. doi:10.1175/BAMS-86-1-39  Najafi M.R., Zwiers F., Gillett N., “Changes in  Snowpack from Regional to Global Scales  and Implications for Water Resources in Dry  Season”, 50th CMOS Congress and Joint CGU  Annual Meeting, Fredericton, New Brunswick,  2016. http://cmos.in1touch.org/client/ relation_roster/clientRelationRosterDetails. html?clientRelationId=733332&clientRelation  RosterId=133&no_header=true&bodyonly=true  Regonda, S.K., Rajagopalan, B., Clark, M., Pitlick, J.,  2005. Seasonal Cycle Shifts in Hydroclimatology  over the Western United States. J. Clim. 18,  372–384. http://dx.doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-3272.1  Rodenhuis, D., Bennett, K., Werner, A., Murdock,  T.Q., Bronaugh, D., 2009. Hydro-climatology  and Future Climate Impacts in British  Columbia, revised 2009. Pacific Climate Impacts  Consortium, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC.  Schnorbus, M.A., Bennett, K.E., Werner, A.T.,  Berland, A.J., 2011. Hydrologic Impacts of  Climate Change in the Peace, Campbell and  Columbia Watersheds, British Columbia, Canada.  Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, University of  Victoria, Victoria, BC.  Schnorbus, M., Werner, A., Bennett, K., 2014.  Impacts of climate change in three hydrologic  regimes in British Columbia, Canada. Hydrol.  Process. 28, 1170–1189. doi:10.1002/hyp.9661  Shrestha, R.R., Schnorbus, M.A., Werner, A.T.,  Berland, A.J., 2012. Modelling spatial and temporal  variability of hydrologic impacts of climate change  in the Fraser River basin, British Columbia,  Canada. Hydrol. Process. 26, 1840–1860  Shrestha, R.R., Schnorbus, M.A., Werner, A.T.,  Zwiers, F.W., 2014. Evaluating Hydroclimatic  Change Signals from Statistically and Dynamically  Downscaled GCMs and Hydrologic Models.  J. Hydrometeorol. 15, 844–860. doi:10.1175/ JHM-D-13-030.1  Shrestha, R. R., Schnorbus, M. A., and Peters, D.  L., 2016. Assessment of a hydrologic model’s  reliability in simulating flow regime alterations in  a changing climate. Hydrol. Process. 30: 2628– 2643. doi: 10.1002/hyp.10812  Stott, P.A., Gillett, N.P., Hegerl, G.C., Karoly, D.J.,  Stone, D.A., Zhang, X., Zwiers, F., 2010. Detection  and attribution of climate change: a regional  perspective. Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Clim. Change  1, 192–211. doi:10.1002/wcc.34  Thomson, R.E., B.D. Bornhold, and S. Mazzotti,  2008: An Examination of the Factors Affecting  Relative and Absolute Sea Level in Coastal  British Columbia. Canadian Technical Report of  Hydrography and Ocean Sciences, No. 260, 49p.  Werner, A.T., 2011. BCSD Downscaled Transient  Climate Projections for Eight Select GCMs over  British Columbia, Canada. Pacific Climate Impacts  Consortium, University of Victoria, Victoria, BC.    57  A P P E N D I C E S  Werner, A.T., Schnorbus, M.A., Shrestha, R.R.,  Eckstrand, H.D., 2013. Spatial and Temporal  Change in the Hydro-Climatology of the Canadian  Portion of the Columbia River Basin under Multiple  Emissions Scenarios. Atmosphere-Ocean 51,  357–379. doi:10.1080/07055900.2013.821400  Whitfield, P.H., Burn, D.H., Hannaford, J., Higgins,  H., Hodgkins, G.A., Marsh, T., Looser, U., 2012.  Reference hydrologic networks I. The status and  potential future directions of national reference  hydrologic networks for detecting trends. Hydrol.  Sci. J. 57, 1562–1579. doi:10.1080/02626667.201 2.728706  Zhang, X., Harvey, D.H., Hogg, W.D.,  Yuzyk, T.R., 2001. Trends in Canadian  Streamflow. Water Resour. Res. 37, 987–998.  doi:10.1029/2000WR900357  Zwiers, F.W., Schnorbus, M.A., Maruszeczka, G.D.,  2011. Hydrologic Impacts of Climate Change  on BC Water Resources: Summary Report  for the Campbell, Columbia and Peace River  Watersheds.    CONTENTS  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  INTRODUCTION  Indicators of Climate Change for British Columbia  About the Trends   CLIMATE CHANGE DRIVERS  Average Temperature  Maximum and Minimum Temperature  Precipitation  Snow   CLIMATE CHANGE AND FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS  Glaciers  Freezing and Thawing  Timing and Volume of River Flow  River Temperature  Salmon in the River   CLIMATE CHANGE AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS  Sea Level  Sea Surface Temperature  Salmon at Sea  Seabird Survival   CLIMATE CHANGE AND TERRESTRIAL ECOSYSTEMS  Growing Degree Days  Mountain Pine Beetle Range   CLIMATE CHANGE AND HUMAN COMMUNITIES  Heating and Cooling Requirements  Human Health   APPENDIX  Climate Change: Past Trends and Future Projections  Data and Methods   