                                                           Canada's Energy Transition: Getting to Our Future, Together   CANADA’S ENERGY   TRANSITION Getting to Our Energy Future, Together  GENERATION ENERGY   COUNCIL REPORT     In 2017, the Government of Canada launched Generation Energy – an open and inclusive nation-wide dialogue  with stakeholders, experts and individual Canadians to envision what a low-carbon energy future would  look like for Canada over the course of a generation. Building on the results of that dialogue, the Minister  of Natural Resources formed the Generation Energy Council to prepare this report in order to answer four  crucial questions:   • What should Canada’s energy future look like over the long term?   • What generational goals should we strive to achieve?   • What principles should guide us?   • What are the potential pathways and milestones along the way?  In answer to these questions, this report takes a generational view. As a Council, we’ve looked beyond the  current tensions and debates. Our focus instead is on our shared future – the broad and deep shifts occurring  in the world’s climate and energy systems, and the imperative that Canada must act now to navigate the  energy transition successfully.  JUNE 2018  The Generation Energy Council Co-chairs  Aisha Bukhari Senior Manager at the Advanced Energy Centre,  MaRS Discovery District  David Collyer Past President and CEO, Canadian Association   of Petroleum Producers   Philippe Dunsky President, Dunsky Energy Consulting  Colleen Giroux-Schmidt Vice President, Corporate Relations, Innergex  Renewable Energy Inc.   Julia Langer Chief Executive Officer, The Atmospheric Fund  Jane McDonald  Managing Director, International Institute for  Sustainable Development   Leah Nelson Guay Past Chief Executive Officer, First Nations Power  Authority  Richard Nerysoo President, Gwich’in Development Corporation and  former Premier of the Northwest Territories  Élise Proulx Vice President of Communications and Government  Affairs, Hydro-Québec   Peter Tertzakian Chief Energy Economist and Executive Director,   ARC Financial Corporation  Louis Tremblay President and Cofounder, AddÉnergie  Annette Verschuren Chair and CEO, NRStor Inc.  Merran Smith Executive Director, Clean Energy Canada and Fellow,   Simon Fraser University  Linda Coady Chief Sustainability Officer, Enbridge Inc.  Council Members    Table of Contents  PART I Introduction 4  PART II   Guiding the Vision: Our Five Principles 12  PART III  The Generation Energy Vision 13  PART IV  Canada’s Energy Transition Pathways 21  1. Wasting Less Energy 22  2. Switching to Clean Power 27  3. Using More Renewable Fuels 33  4. Producing Cleaner Oil and Gas 39  PART V Pathfinding with Indigenous Peoples 46  PART VI Advice 50  APPENDICES  1. The Generation Energy Toolkit 55  2. Glossary of terms 59     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report4  Reports like this are the kind of thing you think  you should get down to reading but rarely do. Most  people just want to use energy to make their lives run  smoothly, not ponder its future. But we’re hoping you  stick with it on this one, because this subject is too  important to lose you on.   An energy transition is underway – and will continue  to roll out over the course of a generation, roughly  between now and 2040. It is the greatest shift of this  kind the world has seen in generations. For nations like  Canada that embrace this shift, it can represent a big  change for the better. This transition has the potential  to change how you switch on the lights, heat your home  and get to work – maybe even the kind of work you do  when you arrive there.  This transition is a big deal. And it represents a real  opportunity for Canadians – we know it can help us  build a better country, avoid the impacts of climate  change, and redefine Canada’s role in a changing  world. This report is a proposition for Canadians – an  invitation to imagine Canada’s energy future, and then  to join together to build it.   What kind of country do you want to be living in a  generation from now? What legacy do you want to pass  on to your children and grandchildren? Do you want  Canada to be a leader or a follower?  In 2017, the Generation Energy dialogues gathered  the ideas of more than 380,000 Canadians about  Canada’s energy future. They said they wanted to  see the economic prosperity, diverse social fabric,  environmental quality and high international regard  that define our country sustained. And they shared a  collective vision of our energy future built on three  pillars: it must be affordable, reliable and clean.   The first two of these pillars have long been in place,  and we all agree they must be maintained. But it is the  demand for clean and efficient energy to power our  homes, businesses and transportation systems – and  the wave of technological innovation underway globally  in response to that same demand – that drives the need  for a new energy vision in Canada.  PART I. INTRODUCTION   A New Energy Vision for Canada   CLEAN ENERGY – For the purposes of this report, clean  energy refers to electricity produced from renewable energy  (hydro, wind, solar, geothermal, etc.), as well as energy  efficiency  solutions   NON-EMITTING – refers to electricity produced from  sources that produce no carbon pollution, such as hydro,  wind, solar, nuclear, geothermal, and tidal  TRANSITION PATHWAY – A mix of technology, investment,  business strategies, and government policy that enables  Canada to transition from its current energy system to  a low-carbon energy system over the next generation  (roughly by by 2040)   CLEANTECH – Emerging knowledge-based products and  services that improve operational performance, productivity  or efficiency while reducing costs, inputs, energy  consumption, waste or pollution   TERMINOLOGY A full glossary has been included at the end of this report. Some of our most frequently used terms:      GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  5  Canada has already made strong commitments to  embrace this transition, pledging under the Paris  Agreement on Climate Change to substantially reduce  its greenhouse gas emissions and agreeing on a plan  to do that through the Pan-Canadian Framework  on Clean Growth and Climate Change. And across  the country, many cities, Indigenous communities,  institutions, businesses, and people like you have  already begun to adopt ambitious clean energy and  low-carbon programs of their own.  This might sound like just feel-good talk, but that  framework – which nearly every province and territory  has endorsed – represents the broadest consensus  on climate and energy issues our country has ever  achieved. Along with the shift now underway in the  global marketplace for energy and other resources,  these commitments require us to act now to  transform our energy systems to ensure they can  meet changing needs at home and abroad.   CANADA’S CLIMATE  COMMITMENTS  At the outset, we want to  emphasize that the global energy  transition is inspired in part by  changing market and technology  dynamics for energy products  and services but the primary  motivation is the urgent need  to cut global greenhouse gas  emissions to address mounting  risks and impacts of climate  change. Accelerating the transition  to a low-carbon economy today  will reduce the costs of inaction.  For these reasons, Canada joined with the vast majority of  the world at the Paris climate talks in 2015 in committing to  global action, pledging to reduce carbon emissions   30 percent below 2005 levels by 2030, with deeper  reductions beyond that.  To achieve this goal, the federal, territorial, and majority  of provincial governments all agreed to the Pan-Canadian  Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change. Here are  the most important commitments in that plan:   • carbon pricing in all jurisdictions by 2018 • acclerated nationwide coal phaseout by 2030 • nationwide strategy for electric vehicles by 2018,  accelerated deployment of charging infrastructure  • implementation of a federal clean fuel standard • establishment of a nationwide net-zero energy building  code by 2030, and energy use labelling for buildings by 2019  • renewed support for industrial efficiency, including the adoption of energy management systems  • reduction in methane emissions from the oil and gas sector of 40-45 percent by 2025     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report6  The Global Race is On We’re headed into challenging terrain, and there’s still a lot  of uncertainty about the pace of change in the Canadian  and global energy marketplace. What’s certain is that our  climate is changing rapidly. Unless we can start to reduce  emissions now, we will soon have to grapple with the  human and financial costs of more frequent and extreme  storms, floods, heat waves, droughts and forest fires.  The transition to a low-carbon economy necessary to  overcome these challenges is a global race, and it won’t  wait for us. Within a generation, countries like Canada  will be using less fossil fuels, and renewable power and  other non-emitting sources of energy will command a  much larger share of the world’s energy supply.  Leading  economies the world over – from China and India to the  US and Europe  – are investing tens of billions every year  to develop the new technologies, services and knowledge  that will supply the world with cleaner and more efficient  energy.  As part of this global boom, Canada’s clean energy  sector can contribute new energy products and services to  developing markets. Oil and gas will also continue to be  part of the global energy mix, and Canada must innovate  to lower carbon and costs in order to compete for that  demand.  There’s real risk involved in falling behind in this energy  transition, in failing to build the momentum – and public  and investor confidence – required to achieve it.  Canada must step on its accelerator.  Two Tracks, One Prosperous  Destination  In the face of long-term uncertainties and rapidly changing  energy markets worldwide, Canada needs to start out on  this journey along two tracks. First, we need to rapidly  transform our energy production, distribution and  consumption systems at home so that they are as clean  and efficient as possible – and do more than they ever have  before to protect our air, land and water. This will require  governments, businesses and citizens alike to make energy  transformation a top priority and step up with the new  tools and decisive steps necessary to make it happen.   Navigating this first track successfully will require Canada to  speed up its shift to low-carbon solutions for our electricity  use, transportation, industrial activities, and heating and  cooling needs, as well as nurturing new businesses and  developing clean energy technologies and energy efficiency  solutions to make the shift possible. By doing this at home,  we can also stake out a leading position in some of the  fastest-growing sectors of the global economy.   On the second track, we must continue to accelerate the  development of low-carbon technologies for use in our  existing oil and gas sector to reduce carbon pollution, cut  costs, and create new value-added products and services.  Oil and gas companies will need to take greater initiative,  rapidly innovating to stay competitive in global markets.  And that will require them to establish carbon footprints  smaller than their competitors.   A GLOBAL CLEANTECH BOOM  The global clean technology market is estimated to grow to  $2.2 trillion by 2022. Here are some key metrics for Canadian  performance to date in the sector:  • Canada ranks fourth on the Global Cleantech Innovation Index  • Canada’s cleantech industry contributed $59.3 billion to GDP in 2016  • Canada’s cleantech industry employs an estimated 274,000 Canadians  • Nearly 80 percent of Canadian cleantech firms are exporters, and together they generated $11.5 billion in exports in 2016  • Canada is ranked fourth worldwide and first in the G20 in terms of potential to produce cleantech start-up companies over the next decade  • Canada’s share of the global clean tech market has fallen 12 percent in the last decade     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  7  Transitioning along these two tracks won’t be easy. Canada  has long used its abundant natural resources – including  oil and gas, forests, agriculture, metals and minerals – to  drive much of our economic prosperity. But the future is  not the past. Our energy transition requires a shift to a  more diversified, knowledge-based economy like the ones  contributing to growth in other parts of the world. Finding  our new competitive advantages will take significant  effort on the part of all Canadians. But the costs of  inaction represent a level of risk that cannot be ignored.  What’s more, the marriage of the existing strengths of  our resource sectors with an innovative wave of new  technologies will open up new market opportunities.  Canada’s Starting Line Few other countries on earth have been blessed with a  range of energy resources as rich and diverse as ours.  Owing to our abundant hydropower, growing renewable  power and storage capacity, and various nuclear facilities,  nearly 80 percent of our electricity already comes from  emissions-free sources. We started out ahead of the game.  Now we have to commit to winning it.   Our head start will only carry us so far, however, because  electricity is only a small portion of all the energy we  use as a nation. We produce most of our emissions in  industrial activities, transportation and heating. Our most  challenging work lies ahead.    The potential rewards, though, more than justify the effort.  This transition represents a unique, once-in-a-generation  opportunity to find a stronger and more stable place in  the energy economy for regions and communities that  weren’t previously well connected to it. The shift to a  low-carbon economy will involve many and varied energy  projects nationwide, and these offer new opportunities to  build real, durable partnerships with Indigenous and rural  communities by investing directly in their energy future. It  provides a chance to expand access to affordable, reliable  and clean energy across the country – not to mention  giving Canadians a much greater range of choice in the  kind of energy they use and when and how they use it.  The good news is we are already part of this transition.  Canadian companies in every sector have begun to invest  in greater energy efficiencies, slash carbon pollution, and  seek customers at home and abroad for clean energy  solutions.   You’ve probably heard the shorthand name for some of  the innovations driving this transition – cleantech – but  that’s only one small part of picture, and it leaves out all  the opportunities created by vital work such as retrofitting  buildings and adding renewable energy to the grid. For  Canadian children in school today, growing economic  sectors like these are where many of them will find stable,  lifelong careers.      • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report8  Canadian governments – federal, provincial, territorial,  municipal and Indigenous – have also begun to introduce  the kinds of climate and energy policies that will enable  every part of our economy, including our energy and  resource sectors, to thrive. If we get the balance right, this  kind of coordinated approach across governments and  jurisdictions can reduce carbon pollution, while spurring  innovation, supporting Canadian productivity, and  providing a solid foundation for future actions. But there’s  a lot of work still to be done.  Indigenous Leadership in  Canada’s Energy Transition Canada’s relationship with Indigenous Peoples should  play an important role in the success of our energy  transition. Indigenous peoples already play a leadership  role as pathfinders – stewards of the land, environment  and natural resources. Both Indigenous and non- Indigenous Canadians see the value of greater Indigenous  participation in Canada’s energy future and want to ensure  that Indigenous communities benefit more directly from  energy development.   Work is already underway on a renewed relationship  with Indigenous peoples. The Government of Canada has  committed to an upfront recognition of rights, respect  and cooperation as a foundation for change. Indigenous  leaders at local, regional and national levels are currently  engaging with senior levels of government on initiatives  such as the implementation of the Pan Canadian  Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change and the  development of a new framework for the recognition and  implementation of Indigenous rights. These processes also  include collaborative development of new mechanisms  for greater Indigenous involvement in regulatory decision- making on energy projects.  As part of this new relationship, Indigenous peoples  must be included as partners in shaping Canada’s energy  future. By embracing Indigenous participation in the  energy transition, Canadian and Indigenous leaders  alike can create a powerful lever for change, accelerating  progress on economic reconciliation, reducing poverty and  increasing prosperity. This transition is an opportunity for  Indigenous Peoples and communities to take their place at  the table and help drive the evolution of Canada’s energy  sector.     AN ENERGY POWERHOUSE  Canada’s resource wealth positions it among the world leaders on every front in the energy sector. Some highlights:   Electricity:   81 percent of Canadian electricity  is generated from non-emitting  sources, 2nd highest in the OECD  Hydroelectricity:   Canada is the world’s 2nd largest  producer  Renewable energy:   the world’s 4th largest producer  Wind energy:   the world’s 8th largest producer  Uranium: the world’s 2nd largest  producer  Nuclear power: the world’s 6th  largest producer  Biofuels: the world’s largest  biomass reserves per capita,  comprising about 7 percent of  worldside potential biomass  energy resources  Oil and gas: the world’s 4th largest  oil producer and 3rd largest  exporter, the world’s 4th largest  natural gas producer and exporter     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  9  A Snapshot of Canadian Energy Use  173 GWh  Nunavut  576 GWh  Prince Edward Island   Natural gasHydro Biomass  Solar and TidalNuclear Petroleum  WindCoal  14,569 GWh  New  Brunswick   24,623 GWh  Saskatchewan  683 GWh  Northwest  Territories    41,848 GWh  Newfoundland and Labrador   206,928 GWh  Quebec  80,487 GWh  Alberta  9,917 GWh  Nova Scotia  158,154 GWh  Ontario  73,324 GWh  British  Columbia    448 GWh  Yukon    36,687 GWh  Manitoba  Other  ELECTRICITY GENERATION IN CANADA  Biomass 6%  Other oil products 8%  Non-Emitting Electricity 16%  Motor Gasoline 17%  Emitting Electricity 4%Natural Gas31%  Coal and other  products  3%  Oil 15%  SECONDARY  ENERGY USE  CANADA 2015  Energy  System  Losses 37%  Losses at  Consumer 30%  Useful Energy 33%  USEFUL  ENERGY AND   ENERGY  LOSSES  CANADA 2013     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report10  The Road Ahead An ambitious vision is one thing, but getting  there will be all about the details – clear,  credible actions that governments, businesses  and individuals need to take to navigate this  transition. And we recognize that the way the  transition unfolds will be influenced by many  factors – some within our control, some we can  reasonably anticipate, and still others that will  catch us by surprise.   That’s why we are presenting the path forward as a portfolio  of four complementary pathways and one pathfinding  relationship. The direction and pace of travel on these  pathways is becoming clearer, and we already know some  of the actions we must take.Along the way, we’ll need to  respond to changing circumstances in Canada and around  the world. But it is crucial to keep heading in the right  direction – and to accelerate our transition, starting now.    Four Pathways for the Energy  Transition:  Here are the four main pathways, all of which must be  pursued for Canada to reach its low-carbon future:  1. Wasting Less Energy It’s rarely the most glamourous part of the  energy business, but some of Canada’s greatest  opportunities to save money, cut greenhouse  gas emissions and create jobs can be found in  slashing energy waste. Fully one-third of our  Paris emissions commitment could be achieved  by improving energy efficiency, which will  also make our businesses more competitive  internationally and leave more money in  consumers’ pockets.       GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  11  2. Switching to Clean Power  With Canada’s head start on  clean power, it can complete the  transformation to a nearly carbon- free electricity grid more easily  than many places. There is a  bigger challenge – and substantial  opportunity – in growing our  supply of clean and non-emitting  electricity to build on our headstart  by switching more of our heating  systems, transportation and  industrial processes to electricity,  a process we refer to as “clean  electrification.”   3. Using More Renewable Fuels  Alongside reducing energy demand  and boosting the use of clean  electricity, we will continue to  require liquid and gas fuels  in  transportation, heating and cooling,  and some industrial processes. We  must reduce the impact of those  fuels by expanding Canada’s capacity  to produce and use cleaner fuels –  biofuels and biogas from plants and  waste, for example – that can heat  homes, power vehicles and support  manufacturing with much less carbon  pollution.  4. Producing Cleaner Oil and Gas  In the changing global marketplace,  competitiveness in the oil and gas  sector will depend on cutting both  costs and greenhouse gas emissions.  By improving efficiency, using  clean power and cleaner fuels, and  introducing new technologies to  capture and store carbon emissions,  Canada’s oil and gas industry can  shrink its carbon footprint and  increase its energy productivity    One Pathfinding Relationship  In addition to these four pathways, which largely  address the way energy is produced and used, there  is an additional pathfinding relationship that must to  followed to address the role of Indigenous Peoples in  Canada’s energy future. This relationship recognizes the  unique leadership responsibilities and opportunities  that Indigenous Peoples and their governments have in  energy development and management.   If we navigate these pathways successfully Canada can  emerge a generation from now as a leader in this energy  transition worldwide. Along the way, we will attract  investment, create jobs, and ensure economic prosperity  which will yield advantages for Canada on a global scale.  What this really means is that all Canadians have  the opportunity to become a part of this transition.  Because this is a process that will involve virtually every  aspect of everyday life, it represents an opportunity  for every Canadian. Not just through the actions of our  governments but in our homes and businesses, in our  workplaces, in our commutes and in our communities,  we can all be catalysts for change and champions of  Canada’s energy transition.      • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report12  Our Five Principles  Generation Energy envisions Canada’s  transition to a low-carbon energy system  guided by these principles:  1. A RESPONSIBLE TRANSITION … reducing carbon pollution to align with Canada’s climate goals for 2030  and beyond   2. A SUSTAINABLE TRANSITION … providing clean, reliable, affordable energy solutions to all Canadians  while taking a leadership role in environmental  stewardship on all fronts  3. A PROSPEROUS TRANSITION … spurring innovation and entrepreneurship to create jobs, attract the  best talent, provide opportunities for retraining,  and enhance Canadian competitiveness in a carbon- constrained global marketplace  PART II. GUIDING THE VISION   4. A COLLABORATIVE TRANSITION … integrating Indigenous values into the process at every step  and creating opportunities for reconciliation and  new partnerships with Indigenous peoples   5. AN INCLUSIVE TRANSITION … engaging and informing Canada’s many diverse communities  and every economic and social sector, while  strengthening collaboration among all levels of  government     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  13  PART III. VISION   Canada a generation from now  OUR ASSUMPTIONS ABOUT CANADA  A GENERATION FROM NOW  To depict the possible future we’ve imagined here, we’ve  made the following assumptions:   We’ve imagined a Canada where the four pathways laid out  later in this report are broadly representative of how life  unfolds in the years to come.   We assume that Canada remains committed to achieving the  goals it set out at the Paris climate talks and in the Pan- Canadian Framework.   We assume that Canada’s oil and gas sector continues  to make significant strides in reducing carbon pollution.  We assume that successive governments significantly  increase support to convert grids to clean electricity, improve  energy efficiency and electrification in every sector of  society, provide companies and entrepreneurs with the tools  and support to create a wave of innovation in energy and  cleantech, and pursue the lowest polluting and most cost- effective options for all other fuels, including fossil fuels and  biofuels.   We assume that in the generation between now and these  scenes, Canada reaches a tipping point, beyond which  the most enticing and affordable solutions for homes and  businesses are also the cleanest ones and the growth of the  low-carbon economy creates a momentum that transforms  clean energy technology into a substantial mainstream  industrial and economic force nationwide.  The Generation Energy Vision For most Canadians, the point of the energy transition  now underway is not the process but the result. You don’t  want to look at schematic diagrams of the engine – you  want to know where we’re going. So, let’s pay a visit to  four Canadian households a generation from now and see  where the transition has taken them.    Before we do, a few comments on the framing of this  section of the report. This is one vision of what life could  look like a generation from now. Our four households are  meant to be illustrative and not prescriptive. We have tried  to steer away from Utopian views and we acknowledge  this is an ambitious and optimistic glimpse of Canada’s  energy future. So, while the energy systems that we have  today will not disappear - a generation from now there  will still be suburban streets and gas stations - we have  deliberately focused on what might be different about  how Canadians use and see energy in their daily life a  generation now because these are the areas in which we  need to accelerate change.     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report14  Consider a Canadian town on the sea coast  a generation from now. Historically, the  town was a place for fishing and processing  catches for customers across the water.  But even before the big changes of recent  years, this coastal town’s place in Canada  had begun to transform. Its proximity to a  major nearby city, at the outer edge of a daily  commute and an easy day trip for tourists,  meant that it grew into a suburb surrounding  its’ pretty historic harbour. A generation  from now, it is a tourist destination with  sturdy small-town roots and metropolitan  challenges – and opportunities on   both fronts.  For a homecare nurse living on one of those suburban  streets (let’s simply call her “the Nurse”) life straddles  these two worlds. Much of her work is in the city and  inner-belt suburbs, but the enhanced regional transit  network allows her to live comfortably in this nearby  coastal town. A fast electric ferry can drop you right  downtown in under an hour, and dedicated bus and  shared vehicle lanes connect the coastal town by  road to nearby suburbs in as little as twenty minutes.  She drives sometimes but prefers the range of transit  options. That way, she can check in on clients digitally  en route. Electric ferries and buses, autonomous  shared vehicles that pick up other subscribers  en route – it all would’ve seemed a little exotic a  generation ago, but this is the routine now.   On the commute, the Nurse’s thoughts sometimes  turn to the small resource town far inland where her  parents grew up and her cousin who still lives there.  His spouse comes from a family of new Canadians.  Let’s call them “the Local” and “the New Canadian.”  The energy transition is well underway in that  traditional resource town as well, and her cousin talks  about how it all started with the “Passive House”.   hand head  legs and feet  Small Towns and Suburbs: A Generation From Now  Consider a Canadian town on the sea coast a generation from now. Historically, the town was a place for fishing and processing  catches for customers across the water. But even before the big changes of recent years, this coastal town’s place in Canada had  begun to transform. Its proximity to a major nearby city, at the outer edge of a daily commute and an easy day trip for tourists,  meant that it grew into a suburb surrounding its’ pretty historic harbour. A generation from now, it is a tourist destination with  sturdy small-town roots and metropolitan challenges – and opportunities on both fronts.  Small Towns  and Suburbs  A Generation From Now Consider a Canadian town on the sea coast a generation from now. Historically, the town was a place for �shing and processing catches for customers across the water. But even before the big changes of recent years, this coastal town’s place in Canada had begun to transform. Its proximity to a major nearby city, at the outer edge of a daily commute and an easy day trip for tourists, meant that it grew into a suburb surrounding its’ pretty historic harbour. A generation from now, it is a tourist destination with sturdy small-town roots and metropolitan challenges – and opportunities on  both fronts.All-electric SUV doesn’t cost much   to keep fueled. A fast electric ferry can drop you right downtown in under an hour  Private Vehicle  Lane  The traffic’s almost always much slower in  the private-vehicle lanes.  The Nurse’s thoughts  often turn to her cousin, still living in the small resource town far inland  where her parents grew  up. His spouse comes  from a family of new  Canadians.  This is the “Passive house”. The design  behind it - which was mostly about  zealous insulation and structural details designed to trap and radiate heat. Started  in Saskatchewan in the 1970’s.  The  “Passive House”  Passes allbuilding codes  Their home isn’t a Passive House, but enough of the design has  become part of building codes at every level of government in  pursuit of “net zero” energy usethat it is a model of efficiency nonetheless.  Inside, though, it bears many of the  same features as a Passive House. The  walls have been thickened to allow for  more insulation, and the windows are  the most efficient ones on the market.  The house verges on zero-emissions  with a ground-source heat pump out  back.  Thicker walls  Better windows  ground-source heat pump  The oil and gas sector working on a technology that  reduces carbon pollution from production and turns  the waste carbon dioxide into feedstock for the  concrete industry, reducing emissions and turning a  profit in one go.  Oil and gas  business  Nurse could just barely manage the  mortgage on the brand-new suburban  house. And she was a bit skeptical about  the new bells and whistles that came with  the place.  100%  The new house had a small  bank of solar panels on the  roof, which were integrated  with the charging port and  batteries in her EV. And the  whole neighbourhood was part  of a trading system operated  by the local utility, which  shifted power loads around the  region as needed. Now, she  rarely pays much on her  electricity bill and her car is  ready and waiting with a full  charge each morning.   The electricity management  app sends reminder notifi- cations to her household  digital assistant, which  nudges her verbally to make  her preferred choices.  The town recently completed its transition to 100%  renewable energy when the commercial/industrial park  completed a major retrofit and conversion to a  co-operatively owned district biomass-powered heating,  cooling and renewable electricity plant.  When she waits for her ferry to the city  down at the harbour, the view these  days is comforting in both its old and  new details. There are still buildings  made of weathered wood and bobbing  fishing boats – the postcard details that  draw the tourists. But there are plenty  of signs that enough is happening in the  town that her kids could build their  lives here one day.  It was new, unexpected ventures like these combined with new opportunities for  growth in old ventures that eventually won over so many Canadians in  resource-dependent communities to the benefits of the low-carbon economy.   Many had seen themselves as inextricably linked to a single industry and were wary  of dramatic changes. But smart investments guided by targeted incentives by  government smoothed the transition and enabled these sorts of towns to find new  niches while evolving their established industries at the same time.  Hydro  Types of power used a generation from now   Oil & Gas SolarWind  Small Towns and Suburbs  A Generation From Now     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  15  At first, people had trouble getting past the name. But  folks soon learned that the design behind it – which  was mostly about zealous insulation and structural  details designed to trap and radiate heat – started  with a conservation experiment in Saskatchewan in the  1970s. And after all, what was more Canadian than a  well-insulated house?   The Local and the New Canadian live in a classic prewar  home on an older street in town. Their home isn’t a  Passive House, but enough of the design has become  part of building codes as every level of government  pursued “net zero” energy use over the years that it is  a model of efficiency nonetheless. The house still looks  the same as it did in family photos from the street, but  inside, it bears many of the same features as a Passive  House. The walls have been thickened to allow for more  insulation, and the windows are the most efficient ones  on the market. The house verges on zero-emissions  with a ground-source heat pump out back.  There are solar panels on the roof – this patch of farm  country turned out to be much more lucrative for solar  than locals might’ve guessed – and the regional grid  mixes wind power (lots of it), large-scale solar (more  than you’d think), a couple of gas-fired cogeneration  plants (newly outfitted with carbon capture and reuse  technology), and interties with a neighbouring region  rich in hydropower to help the local utility’s energy  storage facilities balance the supplies of wind and solar.   The Local continues to have a career in the oil and gas  sector working on a technology that reduces carbon  pollution from production and turns the waste carbon  dioxide into feedstock for the concrete industry,  reducing emissions and turning a profit in one go.  Through these kinds of innovations, carbon pollution  from Canada’s oil and gas production has dropped  significantly from where it was a generation ago and  continues to decline. Cleantech and digital technologies  have combined to reduce costs and pollution, and  energy companies have diversified their product mix  beyond fuel -- including chemicals for advanced  plastics used in electric vehicles and the special  lubricants that keep wind turbines turning.  The New Canadian, meanwhile, is a field representative  for a renewable energy company that operates several  wind farms in the area. Her work includes training  locals on day-to-day maintenance and helping her firm  use big data and machine learning to optimize the way  the farms interact with other producers on the regional  electricity grid. She does most of the work from a home  office. Their old house is a bit of an empty nest these  days. Their only child, a daughter, is at technical college  an hour’s drive away, studying to become a technician  for the biofuel industry. Her tuition is partially  subsidized through a program aimed at encouraging  more young people to develop skills for what everyone  started calling “the bio-economy” once it took off .   In small towns like this one, the real change was to  begin seeing the wind turbines and gas wellheads that  share the farm fields of the region as pieces of the  same energy sector that has made Canada prosperous  and helped keep its economy strong. It’s a very similar  recalibration of vision to the one that the Local’s cousin,  the Nurse, has experienced in her suburban town on  the coast.  The Nurse had worries of her own in the early days of  the energy shift. The coastal town was one of many  that had pledged to convert to 100-percent renewable      • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report16  energy, and the move seemed risky at the time. A  single parent with two young kids in tow, the Nurse  could just barely manage the mortgage on the brand- new suburban house. And she was a bit skeptical  about the bells and whistles that came with the  place. The most confusing part at first was the energy  trading agreement. The house had a small bank of  solar panels on the roof, which were integrated with  the charging port and batteries in her EV. And the  whole neighbourhood was part of a trading system  operated by the local utility, which shifted power  loads around the region as needed. Now, she rarely  pays much on her electricity bill and her car is ready  and waiting with a full charge each morning.   It all feels commonplace now. At the Nurse’s house,  an electricity management app sends reminder  notifications to her household digital assistant, which  nudges her verbally to make her preferred choices.  The heat pump proved a good investment in the  long term compared to other options. And the town  recently completed its renewable energy transition  when the local industrial park completed a major  retrofit to district heating and cooling – a biomass- powered system that burns pellets made from the  regional forestry industry’s waste.   When the Nurse waits for her ferry to the city down  at the harbour these days, the view is comforting in  both its old and new details. There are still buildings  made of weathered wood and bobbing fishing boats –  the postcard details that draw the tourists. But there  are plenty of signs that enough is happening in the  town that her kids could build their lives here one  day. There’s the converted warehouse by the dock, for  example, which houses the head office for a booming  greenhouse business attracted by the low energy  costs, emissions-free grid, and access to a major port.  A company doing offshore wind projects up and down  the coast has an office in the old warehouse as well.   It was new, unexpected ventures like these combined  with new opportunities for growth in old ventures  that eventually won over so many Canadians in  resource-dependent communities to the benefits of  the low-carbon economy. Many had seen themselves  as inextricably linked to a single industry and were  wary of dramatic changes. But smart investments  guided by targeted incentives by government  smoothed the transition and enabled these sorts  of towns to find new niches while evolving their  established industries at the same time.     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  17  Let’s move on to a midrise condo near the  centre of a major Canadian city a generation  from now. This has been a prime location  for significant new housing construction in  urban Canada for decades by now, but this  building in particular was constructed in the  mid-2020s.    For a family of three living in one of the condo’s  three-bedroom units, the day begins, as most days  always have, with hot showers and breakfast, the  morning routine. The married couple work steady  nine-to-five jobs – one in financial services in  the downtown core, the other for a design firm  specializing in energy-efficient retrofits in the  suburbs, so let’s call them “the Designer” and “the  Banker” – and there’s a grade-schooler to wake and  dress and feed.  The shower in this case draws its hot water from one  of the several tanks in the building’s basement that  provide for the needs of all 30 units in the building.  But these tanks don’t heat the water with a boiler –  instead, they drew electricity from the grid overnight,  when it was cheapest. The building also strips away  the heat from its wastewater before sending it into   the city sewers to help with space heating. These are  just two of the many ways that condos across the  city have found to trade energy services and pass on  the savings to residents. And these systems also help  keep the grid reliable and resilient.  The condo building was constructed several years  earlier to the latest nationwide codes, which were  the first to mandate hyper-efficiency and clean  energy on all new residential and commercial  buildings. Interior heating and cooling is via air- source heat pumps. Electricity still comes from  the provincial grid – now powered by a 100%  zero-emissions sources including hydro, nuclear,  and renewables. The grid now meets over 50%  of the province’s energy demand (up from 20% a  generation ago), including burgeoning demand  from EVs charging in the parking lot. This expansion  has been driven in part by changes to provincial  utility regulations several years ago that enabled  utilities and their customers to take advantage of  infrastructure, technologies and business models  that integrate electricity production, conservation,  storage and use. “Hybrid” distribution systems that  bring together an array of clean and low-carbon  energy sources for homes and businesses are now  common.  23°C  14 kWh  8:00 AMSUPERMARKET  The Big City And The Rural North  A Generation From Now     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report18  There’s an app on the couple’s handheld devices  to orchestrate and monitor the morning routine.  Lights and appliances have been set to turn off  automatically once they sit idle for a certain amount  of time, thermostats scale down automatically in  empty rooms. Anywhere there might be waste, a  monitor is on the case. Overall, this particular family’s  highly energy efficient home uses 1/10th of the energy  of the average Canadian household a generation ago.   For the Banker, the day’s commute is usually a quick  one. An app on her handheld device lays out her  options: trains are arriving on time at the LRT stop  two blocks away, and a real-time video feed reveals  more slush in the bike lanes than she likes. The  car share would be quicker and there’s a vehicle  parked one block over, but due to high demand this  morning, it’d be triple the price of transit. She kisses  her daughter goodbye and heads for the LRT and a  15-minute commute to a downtown office tower.  The stock markets still churn up and down, of course,  but these are good times in Canada’s financial  sector. Her bank just closed a big deal to build new  production facilities in Canada for a major energy  storage company drawn by the opportunity to use  Canada’s clean electricity grids. Economies that took  a carefully managed approach to the disruptions  of the global energy transition are in the minority,  and Canada has emerged as a safe, stable place  to invest, not only in its busy cleantech sector but  also in energy and other resource sectors that have  shrunk their carbon footprints and gained strategic  positions internationally by slashing waste and   boosting efficiency. For a Canadian company cutting  logs, digging minerals or exporting natural gas these  days, there is real value in being able to demonstrate  that its products came from a country with an almost  entirely emissions-free grid and stringent laws  protecting water, wilderness and wildlife.  Back at the family’s condo, the daughter has decided  she can handle a little slush – she wants to ride her  bike to school today. She knows her route well, and  it’s on safe, physically separated cycle tracks the  whole way.   The Designer heads down to the basement, starts  up the family EV, and touches the on-board tablet’s  standard pop-up query (“The Usual?”) to agree to  the daily commuter route. He drives the car himself  as far as the main street three blocks away because  he enjoys the performance as it accelerates at the  drop of a hat, then hands the controls back to the  digital system, flips to the tab containing his office  documents, and settles in to check the morning  meeting’s agenda.   He learns his first order of business on arrival will  be prep for a sales trip to Asia the following week.  His design firm built its reputation on extensive  retrofits to large apartment and office buildings to  slash their energy bills. They recently merged with a  company that uses artificial intelligence technology to  improve energy management systems for commercial  buildings. The demand for new tools like these to  improve consumer energy choices has gone global,  and his firm sees limitless opportunities in China and  India.   The traffic moves a little better than it did a  generation before – it’s far from perfect, but major  transit investments and congestion charging have  combined with the growing consumer preference  for cycling, shared rides and auto-piloted vehicles  making smarter lane and route choices to make it all  flow smoothly enough the designer is never distracted  from his work prep by a sudden stop-and-go lurch.   The city eventually gives way to suburbs where former  bedroom communities have brought transit and      GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  19  some midrise density to their cores and often play  host to business clusters of their own. There’s one the  Designer passes on the way to his office park that is  known for movie and videogame studios, international  producers attracted over the years by Canada’s highly  trained technicians and the clean energy on the grid.  And there’s another with a logo the Designer has  always liked that combines an Inukshuk with a gas well.  It’s a partnership between a Canadian energy company  and several Indigenous people in the North – stories  about successful partnerships of that sort have been  staples of the Canadian business press for years, held  up as symbols of  the synergies between cleantech,  energy and Indigenous communities determined to  shape their own energy and economic futures.  This company operates an LNG plant on the northern  part of the west coast, but still has roots in an old  municipal gas utility in the city. One of the company’s  employees, is one of the handful of Indigenous  employees who divides his working time between this  facility and field maintenance in his home community  in the North. Let’s call him “the Vice President”. His  story is in some ways familiar – Indigenous people  from Northern communities have been coming to cities  to find work for generations – but it’s a refreshing  change that not just the wages but the profits from his  employer flow back to the community.   The Vice President’s home community had long  been involved in environmental management in the  region. Some years back, that led to an investment  opportunity for the community – an equity position  along with more than a dozen other First Nations. The  fact that the LNG plant was powered by renewable  electricity was a major factor in the community’s  decision to participate in this project.   When he’s back in the North, Vice President’s stays  with his sister and her family. And there he sees  firsthand just how much his community’s relationship  with energy has changed. Energy was not traditionally  a good news story in their community – like most  other commodities that came from the south, it was a  maddeningly expensive necessity, characterized by the  noise and pollution of diesel generators.   But in this Northern Indigenous community a  generation from now, the topic of energy is a better  one. The electricity that keeps the lights on and the  home warm through long winter nights comes not  via clouds of diesel but from banks of solar panels,  spinning wind turbines near the big lake nearby,  and a new energy storage bank to make the whole  system more reliable. Folks weren’t quite sure what  a “microgrid” was when the topic was introduced by  local entrepreneurs working with an energy partner  from the south, and there were worries about cost and  reliability. But as an equal partner in the development,  the new grid operator is now the Nation itself. It  delivers power to its own community, earns investment  returns, and provides the affordable electricity and  economic support needed to develop more local  businesses. The new power system also created  new jobs – everything from administrative staff to  executives. And those first power bills, smaller than  ever before, improved the quality of life for residents  throughout the community.    The Vice President’s sister works for the First Nation’s  grid operator in a management position. Her spouse,  meanwhile, works in the community’s bustling tourist  economy, taking visitors out into the bush on elaborate  package tours to learn a little of the traditional ways  Indigenous people lived off the land for generations.  Let’s call them “the Manage” and the “Tour Guide”.     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report20  Their home, like all the newer homes in the  community, follows building standards consistent  with those across Canada. The windows and walls are  well insulated, the power reliable, and there’s even a  household-sized battery system in the back hallway  that stores enough power to guarantee all will be well  for several days in the event anything goes wrong.  There’s also a cooperative greenhouse providing  locally grown produce, cutting food costs compared to  food flown in from the south and making a new energy  efficient refrigerator affordable.   As in many Northern families, life remains divided  between the small, traditional northern community  and the cities down south. One of the family’s children  is in university there, studying environmental law and  business administration, with an eye toward starting  a company back home after she graduates. The other,  still in elementary school, is working on a science  project that uses virtual reality technology to explore  her grandfather’s fishing grounds.   Back in the city down south, the Designer arrives at  his office, plugging his car into a convenient workplace  charging unit provided by his company. He consults  briefly with his colleague, who is recently married.  He and his husband were drawn to the city despite   the high rents because their skill sets were in such  demand in this city, with its seamless connections to  nationwide professional networks and global markets.   The transition has touched every sector of the  economy and every community in the country, but  Canada is a very urban country, and the cornerstone of  the whole process was making its cities work well and  prosper. That’s why the most important part of the day  for the Designer and the Banker might be the moment  they arrive back home, content to be building their  lives in the middle of this big city and optimistic for  their daughter’s future.   And far away to the north, an Indigenous community  enjoys some of the same prosperity, connected  to the same new economic opportunities. For too  long, Indigenous communities did not have access  to the same economic tools as the rest of Canada –  basic infrastructure such as reliable and affordable  electricity and clean and safe drinking water. But in  this community a generation from now, much work has  been done to heal the wounds of the past, celebrate  Indigenous culture as an intrinsic part of what it  means to be Canada, and provide a similar standard of  living, with room to nurture both new enterprises and  a traditional way of life.      GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  21  The route Canada takes to a low-carbon  energy future will be as diverse and varied  as the country itself, and there will surely be  unanticipated turns and unexpected barriers  along the way. Still, there are critical steps we  know we need to take now to get going toward a  much needed destination.   We’ve divided the journey into four pathways, which must  be pursued concurrently.  They provide a general overview  of the direction Canada’s energy transition needs should  take, but we will need to be flexible and adaptable in  making course corrections along the way. We have also  provided milestones – targets that governments have  already committed to and will need to go beyond if Canada  is to succeed in this energy transition.  PART IV. CANADA’S ENERGY TRANSITION PATHWAYS    1WASTING LESS ENERGY     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  23  Efficiency – the energy we don’t use – is the cheapest energy resource  at our disposal and the only one that saves consumers money and  reduces the cost of doing business. Indeed the world has seen  an unprecedented decoupling of economic growth and energy  consumption in recent years. We’ve been talking about doing more with  less in Canada since the 1970s and although some progress has been  made, we still have a lot of room for improvement when it comes to  energy efficiency.  Fortunately, wasting less energy today means getting smarter and more  deliberate, not going without – and the tools to slash our energy use  have never been more readily at hand. Wasting less energy may lack  the excitement of an electric car or the visible virtue of solar panels,  but pursuing this energy efficiency pathway may well be the most  significant single action we take in this transition to meet our climate  goals.  Canada is currently improving its energy efficiency by about one  percent every year. By doubling that to two percent every year by 2025  and then increasing again to three percent per year by 2030, we can  meet at least one third of our Paris emissions targets through efficiency  measures alone. Doubling and tripling the current pace of year-to- year efficiency boosts is a very ambitious goal, but also an essential  one. It can create over a hundred thousand jobs, save businesses and  consumers money, and make our economy stronger.   There is no more essential first step toward Canada’s low-carbon  economy than boosting our nation’s energy productivity. And by  minimizing the investment needed in electricity production, renewable  fuels and fossil fuels over the next generation, it makes all the other  pathways shorter, easier and more economical to navigate.  DECOUPLING – AN HISTORIC TURNING  POINT  For many decades, GDP growth and increased   energy use have been parallel, mutually   reinforcing factors in economic success. A   critical cornerstone of the energy transition   is the decoupling of growth from using more   energy. From 1990 to 2015, Canadian energy   use increased about 30 percent while GDP   increased by nearly 80 percent. Energy   efficiency improvements result in improved   energy productivity in the economy, which   means the Canada’s economy can continue to   grow while using less energy.   SKILL AND TALENT  ATTRACTION AND   DEVELOPMENT    POLICY AND  REGULATION    GOVERNMENT  PROCUREMENT   COMPETITIVE  BUSINESS   ENVIRONMENT  INNOVATION POLICY & REGULATION MARKET & INVESTMENT  SKILLS PUBLIC CONFIDENCE & ENGAGEMENT  INNOVATION POLICY & REGULATION MARKET & INVESTMENT  SKILLS PUBLIC CONFIDENCE & ENGAGEMENT  TOOLS  see appendix p.59     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report24  Canada’s Energy Efficiency  Pathway runs along four   main tracks: Regulations:  Making efficiency the norm requires baking it into virtually  everything we do – from the buildings we build and  operate, to the equipment and vehicles we purchase and  use, to the way we develop and re-develop our cities.  Better codes and standards, coordinated at every level  of government, will make the efficient choice not the  virtuous choice but instead the obvious one.  Investment:  Conservation-focused financing, incentives, and other  fiscal tools will encourage the flow of public and private  capital into the residential, commercial, industrial, and  transportation sectors and develop a robust efficiency  marketplace. It will also make it easier for homeowners,  companies and institutions to become part of that market  and earn returns by investing in energy efficiency.   Procurement:  Utilities have a leading role to play by prioritizing energy  conservation among their resources – treating it as a  valuable and profitable commodity purchased from  homeowners, businesses and institutions. Governments  meanwhile can use their purchasing power to blaze the  trail for businesses and individuals by making efficiency  a requirement when buying goods and services, and they  can cut their own energy use and save public money at  the same time.  Infrastructure:  Much of our energy use is dictated by our current  infrastructure, from the design of cities and towns to  the transportation systems we use to get around them  and link them together. To makes these systems more  efficient, we will need smart land use development and  re-development, better access to local transit and active  transportation, and the introduction of low-carbon long- distance travel options.  SMALL ACTIONS, BIG SAVINGS  In Nova Scotia, the country’s first energy efficiency  utility is demonstrating that when governments  are ready to lead, Canadians are keen to waste  less and save more. With more than 100 partners  and more than 200,000 participants, the utility’s  efficiency programs are already saving Nova  Scotians $110 million every year.  LOWER CARBON METAL  For more than 20 years, aluminum smelters across  Canada have been waging a sustained campaign  against energy waste. As a result, greenhouse gas  emissions are down more than 30 percent in the  Quebec aluminum industry, and a state-of-the- art smelter in British Columbia has cut emissions  by nearly 50 percent. Today, Canada’s aluminum  industry is the most carbon-efficient producer of  aluminium in the world.     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  25  Wasting less energy presents many  opportunities for Canadians beyond simply  saving money on energy bills. As we proceed  down this pathway, here are some of the  most promising opportunities likely   to emerge:   The emergence of an efficiency business sector as  economic activity and jobs are generated with the work  of improving the efficiency of homes, buildings and  industrial sites across Canada.   Boosting industrial productivity through performance  requirements and wider implementation of certified  energy management systems, which are currently  voluntary in Canada and are in place in less than one  percent of industrial facilities. If only eight percent  of Canadian industrial facilities implemented such a  system, it could save enough energy to power over one  million Canadian homes for a year.  Getting around more efficiently by improving fuel  efficiency requirements for personal and freight vehicles;  introducing incentive programs; implementing next- generation technologies such as autonomous vehicles;  the use of efficiency technologies and better data to  guide delivery routes; and transportation demand  management programs that can stop the growth of  kilometers traveled and help reduce emissions.  Conserving with data by taking an integrated, systems  approach to the energy performance of vehicles and  buildings, and by giving Canadians greater control of  their energy use through the use of smart appliances,   big data and digitization.   Using smart urban design to ensure that land use, live/ work spaces, distributed energy, electrified and active  transportation networks are intrinsically more efficient,  and that street orientation, building sites and building  designs are compatible with new renewable energy  technologies.   Taken together, these opportunities have the potential  not only to save money for Canadians and Canadian  companies everywhere but to generate new economic  opportunities in everything from the building trades to  manufacturing efficient equipment and materials. What’s  more, an economy that produces more with less energy  is a more competitive one in the global marketplace. This  is why wasting less energy is the backbone of Canada’s  transition to a low-carbon economy.  THE EVOLUTION OF THE PASSIVE HOUSE  The hyper-efficient design behind the “Passive House” traces its origins to the Canadian prairie, when the Saskatchewan  Research Council commissioned the Saskatchewan Conservation House in 1976 to demonstrate energy-saving home design  technologies and techniques. The concept jumped the pond to Germany, where it evolved into the Passivhaus design standard.  Recently, it’s hopped back again, with dozens of new Passive House designs under construction or completed across Canada.  Vancouver, for example, is now home to an 85-unit apartment building constructed to Passive House specifications, meaning  each apartment will require only one-tenth as much energy as a typical Canadian apartment.   Photo credit: 8th Avenue Development Group     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report26  Efficiency Milestones  For freight transport  • By 2030, decouple Canada’s  freight-related emissions  from economic growth  • By 2030, bring fleet average  fuel efficiency in line with  best-in-class standards  worldwide  • By 2030, achieve a significant  shift to rail for long-distance  transport.  For personal transportation  • Vehicle fleet average fuel efficiency  is aligned with best-in-class  standards   • By 2040, single passenger trips  are halved in all medium and  large cities by ensuring that  Canadians have a sufficient range  of transportation options including  transit, ride-sharing programs   and cycling   For buildings  • By 2040, provinces and  territories have all adopted  and implemented a federal  model code requiring all new  construction to achieve   net-zero energy  • A model code requiring  significant energy performance  improvements during major  renovations is introduced in 2022  and adopted by all jurisdictions  in 2025  • By 2025, all homes and buildings  have labels that conveys  their energy performance to  prospective buyers, renters and  lessors   • By 2040, Canadian homes and  buildings are at least as energy  efficient as leading cold climate  jurisdictions worldwide   For industry  • By 2030, 75 percent of industrial  energy use benefits from energy  management systems   • By 2040, Canadian industry meets  or exceeds U.S. energy productivity  For utilities  • By 2022, regulatory  frameworks across Canada  enable and encourage  utilities to procure energy  efficiency and peak demand  reductions as the first priority  energy resource  Overarching Milestone Canada’s rate of economy-wide energy efficiency improvement grows from 1 percent per year today  to 2 percent per year by 2025 and 3 percent per year by 2030, bringing our energy productivity   in line with leading jurisdictions in Europe and the United States.    2SWITCHING TO CLEAN POWER     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report28  Using clean power means not only more clean electricity  on our grids but also relying on electricity for more of our  energy needs. For Canada to take its place as a leader in the  low-carbon economy a generation from now, we will have to  use electricity to power more of our daily activities at home  and in industry, and we must increase the amount of our  electricity supply that comes from sources that do not create  carbon pollution.   Fortunately, Canada begins with a head start – nearly 80 percent of our  electricity is generated from emissions-free sources, thanks to our abundant  hydroelectric power, multiple nuclear facilities and fast-growing wind and  solar capacity. But electricity accounts for only 20 percent of our overall  energy use today – to increase that share substantially, we will need to  significantly expand our clean electricity generating capacity. That’s why this  pathway represents such an enormous opportunity – pursuing it will require  major infrastructure investments nationwide, as well as restoring public  confidence that this expansion can occur in an environmentally responsible  way without causing a spike in electricity costs. With the costs of renewable  energy plummeting and demand booming worldwide, there are huge  economic rewards to be reaped, and strategic advantage to be exploited, by an  aggressive shift to clean electricity now.  There are two decisive steps required   to navigate this pathway:  1. Clean our grids, by bringing more non-emitting electricity   sources on board while ensuring grid stability and affordability aren’t  compromised, and by working with neighbouring jurisdictions to  improve transmission networks.  2. Use more clean power, by giving consumers, institutions  and businesses more opportunities to choose clean electricity for  transportation and heating. This second step means we’ll certainly  need more electricity than ever a generation from now, which means  Canada’s electricity grids will have to get more connected, more  local, more efficient and much smarter even as we cut our emissions.   POLICY AND  REGULATION    DRIVING  INNOVATION    COMPETITIVE  BUSINESS   ENVIRONMENT  INNOVATION POLICY & REGULATION MARKET & INVESTMENT  SKILLS PUBLIC CONFIDENCE & ENGAGEMENT  TOOLS  see appendix p.59     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  29  SMALLER GRIDS, BIG OPPORTUNITIES  As Canada’s electricity systems make room for smaller scale and more decentralized grids, Canadians will see   new choices for energy production and use. In particular, the shift to digitalization and the rise of prosumers will   create many new opportunities as grids become smarter, more flexible, more secure and more distributed.  • DIGITALIZATION refers to the use of digital communications technologies to enable better multi-directional  communication between the various elements of the electricity system, which can improve the collection,   sharing, and analysis of electricity system data and operation of the grid.  • PROSUMERS are energy customers who generate some of their own energy and sell it back to the grid,  for example through rooftop solar panels or air-source heat pumps. This is made possible in part by the   decentralized management of energy systems enabled by digitalization.  Canada has been using clean power for generations, but  the amount varies considerably depending on where  you live, and there is even greater variation regarding  options, feasibility, ease and cost as each jurisdiction  looks to increase their share. In some provinces, power  generated by burning natural gas in place of coal will  be part of the transition by cutting emissions now while  providing stability for next steps.  There are four main strategies for continuing  to navigate this pathway in the years   to come:  • Clean the Supply: Converting power grids to clean  electricity to reduce carbon pollution, accomplished  through planned transitions brought in on time  frames that allow us to control the costs to  ratepayers and businesses.  • Improve the Infrastructure: Upgrading grids and  making them smarter with the introduction and  dissemination of smart grid technology, distributed  generation by small-scale producers, and locally  and regionally controlled microgrids, as well   as developing grid interties with neighbouring  jurisdictions to improve efficiency and reliability  and bring non-emitting power to regions that have  limited potential for clean generation as the mix of  power sources changes.  • Shape the Demand: Electrifying both new energy  demand and energy use currently reliant on fossil  fuels. The feasibility of this step will vary by region  based on cost and availability but may include  switching from natural gas to electricity for heating,  using electric vehicles, and converting industrial  processes from fossil fuels to electricity.  • Build New Partnerships: Developing clean electricity  projects in partnership with Indigenous communities  nationwide to enable new economic development. switching from natural gas to electricity for heating,  using electric vehicles, and converting industrial  processes from fossil fuels to electricity.     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report30  Canadians have already begun to reap rewards from their  work on this pathway. In addition to substantial growth  in Canada’s renewable energy sector, which already  employs more than 200,000 people, there are Canadian  clean power companies operating coast to coast – many  forging partnerships with Indigenous groups to bring  clean energy to their communities.   Here are some of the most promising  opportunities for Canadian leadership as the  world shifts to clean power:  • Developing new business models for utilities: Canada’s utilities will need to find new ways of managing networks, using existing infrastructure more effectively, and offering many more options to customers as they operate new energy networks that are much more distributed and multi-directional. Advanced smart distribution and storage networks can be employed to help consumers get the energy they need, at the best prices, all while ensuring the grid’s reliability and efficiency.  • Generating our own power: As grids decentralize, small-scale renewables drop in price, and microgrid and smart-grid technology introduces more flexibility and choice, Canadian businesses, communities and individuals will have many more ways to get involved in power production. Homeowners and businesses that install renewables can sell excess power back to the grid, and there will also be opportunities for producing power from waste and cutting heating bills through district energy systems.  • Attracting businesses that put a premium on clean power: Pacesetting international technology companies are major clean energy customers, and that trend is already spreading well beyond the high-tech business. Canada will see opportunities to offer a cost-effective carbon-free option for data centres and block chain operations, industrial and manufacturing facilities, even movie and videogame productions.  • Manufacturing for electric vehicles: As a major manufacturer of automobiles and parts, Canada has an opportunity to become a maker of tools and components for electric transportation systems to be used across Canada and beyond. This goes beyond cars, trucks and buses  there will be opportunities in every aspect of the transportation sector, from mining lithium and cobalt for batteries to manufacturing storage systems and electric drive trains.  • Commercializing energy storage technology: To provide more flexibility for the entire electricity system, new storage technologies can integrate excess renewable power with other energy sources to upgrade grids.  • Exporting clean power: Canada is already a clean energy exporter, and this is a market that will only grow in the coming years, particularly the United States looks for options to reduce carbon pollution on its grid even as demand continues to grow.  • Co-generating of electricity and industrial heat: On industrial sites where very high heat is part of the daily operations, there will be a growing role for alternative fuel sources like geothermal as well as cogeneration plants whose excess electricity can be sold back to the grid.  A QUEBEC MODEL FOR EV CHARGING  INFRASTRUCTURE  Québec is home to Canada’s first electric vehicle  charging network, the Electric Circuit. Today, the  network includes mostly 1,500 charging stations in  Quebec and Eastern Ontario and serves more than  23,000 EV drivers. Quebec’s EV charging network is  a model for utility-led infrastructure projects and has  prevented more than 4,000 tons of CO2 emissions.  Photo credit: Hydro-Québec     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  31  As clean electricity technologies spread nationwide over the  generation to come, this new economic activity can boost  Canada’s strategic advantage and enhance our reputation  globally as a clean energy leader. There are irresistible  opportunities in this fast-growing multi-billion-dollar global  industry, but there is also steepening competition and a  need to build public and consumer confidence regarding  costs and convenience. Still, the rewards far outweigh the  risks. A generation from now at the end of this pathway,  Canada can be home to a clean electricity powerhouse,  forming the backbone of a thriving industrial sector  nationwide as a beacon for international customers and  investors seeking pollution-free grids.   20 Well over  THE COMING STORAGE BOOM  New technologies to store energy will be a  critical component of future electricity grids  that rely on a range of sources, including  intermittent sources like solar and wind, for  their power. This goes well beyond batteries.  In a small Ontario town on the shores of  Lake Huron, for example, a Canadian start-up  company is building a facility to store electricity  by turning it into compressed air and pumping  it into a depleted underground salt cavern.  It can then be released on demand to spin a  turbine and generate electricity for delivery  back to the grid as it expands.   RIDING THE ELECTRIC BUS WAVE  Some of the keenest adopters of electric transport in Canada are not individuals but transport systems. Some examples:  • In Winnipeg, five all-electric buses are now part of Winnipeg Transit’s fleet. Manufactured by a Winnipeg company,  the buses have passed cold-weather testing on the prairie and point the way to wider adoption in the years to come.  • In Vancouver, the transit authority has unveiled a plan to introduce electric buses to its fleet, starting with four  vehicles using charging systems manufactured by two Canadian firms.  • In Edmonton, the municipal government has announced that it will purchase electric buses exclusively for its transit  system starting in 2020.      • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report32  Clean Power Milestones  Reducing carbon intensity  • By 2030, 90 percent of  electricity is produced by  non-emitting sources.  • By 2050, nearly 100 percent  of electricity is produced by  non-emitting sources.   Connectivity  • By 2030, more than 50 percent of  off-grid, remote communities have  access to non-emitting energy  technologies, and 100 percent by  2050.  • Canada’s national and international  grid connections is expanded to  encourage   non-emitting electricity use   and exports.  Electrifying transport  • By 2030, 30 percent of new  vehicle sales ware EVs and a  national charging network is in  place  • By 2030, most ships visiting a  Canadian port connect to shore  power while in port.   • By 2025 all new mass-transit  lines (light rail, streetcars, etc.)  use non-emitting sources of  power.  Electrifying buildings  • By 2050, electricity is the primary  energy source for homes across  Canada.  • By 2050, commercial and  institutional buildings with  appropriate roof size and  orientation are required to have  solar installation.  Energy Storage  • By 2030, Canada is established  as a global centre for  energy storage technology  development and deployment. Electrifying industry  • A generation from  now, new industrial  development finds  it economical to use  electricity for on-site  activities  Consumer Preference  • By 2030, the majority  of Canadians have the  option of becoming  prosumers – able to  power their lives with the  clean energy of   their choice   Overarching Milestone By 2050, clean electricity is the single largest source of energy supply in Canada. (Electricity today  generates 20 percent of total energy supplies.)    3USING MORE RENEWABLE  FUELS     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report34  Alongside electrification, our energy transition will require more renewable  fuels to add to the liquid and gas fuels as part of our affordable and reliable  energy mix over the generation to come. These renewable fuels will be  particularly important for transportation, heating and cooling, and in some  industrial processes, including steelmaking, chemical production, mining and  cement making. In addition to using more renewable fuels, we will continue to  improve the quality of our oil and gas fuels to reduce emissions.   Here are the most important steps on this pathway:  • switching to cleaner fuels wherever possible;  • blending cleaner fuels such as biofuels and renewable gas into the  existing fuel supply;  • expanding the supply of cleaner fuels to improve availability.  Particularly important among these cleaner  fuels are: • biofuels produced from agricultural, forestry and municipal   waste materials   • renewable natural gas (RNG), which can be collected from farm  waste, municipal landfills and wastewater treatment facilities, or  generated directly from biomass  • hydrogen, which has potential roles both as a fuel source and as  an energy storage application.   PUBLIC CONFIDENCE DRIVING  INNOVATION    SKILL AND TALENT  ATTRACTION AND   DEVELOPMENT  POLICY &  REGULATIONS  COMPETITIVE  BUSINESS   ENVIRONMENT  INNOVATION POLICY & REGULATION MARKET & INVESTMENT  SKILLS PUBLIC CONFIDENCE & ENGAGEMENT  TOOLS  see appendix p.59     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  35  These fuels can often be directly substituted for current fuel supplies, so this  Pathway provides a cost-effective way to boost productivity while reducing  carbon pollution in sectors where zero-emissions options remain further off.  And Canada already has a competitive advantage on this pathway, owing to  our abundant and diverse range of feedstocks for these low-carbon fuels.  Canada is currently home to pacesetting companies nationwide that use  municipal waste, forestry industry waste, and many other feedstocks to make  renewable fuels and other value-added products.   This Pathway presents an opportunity for Canada to become an international  leader in the emerging bio-economy, where renewable resources and waste  streams are converted into fuels and value-added products—including  captured carbon dioxide as a feedstock. The rise of the bio-economy is  already well underway in Canada, and it presents not just an opportunity  to reduce carbon pollution but a way to create jobs, boost economic  competitiveness and potentially become a significant export sector.  By some estimates, products from bio-refineries could supply as much as  a third of the global chemical industry and replace up to 80 percent of the  petrochemical feedstock for the pharmaceutical and diagnostic products  industries by 2030. While the market is growing rapidly, global leaders such  as Finland are investing heavily in this sector. Canada has the resources  to become a bio-economy leader, but there’s also a real danger of falling  behind.   A MUNICIPAL WASTE POWERHOUSE  Edmonton, Alberta, is home to a world-class municipal waste processing  facility that turns the stream of waste that the city can’t recycle into  clean biofuels and green chemicals (such as ethanol and methanol),  boosting the city’s waste diversion rate from 50 to 90 percent.      • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report36  Canada’s path to leadership is clear, and it breaks  down like this:  • Canada’s resource wealth provides abundant feedstock to   expand the use of cleaner renewable fuels and value-added  products;    • these renewable fuels are a key component in the  development of Canada’s bio-economy, a potential strategic  advantage enabling Canada to compete at global scale in a  fast-growing economic sector; and  • the bio-economy represents a platform upon which to  establish Canada among the leaders in the circular economy,  as it grows worldwide over the next generation.   FROM SURPLUS TO HEAT   North America’s first utility-scale project  to convert surplus renewable power into  hydrogen gas for storage, at which point  it can be blended with natural gas for use  in home heating, is under construction in  southern Ontario.  A CARBON POLLUTION VACUUM  A B.C. start-up company has begun field testing of a system designed to  remove carbon dioxide directly from the air and combine it with renewable  energy to produce biofuel. The concept is still many years from commercial  application, but is a potential step-out solution to global GHG emissions with  its demo site in Canada.      GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  37  Building out the bio-economy is also an important  step in positioning Canada as a leader in the “circular  economy.” The industrial symbiosis that a circular  economy would create by sharing waste streams and  feedstock among industrial sites and across industry  sectors could be a major leap forward along the path   to a low-carbon economy.  In addition, technologies that employ hydrogen gas as  a fuel or for energy storage are already well established  in Canada. This is a potential strategic advantage for  Canada as the next generation of more affordable and  efficient hydrogen fuel cells see greater use, both as  fuel for vehicles at industrial work sites and as a way of  storing variable renewable energy sources like wind and  solar as part of an integrated next-generation electricity  grid.  Canada is also a world leader in in Carbon Capture,  Use and Storage (CCUS), a technology that in the longer  term could significantly reduce the carbon emissions  arising from fossil fuel use at industrial sites. The next  generation of these technologies has potential to be  employed at a smaller scale and at a broader range  of industrial facilities than is economically viable with  current technology. There is also potential further out  to employ this technology to remove carbon dioxide  directly from the air.  The Cleaner Fuels Pathway does not come without  its challenges, which include upfront costs for new  infrastructure needed to make renewable fuels  affordable and widely available, and the need to  attract investors to projects and technologies that are  capital-intensive and require significant investment  in research and development, as well as extended  time horizons. The opportunities on this pathway also  often require coordinated action across government  jurisdictions and between industries that don’t have a  history of collaboration (waste management facilities  and fuel suppliers, for example, don’t naturally think of  themselves as partners).  Investing in cleaner fuels offers a range of tools for  boosting competitiveness, and it could give rise to a  robust new economic sector producing a diversity of  cleaner fuels for transport and industrial uses, along  with many other value-added products.   WHAT IS A CIRCULAR ECONOMY?  A circular economy is a system that closes the supply  loop and encourages the use of cleaner and longer  lasting raw materials, as well as the repurposing,  reuse and upgrading of all waste streams into valuable  low-carbon products. The energy transition outlined in  these pathways can encourage connections between  industrial sectors in order to share supply and waste  streams.  WHY A CIRCULAR ECONOMY IS IMPORTANT  A more circular economy will:  • reduce waste  • encourage greater resource productivity   • boost competitiveness  • establish a better foundation from which to address  future resource security and scarcity issues   • reduce the environmental impacts of production and  consumption, including carbon pollution     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report38  Renewable Fuels Milestones  Clean Fuel Standard   and Cleaner Fuels • A Clean Fuel Standard is   implemented to deploy low-carbon  fuels, electrification, and other  technologies, to reduce Canada’s  annual greenhouse gas emissions by  30 million tonnes by 2030.  • Cleaner fuel use increases by 60%  by 2040   • The number of advanced bio- refineries in Canada increases to 10  by 2030, and continues to increase  thereafter.  Bio-Economy   and Circular Economy • Strengthen current national bio-  economy strategy by 2020 and develop  a harmonized national strategy for the  circular economy by 2025.  Hydrogen  • By 2040, establish a leading  hydrogen and fuel cell  technology cluster and   export trade. Carbon Capture Use   and Storage • Next generation CCUS technology   is commercially viable for smaller  scale industrial applications by  2030 or later.  Measurement, Monitoring and  Transparent Reporting  • By 2020, establish a credible   and transparent measurement,  monitoring and reporting system  to better inform purchasing  decisions by providing comparative  environmental, cost and  performance data across a broad  range of fuel types (conventional  fuels, renewable fuels, hybrid  solutions, etc.).  Overarching Milestone Over the next generation Canada is positioned among the global leaders in the bio- economy, leveraging our abundant resources and energy expertise to develop lower  carbon fuels and value-added products.     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  39  Bio-Economy   and Circular Economy • Strengthen current national bio-  economy strategy by 2020 and develop  a harmonized national strategy for the  circular economy by 2025.  4 PRODUCING CLEANER  OIL AND GAS     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report40  Even as the world moves toward a low-carbon future, the low cost and  abundance of oil and gas mean they will continue to have a role to play in  the global energy economy in the next generation. As in other industrialized  economies, Canadians will be using less energy, including less oil and gas, at  home.   Canada is the fourth largest producer of natural gas and home to the world’s  third largest oil reserves. But simply having those resources won’t be enough  to compete in rapidly transforming global energy markets. Canada’s oil and  gas production must be both cost and carbon competitive in domestic and  international markets as the world seeks the most affordable and least  polluting supplies in a carbon constrained economy.  To achieve this goal Canada should set its sights on   a few key priorities:  • reducing emissions per unit of oil or natural gas produced;  • improving the cost competitiveness of Canadian oil and gas; and  • expanding the scope of value-added oil and gas products and services for  both domestic and export markets.  PUBLIC CONFIDENCE DRIVING  INNOVATION    SKILL AND TALENT  ATTRACTION AND   DEVELOPMENT  POLICY &  REGULATIONS  COMPETITIVE  BUSINESS   ENVIRONMENT  INNOVATION POLICY & REGULATION MARKET & INVESTMENT  SKILLS PUBLIC CONFIDENCE & ENGAGEMENT  TOOLS  see appendix p.59     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  41  The generation to come promises to be a tumultuous one for the oil and gas  sector worldwide – an era of mounting competition both between producers  within the industry and with new sources being developed outside it. For  oil and gas producers, pursuing this pathway starts with their own energy  use, because using less energy reduces both their carbon pollution and  their production costs. This is not a new challenge for Canadian oil and gas  producers – the pursuit of lower costs and less energy use has been a focus of  the business for years.  Canada’s oil and gas producers will need to pursue a wide range of strategies  to overcome barriers as they develop new low-carbon technologies. These  include high costs, the difficulty of obtaining financing, the lack of flexibility in  regulations to enable new technology, and long-time lags between testing and  large-scale commercial implementation.   Here are some of the most important ways to respond to both  the challenges and the opportunities in this Pathway:  • Developing new processes for lower cost and more energy efficient  extraction of crude oil (including the use of solvents and other new  technologies to reduce or eliminate the use of natural gas to generate the  steam needed to extract underground oil sands deposits) as well as in  downstream upgrading, refining and transportation;  • Continuing to improve the cost and carbon competitiveness of Canada’s  oil, natural gas and natural gas liquids production by developing and  implementing new technology, by applying innovative new systems and  processes, and by ensuring that Canada has competitive policies and  regulations that both protect the environment and attract investment;  • Significantly reducing methane emissions at oil and gas extraction and  processing sites through more efficient equipment design; improved  measurement, monitoring and reporting; and accelerating replacement of  existing equipment;  • Reducing the cost of and improving access to clean grids for natural gas  extraction and LNG delivery, so that lower carbon Canadian LNG can  displace higher carbon LNG supplies from elsewhere in the world;  • Developing and implementing next-generation carbon capture, use and  storage (CCUS) technologies to reduce carbon dioxide and other emissions  created during the extraction of oil and gas, and potentially using the  captured carbon dioxide as a feedstock for value-added products; and   • Diversifying the product mix produced by the oil and gas sector, with  a particular emphasis on uses with lower life-cycle greenhouse gas  emissions such as petrochemicals, non-combustion uses for bitumen, and  using carbon dioxide to produce other products such as biofuels.  BLOWING OFF STEAM IN   THE OIL SANDS   A number of oil sands production  companies are advancing new  technologies that use solvents  instead of steam generated by  burning natural gas to extract  oil from deeply buried oil sands  deposits, significantly reducing  carbon emissions per barrel of   oil produced.     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report42  This pathway also presents a chance for Canada’s long-standing expertise  in resource extraction to connect more directly with the emerging cleantech  economy. The expertise and technological innovations created in pursuit  of CCUS, for example, can create a strategic advantage as this technology  becomes more prominent in the global marketplace, positioning Canada to  export technology and expertise for both CCUS and value-added products  made from captured carbon dioxide.  Producing cleaner and more competitive oil and gas represents a significant  opportunity for Canada’s oil and gas sector. Its large and growing carbon  footprint has hindered its ability to obtain public approval for new  infrastructure projects in Canada and tarnished Canada’s energy brand  abroad. A redoubled effort to shrink that footprint while continuing to play a  significant role in the global energy economy could provide a major boost to  the brand and demonstrate how a resource-based economy like Canada’s can  support the transition to a lower carbon future.  CARBON CAPTURE PIONEER    A project under construction near  Edmonton will be the largest CCUS  facility in the world, collecting  carbon dioxide from industrial sites  (including an oil refinery and a  fertilizer plant) and transporting it to  sites in central and southern Alberta  for enhanced oil recovery and  permanent storage.  CANADA’S PETROCHEMICAL ADVANTAGE  More than 95 percent of all manufactured products rely on chemistry –  including such sectors as green buildings, sustainable transportation, clean  energy and sustainable agriculture are dependent on chemicals.  Canada’s  petrochemicals industry has made significant reductions in greenhouse gas  emissions and energy intensity. It is well positioned to grow, with secure  supplies of low-cost natural gas liquid feedstock and ready access to low- carbon fuel supplies like hydroelectricity and biomass to power its industrial  processes, an advantage over international competitors who are reliant on  higher carbon energy such as oil and coal.     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  43  Cleaner Oil and Gas Milestones  Cleaner Production  • Canada is among the  suppliers of the cleanest  LNG in the world to global  markets, enabled by clean  electrification.   • By 2025, reduce methane  emissions by 40 to 45  percent from 2012 levels,  with ongoing improvements  thereafter.  • By 2030, reduce life-cycle  greenhouse gas emissions for  oil sands extraction to levels  lower than competing crudes  in global markets.  • By 2020 to 2025, next- generation CCUS projects  are ready for demonstration- scale operatio, with  commercial application  by 2030 or later,and the  eventual goal of generating  revenues that offset the cost  of carbon capture.   • Integrate renewable energy  at a significant scale into oil  and gas extraction within  five years, and introduce  advanced power generation  (e.g. fuel cells, small modular  nuclear reactors, etc.) within  the next 20 years.  Regulations  • Develop a trusted and effective  regulatory system, including a  life-cycle approach to greenhouse  gas emissions, as measured by  objective third party assessment  of key attributes relative to  competing jurisdictions.  Diversify Product Mix and  Enhance Market Access  • By 2030, a more diversified mix  of oil and gas products, services  and solutions to domestic and  global markets has a measurably  significant impact on industry and  government revenues.   Overarching Milestone Reduce costs and carbon pollution of Canada’s supply of crude oil, natural gas and natural gas  liquids to levels per unit of production lower than competing supplies in the market by 2030,   with further improvement thereafter.    F O R  I N D U S T R Y Canada’s competitive advantage will be enhanced  by new energy efficiencies and opportunities across  the four pathways. The re-use of waste, and access to  clean energy and new technologies will make Canada’s  industries leaders in energy transition.  F O R  C O M M U N I T Y  CLEANER  OIL & GAS  Many homeowners will be ‘prosumers,’ producing  electricity to heat and power their efficient homes  and vehicles, and selling excess power to the grid.  Buildings will be super-efficient,  thanks to new building codes that  require improvements like more  insulation and better windows.  More efficient homes, offices and factories, outfitted with integrated energy  management systems and next-generation storage, allow for a lower cost and  more reliable grid, as more access to decentralized renewable energy increases.   Biofuels will complement  electrification to make moving  people and goods more  efficient and cleaner.  District energy systems will  use waste heat from   industry and municipalities  Electric vehicles, often shared  and self-driving, will combine with  transit, cycling, and telecommuting  to transform urban transportation.  Electricity will come  primarily from renewable  and non-emitting sources.  More production will be  local and distributed.   Waste from heavy industry,  agriculture, forestry and  municipalities will be  refined into biofuels.  Long distance transport will run on a mix of  options including  conventional fuels and biofuels.  Industries will use energy and resources more  productively and switch to renewable and   non-emitting electricity.   Carbon capture from gas  power plants will fuel  industrial greenhouses, which  will in turn produce organic  waste used for biofuels.   Energy data will be used  and shared to support  more intelligent  energy choices.  Municipal and other  waste will be converted  to biofuels and  renewable natural gas. Electrification and improved production   methods help reduce CO2 from the oil  and gas sector, making it  more competitive.   ACROSS CANADA A GENERATION FROM NOW,  THE WAY WE MAKE AND USE ENERGY  WILL BE DIFFERENT.   All of the services energy provides— from transportation to  heating, cooling, and hot water, to motors and lighting and wifi —  will all work together seamlessly, enabled by cross-cutting tools  like AI* and other advanced systems for optimizing energy  production and use.  Electricity generation will come from non-emitting, renewable and traditional sources. Some electricity generating stations  will use both conventional and renewable natural gas (produced from forestry, farm and municipal waste).  Their CO2 emissions will be captured.   The rise of the circular economy creates opportunities to turn  waste into energy sources, which  in turn make industrial processes  cleaner.**   We’ve outlined these four pathways to make this  energy transition, but the full impact is seen in the  way these pathways intertwine and mutually  reinforce each other.   * AI : Artificial Intelligence ** See page 37 for more information on the Circular Economy    F O R    I N D U S T R Y Canada’s competitive advantage will be enhanced  by new energy efficiencies and opportunities across  the four pathways. The re-use of waste, and access to  clean energy and new technologies will make Canada’s  industries leaders in energy transition.  F O R    C O M M U N I T Y  CLEANER  OIL & GAS  Many homeowners will be ‘prosumers,’ producing  electricity to heat and power their efficient homes  and vehicles, and selling excess power to the grid.  Buildings will be super-efficient,  thanks to new building codes that  require improvements like more  insulation and better windows.  More efficient homes, offices and factories, outfitted with integrated energy  management systems and next-generation storage, allow for a lower cost and  more reliable grid, as more access to decentralized renewable energy increases.   Biofuels will complement  electrification to make moving  people and goods more  efficient and cleaner.  District energy systems will  use waste heat from   industry and municipalities  Electric vehicles, often shared  and self-driving, will combine with  transit, cycling, and telecommuting  to transform urban transportation.  Electricity will come  primarily from renewable  and non-emitting sources.  More production will be  local and distributed.   Waste from heavy industry,  agriculture, forestry and  municipalities will be  refined into biofuels.  Long distance transport  will run on a mix of  options including  conventional fuels  and biofuels.  Industries will use energy and resources more  productively and switch to renewable and   non-emitting electricity.   Carbon capture from gas  power plants will fuel  industrial greenhouses, which  will in turn produce organic  waste used for biofuels.   Energy data will be used  and shared to support  more intelligent  energy choices.  Municipal and other  waste will be converted  to biofuels and  renewable natural gas. Electrification and improved production   methods help reduce CO2 from the oil  and gas sector, making it  more competitive.   ACROSS CANADA A GENERATION FROM NOW,  THE WAY WE MAKE AND USE ENERGY  WILL BE DIFFERENT.   All of the services energy provides— from transportation to  heating, cooling, and hot water, to motors and lighting and wifi —  will all work together seamlessly, enabled by cross-cutting tools  like AI* and other advanced systems for optimizing energy  production and use.  Electricity generation will come from non-emitting, renewable  and traditional sources. Some electricity generating stations  will use both conventional and renewable natural gas  (produced from forestry, farm and municipal waste).  Their CO2 emissions will be captured.   The rise of the circular economy creates opportunities to turn  waste into energy sources, which  in turn make industrial processes  cleaner.**   We’ve outlined these four pathways to make this  energy transition, but the full impact is seen in the  way these pathways intertwine and mutually  reinforce each other.   *  AI : Artificial Intelligence ** See page 37 for more information on the Circular Economy     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  46  5PATHFINDING WITH  INDIGENOUS   PEOPLES     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  47  A new model has begun to emerge for Canada’s relationship with  Indigenous peoples, and Indigenous participation in all aspects of  the energy transition can become a powerful lever for change as  part of this new relationship.    Indigenous representatives and organizations who participated in the Generation  Energy dialogues and other recent forums have identified several factors that can  increase Indigenous involvement in projects and initiatives to help Canada meet its  climate and energy goals. Among them:  • Indigenous peoples require improved regulatory systems with more formal  roles in energy project assessment and review, as well as in decision making,  monitoring and active participation in the projects themselves.   • Though ownership and management of energy systems, Indigenous governments  and businesses can build capacity to meet their own energy needs and provide  their communities with more affordable, reliable and sustainable energy.  • A young, growing and increasingly engaged generation of Indigenous youth can  use new technology and new energy systems together to advance reconciliation,  sustainability and self-determination within their communities.   In central British Columbia, a 50-megawatt run-of-river hydro project, a 50-50  joint venture between a renewable energy developer and the local First Nation  and built with a construction crew nearly half of whom were local Indigenous  workers, will guarantee annual revenues for the Indigenous partner.  AN INDIGENOUS WAVE OF  RENEWABLE ENERGY :   The relatively small scale, modest  capital cost and decentralized  nature of renewable energy  sources such as wind, solar and  run-of-river hydro has inspired  a wave of Indigenous-owned  energy projects and 50-50  partnerships between renewable  energy companies and First  Nations across Canada. There  are already an estimated 31 such  projects underway or completed  across Canada.      • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report48  This Council has neither the mandate nor the expertise to address this issue in  full. We can, however, confirm that new opportunities are emerging for Indigenous  peoples in Canada to provide leadership on energy strategy and energy development.  A diverse range of parties interested in acting on these opportunities has begun to  come together. In order to accelerate outcomes, we recognize the importance of the  following:  • Building mutually beneficial and respectful relationships requires political will,  joint leadership, trust, accountability, and transparency. This requires substantial  commitment by all parties involved.  • Recognizing the knowledge and perspectives of Indigenous elders and keepers  of Traditional Knowledge regarding community ethics, concepts, and practices  can serve as a guide for the use of Traditional Knowledge in Canada’s energy  transition.  • Engaging Indigenous peoples in the energy transition in a collaborative and  solutions-oriented manner will lead to better economic, social and environmental  outcomes.  Many Indigenous communities in Canada have already begun to navigate their own  pathway to Canada’s energy future. The federal government and Indigenous leaders  and communities need to establish a dialogue for specific actions that will enable  greater Indigenous involvement in all aspects of Canada’s energy transition.  A focus  on the following issues will help ensure this dialogue achieves tangible results.   In northwestern Ontario, a 60-megawatt wind farm, half owned by the First Nation whose  territory it stands on, opened in 2015 as one of the largest wind power partnerships in the  country, sending enough power to the grid for 15,000 homes and employing First Nation  members as maintenance crew.     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  49  Involvement:  A Dialogue about the role of Indigenous Peoples in  the energy transition must continue and find ways to  reflect the different geographic needs, interests and  opportunities of Indigenous communities. This can be  advanced by:  • Developing new models for collaboration and  governance based on guiding principles such as  the recognition of rights and next-generation  approaches to partnership, both within the context  of current government-to-government discussions  and outside of them  • Building awareness among Canadian Indigenous  Peoples about global opportunities with Indigenous  Peoples around the world to share best practices  and discuss new trade and investment. This could  include, for example, Indigenous participation in  international trade delegations and other forums  with investors and customers.   Investment:  Indigenous Peoples and communities need better access  to capital designed to meet their needs and help create  certainty for investments in Indigenous clean energy and  low-carbon projects. This can be advanced by:  • Dedicating financing to provide cost-competitive,  Indigenous investment in clean and low-carbon  energy projects.  • Establishing funding to support Indigenous  participation in energy projects or opportunities.  • Scaling funding and investment to enable energy  development processes and projects that range from  small projects like roof-scale solar on a community  to school to large ones like the development of a  local energy system at community scale.   Capacity:  Indigenous communities need better access to technical  and business expertise that integrates the application  of Traditional Knowledge with energy development. This  can be advanced by:  • Establishing a centralized resource for energy  information to enable interested Indigenous  communities, businesses and individuals to share  best practices and obtain independent advice, which  can provide the foundation for training and capacity  building in the planning, development and operation  of energy projects.  In northeastern Alberta, a First Nation took advantage of  the Alberta government’s Indigenous Solar Program in  2017 to finance a 25-kilowatt solar power project on the  roof of its local school, with costs split 60-40 between  the First Nation and the province.     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report50  1. Create a Plan for Canada’s  Energy Transition    Canada will need a clear strategy and plan that  integrates our energy vision, principles and pathways  with Canada’s climate commitments and our domestic  and global energy interests, as well as a commitment  to execute it practically it through cooperation  among federal, provincial, territorial and Indigenous  governments. We urge the federal government to:  • Develop an integrated Energy Transition Strategy  and Plan informed by research, modelling, policy  and indicator-tracking and by roadmaps for each  of the four pathways—Energy Efficiency, Clean  Electrification, Renewable Fuels, and Producing  Cleaner Oil and Gas.   • Rally governments at every level to build a strong  national consensus on the energy transition  because success requires that crucial federal  efforts are aligned with and complementary  to provincial, regional and local programs,  underpinned by a shared vision and action plan  for Canada’s energy future.  2. Build a Unified  Government Platform  to Guide the Energy  Transition    Other nations have functionally integrated energy,  climate and industrial development into a single  ministry or department, leading to more durable  policy and more robust, cross-functional planning and  execution. We urge the federal government to:  • Integrate the government functions of energy,  climate and economic development (business,  industry, investment, technology, innovation,  infrastructure, human resources, etc.). This is a  fundamental governance and structural issue,  which needs to be addressed in Canada if  momentum toward a low-carbon economy is to be  sustained.   • Create a transparent Canadian Energy Information  Organization – to provide a single window to  timely, objective and credible energy-related  data2 to support informed decision-making on  public policy related to energy, and to improve  understanding amongst stakeholders and  the public.This national organization would  have some independence from the federal  government.  Where practical, data collection  should be coordinated with ECCC to ensure an  integrated energy and climate data set and  supporting analysis.  PART VI. ADVICE  The energy transition may be the single greatest challenge of our generation, but it is also  our greatest opportunity—a bold and urgent national mission to build a better Canada. We  urge the federal government to use its resources and influence to complete the actions  outlined below.  LEAD THE ENERGY TRANSITION     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  51  3. Walk The Talk  The federal government is Canada’s single largest  owner and lessor of buildings and vehicles, as well as  consumer of energy. Building on the Centre for Greening  Government, government should move immediately to  lead by example, without waiting for the broader plan.   We urge the government to revisit and implement its own:  • Procurement rules for buildings and equipment, to  ensure that government occupied space, whether  leased or owned, is among the most energy efficient  in the nation.  • Procurement rules for government vehicles, to ensure  that government fleets, whether leased or owned, are  the most efficient and electrified in the nation.  • Energy management rules to ensure that  government’s total energy footprint is the first to  meet national energy efficiency and clean energy  goals.  • Investment rules to ensure that government’s capital  investments support the clean energy transition.  • Procurement, investment and management rules  to ensure they support, encourage and showcase  Canadian clean energy businesses.  4. Establish an Independent  Climate & Energy Transition  Institute  We urge the federal government to establish an  independent, credible, evidence-based, transparent  institute1 to ensure Canada’s energy transition is linked  to Canada’s climate objectives and commitments.  • The scope should include independent analysis,  modelling and research, report on progress, advice to  government on areas for prioritization, and engaging  Canadians in the conversation about energy and  climate.  • The Institute could be realized without significantly  more resources by revising the mandate and  governance of the Canadian Expert Institute on the  Pan Canadian Framework to address energy transition  in more detail, in-line with the scope noted above,  appropriately funded and staffed on a longer-term  basis to fulfill the mandate.     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report52  5. Get the Codes and  Standards in Place  While there are many new codes and standards that  could be implemented to support energy transition,  we encourage the federal government to put a priority  on implementing new regulatory tools that are already  part of current plans. In particular we urge the federal  government to:  • Expand energy labelling. Consumers and the broader  marketplace cannot make informed decisions  without credible information. Labelling of home and  building energy performance is already required in  Europe, parts of the U.S., and beyond, and is urgently  needed for buyers and renters/lessors of homes and  buildings across Canada.  • Support the introduction of new world-class  building codes. Canada’s residential and commercial  building energy codes have steadily improved.  The federal government has signalled its intent to  adopt “model” energy codes that establish best- in-class expectations, both for new homes and for  retrofitting the existing stock. While adoption of  the codes themselves is a provincial jurisdiction,  the federal government can work to ensure rapid  implementation.   • Implement new standards for low-carbon fuels and  natural gas processing that will enable Canada’s fuels  to become progressively cleaner and more cost- effective at reducing emissions.   6. Enable Regulatory  Processes to Support  Energy Transition   Modernizing and integrating the policy and regulatory  system is fundamental to accelerating energy transition.  This applies across multiple jurisdictions, as well as  across different sources and uses of energy, and different  energy delivery mechanisms. The federal government  should:  • Provide leadership in the integration of energy  policies and regulations across multiple  jurisdictions. Encourage a more aligned approach to  policy and regulatory frameworks among provincial,  territorial, municipal and Indigenous governments,  so as to improve regulatory effectiveness and  transparency.   • Support changes toward a more effective,  integrated framework for utility regulation within  provinces. While respecting provincial and municipal  jurisdiction, the federal government should actively  encourage and support efforts to: (i) adapt regulatory  rules to the goal of accelerating the energy transition,  and (ii) remove silos and align the regulatory system  with the shift to more integrated energy systems -  heat, power, transport, waste, etc.  • Continue to advance current efforts for Indigenous  inclusion in modernized energy assessment and  regulatory processes, based on recognition of rights,  respect, co-operations and partnership.  •  As an element within established regulatory  review processes, support consideration of the role  a proposed project and new technologies could  play in accelerating progress on energy transition.  Early project planning phases should include an  assessment of a potential project’s contribution to  the transition to a lower carbon economy. Fast-track  regulatory review options should be considered  for projects and new technologies that meet pre- established criteria.  DRIVE CHANGE     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  53  7. Invest In Canada’s Energy  Transition  Canada’s energy transition will require a shift from the  status quo to ensure adequate and predictable private and  public investment to de-risk, accelerate and strategically  attract capital to new technologies, products and  infrastructure. We recommend the federal government:  • Introduce policies, programs and frameworks to deliver  and stimulate strategic investment in Canada’s energy  transition, including but not limited to:  • Dedicating current and enhanced future funding  to energy solutions that improve Canada’s  overall  carbon profile, reduce climate related risk,  and maximize the GHG reductions per dollar.   • Enhancing the ability to aggregate and  commercialize small and medium sized projects  (for example retrofits, generation, EV charging,  biofuels) including through public procurement  and business development supports.  • Offering fiscal and other incentives – such as  capital cost depreciation, other tax treatments  and strategic initiatives – to encourage energy  efficiency, distributed power generation and use of  cleaner energy sources in homes and businesses.  • Ensure the Canada Infrastructure Bank’s mandate  includes attracting private and public investment to  implement the energy transition. This can include credit  enhancements, other strategic de-risking mechanisms  and specialized financing approaches that highly  leverage public capital.  • Ensure that Indigenous Peoples and communities  have access to affordable capital designed to meet  their needs and help create certainty in investment in  Indigenous led and/or supported clean energy and low- carbon infrastructure projects, by:  • Expanding access to funding and financing to  support early engagement, capacity development  and equity investments that advance participation  in energy transition, and meet the different needs  of Indigenous communities through the creation of  an Indigenous Energy Transition Fund.   • Streamline existing funding and investment  programs to maximize the value of resources  dedicated to Indigenous participation in energy  projects.     • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report54  8. Accelerate The Generation  Energy Conversation  The federal government’s conversation with over 380,000  Canadians about the future of energy in our nation was a  proactive and collaborative starting point.  We urge the  federal government to:  • Promote a culture shift about energy by supporting  Canadians and Canadian businesses as they seek to  develop and take advantage of new energy sources  and technologies, specifically  • Engage Canadians in the energy transition  conversation with a clear vision of Canada’s  competitive, low-carbon economy, enabled by clean,  efficient and affordable energy systems and ensure  the co-benefits of a low-carbon economy are broadly  understood.  • Support workers and communities in their efforts to  make their workplaces and living spaces clean and  competitive.  9. Empower Canada’s  Indigenous Peoples  Indigenous Peoples must be included as important  partners in Canada’s energy future. We urge the federal  government and interested Indigenous leaders and  communities to:  • Establish a focused mechanism and process to  provide specific actions that can ensure Indigenous  involvement in all aspects of Canada’s energy  transition, including the development of an integrated  energy transition strategy and plan, and new structural  and institutional capacities required to execute that  plan.  • Advance prosperity by respecting inherent treaty and  indigenous rights to empower indigenous people’s  communities and businesses to initiate, plan and  invest in clean and low-carbon energy projects.  10. Demonstrate Canadian  Leadership on Energy  Transition  Attract business and investment to Canada and strengthen  Canada’s position in global markets for our energy  products, services and solutions by earning a reputation  for leadership in energy transition. Taking the advice  outlined above will have the effect of significantly  improving Canada’s energy brand. We urge the federal  government to:  • Engage Canadians and the international community  in a new Canadian energy narrative framed on our  policy leadership and our progress on our goals and  challenges as demonstrated by results from our energy  transition plan.   • As part of this narrative, highlight our existing  strengths, such as our clean and low-carbon electricity  grid and the opportunity to power low-carbon  businesses in Canada today.  EMPOWER CANADIANS     55 GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •    CANADA’S ENERGY TRANSITION TOOLKIT    1.  Innovation  Tool – Driving Innovation:  Accelerate the energy transition through investment  in research and development, demonstration and  commercialization, and the conversion of new knowledge  into products and services. This tool includes funding,  policies, collaboration and other mechanisms that can  support the adoption of new ideas, management systems  and operating models.   2.  Rules Of   The Game Tool – Policy and Regulations:  Support the energy transition through government  actions at every level, while ensuring that Canada’s energy  systems continue to provide affordable and reliable  energy. Tools include national goals and targets, carbon  pricing, performance codes and standards, sector-specific  permitting requirements (such as emissions caps),  labelling and management systems, and the development  and zoning procedures that guide decision-making by  industry, consumers and other levels of government.    Tool – Government Coordination:   Support and advance an unprecedented level of  coordination and alignment of the policies and programs  needed to enable the energy transition among federal,  provincial/territorial, municipal and Indigenous  governments, particularly as new energy systems and  technologies emerge. Tools include synchronizing policies  and regulations across multiple levels of government  regarding community design and growth, codes and  standards, infrastructure and trade, and voluntary and  mandatory reporting. Collaboration at senior levels of  government can be fostered by joint forums such as the  Energy and Mines Ministers Conference.    Tool – Regulatory Design:  Design new regulatory frameworks to be more integrated,  transparent, streamlined, predictable and agile, in  response to rapid and disruptive technological change,  new market dynamics and the need to increase public and  investor confidence.  Tool – Government Procurement:  Make use of public purchasing power to support  the energy transition by ensuring cost-competitive  procurement processes for buildings, vehicles, equipment,  infrastructure (see Tool below), materials and services.  Tools include screening criteria using carbon and  energy metrics and support for demonstration and  commercialization of technologies and services. Public  sector procurement policies can also influence supply  chain management policies and practices adopted by the  private sector.  3.  Investment   & Markets  Tool – Infrastructure Investment:  Target investments toward strategic infrastructure that is  essential to the energy transition. Tools could include EV  charging, interprovincial systems for energy transmission  and transportation, systems for remote and distributed  generation, green banks (e.g. the Canada Infrastructure  Bank), innovation clusters based on public/private  partnerships, and new financing mechanisms to attract  private capital and prioritize investments.     Tool – Competitive Business Environment:   Make use of a suite of measures including laws and  policies, taxation treatments, trade and market  development initiatives, and investment attraction  strategies to give Canada’s small, medium and large  energy sectors the ability and visibility to innovate and  compete on an even footing domestically and globally.     56 • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  CANADA’S ENERGY TRANSITION TOOLKIT    Competitive Business Environment (cont’d):   Tools include trade policies and programs aimed at:  • improving the efficiency of existing interprovincial  and international trade corridors;   • boosting Canadian participation in the development  of national and international standards that can help  open up markets for new Canadian energy products  and services;  • attracting foreign investment in Canadian energy  innovation; and,  • enhancing Canadian access to export markets for our  energy products and services.   4.  Building Capacity Tool – Skills and Talent Attraction   and Development:  Develop coordinated strategies and partnerships among  all levels of government, the private sector, and the  labour market that ensure the relevant human resources  and skills are in place to implement energy transition.  This can include retraining, mentorship and accreditation  programs related to trades, buildings and construction, as  well as digital skills and technical training to support the  application of new technologies that advance efficiency  and emissions reductions across all of Canada’s energy  systems. It also includes new collaborative strategies to  both retain and attract world-class talent to Canada’s  energy transition.  Tool – Entrepreneurship and New Business  Models:  Modify regulations, target incentives, and develop  mentorship networks and other support for the  development and growth of new business and ownership  models, including shared, distributed and circular  economy platforms.   5.  Engaging  Canadians Tool – Public Confidence:  Encourage greater public confidence in energy-related  institutions and decision making processes through  improved public access to information and credible ‘big  data’ regarding energy sources, costs, and options. Put  information into the hands of individuals and businesses  to allow them to make smart choices for themselves  and engage more effectively in broader decision-making  processes on energy issues.     Tool – Behavioural Change:  Implement financial signals such as rebates, rewards,  incentives and discounts to help Canadians embrace  change and greater personal responsibility for the  way in which they use energy. Financial tools that can  overcome inertia or make a compelling business case  are particularly useful for encouraging the use of more  advanced technologies and creating opportunities  for households and neighbourhoods to participate as  “prosumers” who use, generate, store and sell energy at  the local level.     Wasting Less Energy  1. Tool – Skill and Talent Attraction and  Development: Education and training to  ramp up the workforce needed for planning,  implementation and maintenance of retrofits  and net-zero new construction, delivery of  demand management programs, development  of integrated urban plans, and other key jobs  in the efficiency sector.    2. Tool – Policy and Regulations: Codes,  standards and requirements are needed to  predictably and continuously improve the  efficiency of Canada’s vehicles, equipment,  buildings,  industry and land use. The federal  government can directly regulate the first two,  and can encourage and support provincial  and municipal governments in promulgating  others.   3. Tool – Government Procurement:  Governments – federal, provincial and  municipal -- can be market leaders by  demonstrating efficient new construction  and  dbuilding retrofits, disclosing energy  use, incorporating zero emission vehicles into  fleets, and using the most efficient equipment.  The public procurement process needs  updating to ensure life-cycle energy use and  greenhouse gas emissions reductions are key  to the bidding and selection process.  4. Tool – Competitive Business Environment:   Because energy efficiency is distributed  throughout the economy, support and  investment is needed in businesses and  programs that originate and aggregate  efficiency projects, for services that support  conservation, for initial deployment of  innovative technologies to accelerate  commercialization, and for services.  Switching to Clean Power 1. Tool – Policy and Regulation: The pace of  change will create significant pressure on  federal and provincial governments to create  regulations for new technologies as they  emerge. Governments will need to stay ahead  of the curve to avoid slowing the transition, in  particular regarding international and internal  efforts to standardize codes and standards.  Support will also be needed to attract  investors in those clean energy sectors that are  not yet cost competitive. Governments at every  level will need to find ways to create incentives  and support for these new technologies and  help them find support among the general  public.  2. Tool – Driving Innovation: To spur innovation  in the clean power sector, government support  is needed for research, development and  demonstration activities tha are technology- neutral to allow the largest set of potential  solutions. Specific targeted programs can  complement broader and more flexible  programs to improve their effectiveness. For  example, R&D of clean technologies may  reduce their overall mitigation cost, thereby  potentially making it easier to achieve a given  GHG emissions target.  3. Tool – Competitive Business Environment:  Building out the clean power supply and  transmission infrastructure at the scale  required over the next generation will  require major investments of both public  and private capital. Canadian companies  will need to develop new business models  and entrepreneurs running new companies  must develop the new technologies to attract  investors and build affordable and reliable  grids.  PATHWAY – SPECIFIC TOOLKITS  57 GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •      PATHWAY – SPECIFIC TOOLKITS  Using Renewable Fuels 1. Tool – Public Confidence: Consumer  habits, well-established standard operating  procedures, and jurisdictional issues will  need to shift to successfully navigate this  pathway. One way to accelerate this shift is  to boost public confidence in new fuel types  by ensuring quality and affordability, and  improving consumer access.  2. Tool – Driving Innovation: Innovation efforts  on the Cleaner Fuels Pathway should prioritize:  • technologies to produce cleaner natural  gas (e.g. renewable natural gas and  hydrogen) and build integrated electricity  and natural gas systems;  • development of “drop-in” low- carbon fuels with fuel properties and  specifications that align with conventional  fuels (avoiding new investments in  infrastructure and engine conversions);  and  • development of next generation biofuels  and smaller scale CCUS.   3. Tool – Skill and Talent Attraction and  Development: Introduce education and  training programs that develop new skills  specifically for the emerging bio- and circular  economies.  4. Tool – Competitive Business Environment:  Help find both public and private capital for  investment in the facilities and infrastructure  required to enable wider access to cleaner  fuels.  5. Tool – Policy & Regulations: Adopt and  implement a clean fuel standard, as well as  carbon pricing and other policy and regulatory  tools, to accelerate a cost-effective transition  to lower carbon fuels.  Cleaner Oil & Gas 1. Tool – Driving Innovation: Enable public  and private sector collaboration to diversify  the product slate from the Canadian oil and  gas sector, with the specific objectives of  improving environmental performance and  economic competitiveness.  2. Tool – Competitive Business Environment:  Ensuring the necessary infrastructure and  trade relationships to deliver oil and gas  products and services to a diversity of  markets.  3. Tool – Policy and Regulations: Ensure new  policies and regulations (like the Alberta  Climate Leadership Plan carbon pricing and  emissions limit) stimulate reductions in the  greenhouse gas intensity of Canada’s oil and  gas sector, while ensuring competitiveness is  not compromised. Utilize other public policy  tools, such as offsets and international credits,  to ensure Canada’s domestic leadership is  recognized in a global context.      4. Tool – Skill and Talent Attraction and  Development: A highly skilled Canadian  workforce will contribute to progress within  Canada and create opportunities to export this  know-how.  5. Tool – Public Confidence: Leadership in  public policy and industry performance,  along with more effective engagement and  communications, could improve the overall  public perception of the oil and gas sector as  an important participant in the transition to a  low-carbon economy, both across Canada and  globally.  58 • GENERATION ENERGY Council Report     GENERATION ENERGY Council Report  •  59  GLOSSARY OF TERMS Bio-economy – an economy that relies  on renewable natural resources to  produce food, energy, products and  services.   Biofuels – liquid, solid and gaseous  fuels (e.g. ethanol, biodiesel, wood  pellets and renewable natural gas) that  are derived from biomass.  Carbon Capture Utilization and Storage  (CCUS) – an integrated suite of emerging  technologies designed to capture  carbon dioxide emissions produced  from large industrial processes (such as  electricity generation and oil and gas  production).   Circular Economy – a shift from the  current linear economy, in which  feedstocks enter the supply chain at  one end and finished products and  waste exit at the other, to a circular  system, in which raw material use and  waste are minimised and a product at  the end of its life is used again to create  further value.   Clean Energy – for the purposes of this  report, clean energy refers to electricity  that is produced from renewable energy  (hydro, wind, solar, geothermal, tidal,  etc.) and energy efficiency.   Cleantech – for the purposes of this  report, cleantech refers to emerging  knowledge-based products and services  that improve operational performance,  productivity or efficiency while reducing  costs, inputs, energy consumption,  waste or pollution.   Competitive Advantage – for the  purposes of this report, competitive  advantage is a condition or  circumstance that places a company,  energy sector or country in a  favorable business position relative  to competitors. For instance, Canada’s  access to abundant sources of clean  electrical generation provides its   industrial and energy sectors with a  competitive advantage in a global low- carbon economy.   Digitization – the introduction of  large-scale data into modern energy  systems, enabling greater connectivity,  intelligence, efficiency and reliability.  Digitalized energy systems can enable  consumers to better understand and  control their energy usage, allow  prosumers to participate more actively  and efficiently in energy markets, and  create opportunities for both utilities  and third-party developers to offer  advanced solutions to enable both.  Non-Emitting – electricity produced  from sources that produce no carbon  pollution, such as hydro, wind, solar,  nuclear, geothermal, and tidal.  Paris Agreement – On December 12,  2015, Canada and 194 other countries  signed onto the Paris Agreement to  fight climate change by limiting the  global average temperature rise to less  than 2°C and to pursue efforts to limit  the increase to 1.5°C. As part of this  agreement, Canada agreed to reduce  greenhouse emissions to 30 percent  below 2005 levels by 2030 and 80  percent below 2005 levels by 2050. The  agreement also contains provisions for  enhanced international collaboration  and transparency on the tracking,  reporting and trading of carbon  emissions.    Passive House – a rigorous standard  for energy efficiency in building design,  resulting in structures that require  very little energy for heating and  cooling. The passive house concept  was pioneered in Saskatchewan in 1976.  Today this concept is an essential tool  in Canada’s efforts to make all new  Canadian home net-zero energy ready  by 2030.   Prosumer – a term for an individual  who both consumes and produces  a product. In the energy sector,  “prosumers” typically use energy while  also producing it (most commonly from  on-site solar panels) and sell surplus  power back into the electricity grid.  Prosumers also participate in “demand  response” programs through which they  provide energy to the market by shifting  their demand according to the needs of  the grid.   Renewable Natural Gas – biogas or  natural gas produced from waste (e.g.  agricultural, forestry, landfills) that has  been upgraded to a quality similar to  conventional natural gas, and which can  be mixed with conventional natural gas  supplies for use in homes, industry and  equipment without any modifications.  Smart Grid – an electricity  distribution network that uses digital  communications technology to detect  and react to local changes in usage.  The development of smart grids allows  utilities to more efficiently prevent  or repair problems on the grid, while  enabling prosumers to play a greater  role in ensuring demand and supply are  in sync at the lowest overall cost.  Transition Pathway – a combination  of technology, investment, business  strategies, and government policy  that enables Canada to transition  from its current energy system to a  low-carbon energy system over the  next generation (roughly between  now and 2040).     Title Page  Colophon  ToC  Part I. Introduction  Part II. Guiding the Vision  Part III. Vision  Part IV. Canada's Energy Transition Pathways  Pathways infographic  Pathfinding with Indigenous Peoples  Part VI. Advice  Toolkit  Pathway - Specific Toolkits   Glossary of Terms    