                                                       Land use planning tools for local adaptation to climate change   Land use planning tools for local adaptation to climate change    Aussi disponible en français sous le titre : Outils d’aménagement locaux pour l’adaptation aux changements climatiques  Information contained in this publication or product may be reproduced, in part or in whole, and by any means, for personal or public   non-commercial purposes, without charge or further permission, unless otherwise specified.  You are asked to:  •  exercise due diligence in ensuring the accuracy of the materials reproduced;  •  indicate the complete title of the materials reproduced, and the name of the author organization; and  •  indicate that the reproduction is a copy of an official work that is published by the Government of Canada and that the reproduction   has not been produced in affiliation with, or with the endorsement of, the Government of Canada.  Commercial reproduction and distribution is prohibited except with written permission from the Government of Canada’s copyright   administrator, Public Works and Government Services Canada (PWGSC). For more information, contact PWGSC at 613-996-6886 or   at copyright.droitdauteur@pwgsc-tpsgc.gc.ca.  Cat. No. M4-106/2012E-PDF  ISBN 978-1-100-21282-1  © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, 2012  Her Majesty is not responsible for the accuracy or completeness of the information contained in the reproduced material. Her Majesty shall  at all times be indemnified and held harmless against any and all claims whatsoever arising out of negligence or other fault in the use of the  information contained in this publication or product.  Recommended citation:  Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. (2012). Land use planning tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.: Government  of Canada, 38 p.   Front cover photograph courtesy of Halifax Regional Municipality  Synopsis: This document describes planning tools being used across  Canada to help communities prepare for climate change, increase  adaptive capacity and build resilience. It is directed to individuals and  groups interested in climate change adaptation at the local level,  including planners and other local government staff, elected officials,  community organizations, local residents and business leaders.    Acknowledgements Authors: Gregory R.A. Richardson, Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources Canada and José  Otero, School of Urban Planning, McGill University  The authors thank the following people who generously shared their knowledge and time to review the manuscript:  David Brown, McGill University Cathy LeBlanc, British Columbia Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development Don Lemmen, Natural Resources Canada Pam Kertland, Natural Resources Canada Eric Rappaport, Dalhousie University  We also thank the following people who provided valuable insight on particular community initiatives and planning tools:    Stev Andis, Town of Ajax Elizabeth Atkinson, Natural Resources Canada Peter Berry, Health Canada Carolyn Bowen, City of Calgary Jennifer Catarino, City of Iqaluit John Charles, Halifax Regional Municipality  Jennifer Eliason, Islands Trust  Sébastien Doiron, Beaubassin Planning Commission David Dyer, City of Prince George Gilles Galipeau, Borough of Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie, City of Montréal Ryan Hennessey, Northern Climate ExChange Barbara Hodgins, Town of Ajax Ewa Jackson, ICLEI Canada Lisa King, City of Toronto Randy Lambright, City of Kamloops Arthur MacDonald, Town of Yarmouth Roxanne MacLean, Fisheries and Oceans Canada Rod Martin, City of Kamloops Andrew Paton, Service Nova Scotia and Municipal Relations Ian Picketts, University of Northern British Columbia Ellen Pond, University of British Columbia Karina Richters, City of Windsor Corien Speaker, District of Elkford Jay Storfer, Health Canada Fiona Warren, Natural Resources Canada Jeannette Wheeler, City of Edmonton    Contents   1.0 Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .1  2.0 Land use planning tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .3  2.1 Official plans  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .4  2.2 Local plans on special matters  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .6  2.3 Zoning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .8  2.4 Land subdivision and development controls . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10  2.5 Covenants and easements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12  2.6 Design guidelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14  2.7 Environmental review of development projects  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16  3.0 Decision-support tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18  3.1  Assessments of community vulnerability and risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19  3.2 Climate projections  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22  3.3 Scenario planning  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25  3.4 Visualizing climate change impacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26  3.5 Adaptation planning guidebooks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28  Appendix A  Provincial and territorial role in local adaptation planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .30  Appendix B  Additional resources on select decision-support tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32  References  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .34    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  1   1.0 Introduction  Adaptation defined  Climate change adaptation refers to actions that  reduce the negative impact of climate change and/ or take advantage of new opportunities. It involves  making adjustments in our decisions, activities and  thinking because of observed or expected changes  in climate.2  Some ways municipalities act  •  planning and land use controls: zoning, official   plans, development reviews  •  provision of public services: utilities, public  transit, road maintenance, snow removal, fire  and police, emergency preparedness  •  forum for public dialogue and information:  public awareness campaigns, deliberation  on bylaws and programs, information on  city services  •  collection of taxes and user fees: property  taxes, recreational facility fees, parking fees   •  management of public land and buildings:  establishment of parks, renovation of civic  buildings, operation of water treatment plants  Canada’s climate is changing rapidly. Although all levels  of government have important roles to play to advance  adaptation, action at the local level is particularly important  because that is where many of the impacts of climate  change will be felt most directly.1  Local governments in Canada can manage the risks and  opportunities presented by climate through a variety  of practices, including adoption and enforcement of  bylaws; collection of taxes and user fees; operation of  transportation, utilities and other public infrastructure;  establishment of subsidies, tax credits and other incentive  programs; administration of emergency management  and response systems; and public outreach and  education initiatives.  Land use planning is one of the most effective processes  to facilitate local adaptation to climate change.3,4  Historically, local governments have used land use planning  tools – official plans, zoning, development permits and  others – to minimize risks to communities from floods,  wildfires, landslides and other natural hazards.5 As the  climate changes, so will the frequency and magnitude of  climate-related hazards, posing a challenge for community  planners. A recent survey by the Canadian Institute of  Planners confirmed that “planners gravitate to tools they  know best and are looking for ways to adapt known tools  when addressing climate change.”6   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  J  E R  R Y   M O  U L  A N  D    2 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S2 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  Planning tools and climate change  risk reduction  Generally speaking, planning tools can be used to  reduce climate risks in four ways:  •  limiting development in hazard-prone areas  •  ensuring that the built environment can  withstand a range of environmental stress  •  helping to preserve natural environments  that protect communities against hazards  (for example, dunes that absorb coastal  storm effects)   •  educating stakeholders and decision makers  about risks and opportunities and fostering  dialogue about adaptation  This document describes tools in the land use planning  sector that communities can use in preparing to adapt to  climate change. In addition, it provides information on  decision-support tools, tools that provide information and  resources to help planners and local decision makers take  effective adaptation action.   A brief example of each tool and its use by a Canadian  community is given. Not every case discussed here was  explicitly motivated by a desire to adapt to climate change.  However, the significance of the tool to adaptation  planning is clear in each case. An effort was made to select  examples from communities of varying sizes and from all  regions of Canada.    Although the examples are of broad utility, the design and  application of a particular planning tool can vary greatly  from one jurisdiction to another, depending on provincial  or territorial laws and other factors. We describe the  provincial and territorial roles in local adaptation planning  in Appendix A. Readers interested in knowing how a  particular tool is applied in a specific community should  consult provincial, territorial and local laws.  It is important to keep in mind that land use planning is  used to pursue many local policy objectives, including  providing affordable housing, stimulating job growth,  preserving the character and heritage of a community,  reducing greenhouse gas emissions, protecting biodiversity  and enabling efficient transportation. A key challenge for  planners and local decision makers is how to incorporate  and balance the need to prepare for climate change  through adaptation with other local development  objectives. Another consideration is how to integrate  (mainstream) consideration of changing climate into  the wide array of decisions made by local governments,  from operating municipal services to capital spending,  enforcement and inspection activities, collection of taxes,  and administration of disaster response programs.    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  3   LAND USE PLANNING TOOLS ADAPTATION EXAMPLES PAGE  2.1 Official plans Iqaluit’s General Plan 4  Elkford’s Official Community Plan 5  2.2 Local plans on special matters Stratford’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan 6  Edmonton’s Urban Forest Management Plan 7  imagineCALGARY 7  2.3 Zoning Beaubassin-est’s sea level rise protection zone 8  Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie’s zoning bylaw to reduce the   urban heat island effect   9  2.4  Land subdivision and   development controls  Toronto’s Green Standard 10  Halifax Regional Municipality development agreements 11  2.5 Covenants and easements Island Trust’s NAPTEP Covenant 12  Kamloops wildland-urban interface covenant 13  2.6 Design guidelines Regina’s Xeriscape Workbook 14  Toronto’s Draft Design Guidelines for “Greening” Surface Parking Lots 15  2.7  Environmental review of   development projects  Saint John waterfront redevelopment 16  Town of Ajax environmental review of   land development and infrastructure projects  17  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  N  A R  A D  A  T  H O  M A  S  This section describes seven of the most prominent land  use planning tools in use across Canada and explains how  communities can use them to more effectively adapt to  climate change.   Land use planning refers to the processes and instruments  employed to manage the use of land and the physical  development of a community for the common interest.   A variety of statutory and other measures – bylaws,  incentives, information and guidance, spending programs –  may be applied to control how land is used. The scale of  action is usually the neighbourhood, a whole town or city  or a metropolitan area. Tools for the regulation of individual  buildings, such as building codes, green building standards,  property taxes and the like, are closely related to land use  planning but are not covered in this document.   2.0 Land use planning tools    4 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  J  E R  R Y   M O  U L  A N  D P  H O  T O   C O  U R  T E  S Y   O F   J E  R R  Y  M  O U  L A  N D  2.1 OFFICIAL PLANS An official plan is a formal planning document, often  required by provincial law, that sets out a comprehensive  long-term vision and the goals and objectives for the  development of a community.7 Preparing such a plan  typically begins with expert analyses of local conditions  and includes public consultations as well as reviews by local  advisory committees and provincial and other authorities.  After the plan is finalized, the local council adopts it  formally by enacting a bylaw. Provincial approval may be  required as well.   Also entitled general, community or master plans, these  documents identify the major social, economic and  environmental challenges facing the community and  articulate strategies to address them. Official plans are  in force for a relatively long period (10 years or longer)  with updates required periodically (every five years in  some provinces). They may designate some areas of the  community as appropriate locations for new growth   Iqaluit’s General Plan8  Iqaluit (population 6200), the capital of Nunavut, is one of the first Canadian communities to integrate climate  change adaptation into its General Plan. One of the five priority vision statements identifies Iqaluit as “a community  that adapts to climate change.” The plan sets out two high-level objectives to realize this vision: (1) to study the  impacts of climate change on the community and (2) to adopt policies that recognize the long-term impacts of  climate change. The plan includes more detail on the climate change issues of concern to the community (for  example, increases in temperature and precipitation, permafrost thaw, decreases in sea ice, and accelerated coastal  erosion) and priority adaptation actions related to municipal infrastructure.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  M  IC H  E L  E  B  E R  T O  L  while others are to be preserved or revitalised. Official  plans serve as guiding documents for subsequent local  policies, programs and bylaws (such as zoning codes and  subdivision controls).  Climate change adaptation can be incorporated directly  into a municipality’s official plan, either in a dedicated  section or embedded throughout the document. Such  texts normally detail local climate change risks and  opportunities, an overarching adaptation vision and policy,  as well as priority adaptation needs. Adaptation strategies  and actions in official plans include mainstreaming  adaptation into all or selected municipal operations,  undertaking a comprehensive municipal risk assessment  process to prioritize risks and opportunities, developing  a comprehensive municipal adaptation action plan, or  obtaining critical information or technical data for making  effective and appropriate adaptation decisions.     L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  5   Elkford’s Official Community Plan9,10  The District of Elkford is a small community (population 2500) in the Rocky Mountains of southeastern British  Columbia. Historically, Elkford has dealt with several climate-related hazards, including flooding, drought and  wildfires. A changing climate magnifies all these risks. In 2008, Elkford, with support of the Columbia Basin Trust,  a provincial crown corporation, developed a local adaptation strategy to assess the risks posed by climate change  and identify corresponding adaptation actions. The Adaptation Strategy was developed concurrently with a revision  to Elkford’s Official Community Plan (OCP), allowing the two to be fully integrated. Consideration of climate  change in all decision making is one of the OCP’s 11 guiding principles. Adaptation actions in the OCP include  a wildfire protection zone in which any development application must be accompanied by a fire hazard and risk  assessment conducted by certified professionals before a permit is issued. The OCP also calls for the development  of a community evacuation plan in the event of an extreme wildfire or flooding.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  D  IS T  R IC  T  O  F  E  L K  F O  R D    6 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  2.2 LOCAL PLANS ON SPECIAL MATTERS  In addition to official plans, local governments adopt  many other kinds of plans. Those plans may focus on one  function of local government (such as public transit or  storm water management), on a sector or issue of special  significance to the community (such as the development  of the arts or the needs of senior citizens) or on a  neighbourhood with special planning needs.11 As with  official plans, these local plans are often developed through  a formal planning process, including public consultation,  and provide an assessment of conditions, a long-term vision  and a set of goals and actions for the particular issue or  area in question.   A growing number of Canadian municipalities have  adopted plans that specifically address the need to adapt to  climate change. Some communities have chosen to develop  stand-alone adaptation plans. Those documents typically  outline the climate change impacts of concern to the  community, the associated risks and opportunities, and the  community’s vision and proposed actions for dealing with  those changes. Many other communities have integrated  consideration of climate change adaptation into local plans  that address other issues. For example, a municipality may  integrate adaptation into its capital improvement plan for  storm water sewer systems.  Stratford’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan12  The Town of Stratford (population 8046), a rapidly growing community in Prince Edward Island, is located on a  peninsula just south of the provincial capital, Charlottetown. The main climate change issues of concern to the  community are coastal erosion, which already threatens several important heritage buildings and homes, sea level  rise, storm surge and inland flooding.   In 2010, the Town, in partnership with the Canadian Institute of Planners and the Atlantic Planners Institute,  created a long-term strategic plan to prepare Stratford for climate change. The process comprised four stages:  (1) forming a core working group to establish overarching objectives, engage key stakeholders and conduct  background research into local climate change impacts; (2) organizing public meetings to assess current and future  vulnerabilities (following a presentation of the potential climate change impacts, a survey was distributed to all  participants at the public meeting to gauge climate change-related opportunities and threats for the community);  (3) conducting a risk assessment, building on results of the vulnerability assessment, to rank the most important  climate change impacts and identify priority areas for adaptation action; and (4) preparing a final adaptation plan  that included recommended adaptation actions by theme (for example, heritage properties, parks and recreation,  private properties, emergency services, storm water infrastructure). Stratford has since integrated adaptation  considerations into all new or updated community action plans, including its draft Official Plan, Strategic Plan and  Master Stormwater Management Plan.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  W  IN S  T O  N  M  A U  N D    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  7   Edmonton’s Urban Forest Management Plan13  Edmonton (population 812 201), the capital  of Alberta, is located along the North  Saskatchewan River. The city’s urban tree  canopy is seriously threatened by drought,  insect infestations, disease, storms and climate  change. These threats spurred Edmonton to  create the Urban Forest Management Plan  (UFMP) to guide the management of the tree  canopy over a 10-year period. The UFMP  includes developing an inventory of the urban  forest (completed 2009), a review of existing  planting strategies, a communication plan and  potential tree planting partnerships. Many  of these actions will increase resilience to  drought conditions, which may be exacerbated  by climate change. For example, Edmonton’s  Forestry Unit is testing the use of different tree  species, such as red maples, and alternative  tree watering techniques.   imagineCALGARY14  Calgary (population 1 096 833) is situated in southern Alberta. The impact of climate change on water quality and  quantity is of particular concern in the area. Local rivers are expected to experience decreased flow because of  decreased precipitation and reduced glacial coverage in the headwaters of the river basins.15 imagineCALGARY was  a community visioning and consultation process undertaken in 2005 to produce a 100-year roadmap for Calgary’s  development. The process engaged more than 18 000 Calgarians representing businesses, community agencies,  non-profits and governments as well as the public. Calgary is one of the first communities in Canada to consider  climate change in its long-range planning. The City commissioned scoping reports to investigate how four major  trends might impact the city: demographic changes, resource scarcity, technology transformation and climate  change. Since publishing the imagineCALGARY plan in 2007, the City has implemented its vision and targets in  subsequent land use plans and strategies. Numerous local partner organizations in the private, non-profit and  public sectors have also committed to achieving the vision by changing their policies and practices.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  N  IC O  L A   J O  H N  S O  N P  H O  T O   C O  U R  T E  S Y   O F   T H  E  C  IT Y   O F   E D  M O  N T  O N    8 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  2.3 ZONING  Zoning is a regulatory tool widely used by municipalities  to control land use within their borders.7,16,17,18 It is a key  tool for implementing the goals and objectives set out  in a municipality’s official plan. Zoning bylaws divide  the entire community into zones. For each zone, only  certain land uses are permitted (for example, commercial,  residential, industrial). In addition to restrictions on the  use of the property, the zoning bylaws may impose  requirements on buildings, including maximum height,  lot coverage and density, as well as building type and  setbacks. Those requirements are reflected in a zoning  map for the jurisdiction. Zoning restrictions usually apply  only prospectively.19  Zoning codes can be used by municipalities to limit new  development in hazard-prone areas (for instance in areas  subject to wildfires, landslides or coastal erosion) or to  prescribe building standards that reduce vulnerability to  environmental stress.20,21 For example, in areas of high  flood risk, all development may be prohibited, while in  areas where the risk is lower, the ground floor of new  buildings and structures may be required to be built  above a minimum height to avoid flood damage.22 Given  that climate change often magnifies existing hazard risk,  municipalities could respond by modifying existing zoning  restrictions to factor in the greater intensity, frequency or  duration of certain hazards as climate changes.  Beaubassin-est’s sea level rise protection zone23  Beaubassin-est (population 6200), a small coastal community in southeast New Brunswick, is vulnerable to  the impacts of sea level rise and storm surge flooding. The Community is one of the first in New Brunswick  to implement a minimum height standard for buildings to address climate change impacts. Council passed an  updated zoning bylaw in March 2011 to better protect new construction in the community’s coastal zone.   The bylaw identifies a sea level rise “protection zone” in which the minimum ground floor elevation of any new  building must be at least 1.43 metres above the current 1-in-100-year flood mark. The regulation is an overlay  zone – all previous zoning conditions apply. Rather than restrict development outright, the zoning bylaw imposes  stricter building requirements on developers. This new regulation provides an opportunity to educate developers  as well as the community at large about the impacts of climate change and sea level rise. This update to the bylaw  was based on the best available scientific understanding of sea level rise for the area and a high resolution digital  map that the community commissioned to help identify potential flood levels.   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  S  É B  A S  T IE  N  D  O IR  O N    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  9   Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie’s zoning bylaw to reduce the urban heat island effect24,25  Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie (population 131 000) is a central borough in Montréal, Quebec, that is very densely  built. The urban heat island effect is pronounced in many parts of the borough. Urban heat islands are areas in  cities where ambient air temperatures tend to be hotter than in surrounding areas. They occur where there is little  vegetation and a high percentage of dark surfaces, such as tar roofs, asphalt roads and parking lots.   In April 2011, the borough council revised its comprehensive zoning bylaw to include four regulatory measures  aimed at tackling urban heat islands: (1) when replacing an existing roof or constructing a new building, the owner  must install either a green roof or a highly reflective roof; (2) for all new parking lots of 10 or more spaces, at least  15 percent of the area must be open ground landscaped with plants, bushes and trees; (3) all new paving materials  must meet a minimum specified surface reflectivity rating; and (4) when constructing a new building, at least  20 percent of the building site must remain open ground and be landscaped with plants, bushes and trees.   These four measures apply to all public and private property throughout the borough. More than 300 permits for  reflective roofs were issued in the first year after the bylaw was passed.   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  R  O S  E M  O N  T  –   L A   P E  T IT  E -P  A T  R IE    10 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  2.4 LAND SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT CONTROLS Communities across Canada employ many different tools  to control the layout and design of proposed developments  and to reduce adverse impacts on the community. The  controls, which may apply to subdivisions of land, new  construction or alterations to existing buildings, allow local  officials to evaluate projects case by case.7 Among them are  •  subdivision controls – which apply when a developer  wants to divide a parcel of land, often for residential  development. Generally, subdivision plans must  demonstrate good access and efficient utility service  for all the proposed lots and also address concerns  about financial, environmental and other impacts.  •  site plan controls, development permits,  development agreements and similar tools –  which require developers to submit detailed designs  to be assessed against specified criteria. For example,  a proposal may be reviewed for the quality of the  design of public areas, the fit with the historic  character of the neighbourhood, or the extent of  disturbance to ecologically sensitive land.  •  comprehensive development zones, planned  unit developments and similar instruments –  that apply to large sites in which non-standard or  innovative designs and techniques are to be used,  and a customised approach to zoning and site design  is appropriate.  As part of the evaluation of proposals under these types  of regulations, local officials may seek changes to projects  prior to approval. Further, the developer may be required to  pay development charges, dedicate a portion of the site for  public use or provide some other concession or amenity.  These project-based, discretionary development controls  can be very useful for adapting to climate change at the  neighbourhood scale. For example, as part of the review  of a subdivision proposal, the developer may be asked to  assess the increased risk of erosion due to climate change  and to determine how it may affect the development.  The municipality may require that appropriate adaptation  measures be taken by the developer, such as shoreline  restoration or increased development setbacks. The lots  in a proposed subdivision may be clustered in the least  hazardous part of the property. In other cases, a site plan  control ordinance may be used to require that green design  features that address the impacts of climate change be  incorporated (for instance, providing shade and rooftop  gardens to decrease the public health risk from urban  heat islands).   Toronto’s Green Standard Toronto, Ontario (population 2.6 million), is situated at the centre  of a conurbation of more than 5 million people. Climate change  impacts of concern for the city include increased health risks due  to extreme heat, higher incidence of pests and diseases (such as  West Nile virus) and more extreme rainfall with consequences for  storm-water systems and other infrastructure.26  The Toronto Green Standard (TGS) is a set of performance  measures for site and building design, covering energy and water  efficiency, air and water quality, ecological services and solid waste  management. The standards work with the regular development  approval and inspection process, and apply to all new development subject to subdivision or site plan controls or  for which a zoning amendment is required.27 Although adaptation is not explicitly mentioned, the TGS addresses  several climate change impacts of concern to the city. For example, one provision, applicable to non-residential  development of three stories or less, requires the use of light-coloured materials, open-grid pavement or shading  on at least 50 percent of the site to reduce urban heat. Another provision requires that new developments retain at  least the first 5 millimetres (mm) from each rainfall through rainwater reuse, plantings and other practices, thereby  reducing storm water runoff. A more stringent set of voluntary standards has been adopted. Developments that  meet those stricter standards are eligible for reductions in development fees.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  T  H E   C IT  Y  O  F  T  O R  O N  T O    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  11   Halifax Regional Municipality development agreements Halifax Regional Municipality (HRM) (population 390 000) is the most populous urban community in Atlantic  Canada and the capital of Nova Scotia. Climate change, which is expected to bring more frequent storms to the  area, will likely increase the vulnerability of coastal development and infrastructure.28 Various community plans,  including the 2006 HRM Regional Plan, already call for new developments to be constructed a minimum height  above the ordinary high-water mark.29   One flexible mechanism that planners in Halifax use to address coastal threats is development agreements. Certain  areas of the community are designated as zones where review and approval of development projects proceed  through negotiation. Local bylaws specify in general terms the matters to be considered in such negotiations,  giving planners latitude to address a broad range of issues regarding environmental protection, natural hazards  and other concerns.30 The developer may be asked to produce relevant information (such as the impacts of  wave-run up on a particular property) and to consider and adopt appropriate hazard mitigation strategies. In a  recent development in downtown Dartmouth (an HRM municipality), local officials and the developer agreed to  establish minimum elevations for a new marina and other seaside structures that were several metres higher than  provided in area plans. This was consistent both with the developer’s interest in protecting the property and the  community’s interest in minimizing risk. The development agreement process enabled planners and developers to  exchange information on storm surge and wave run up on this site, and to produce a more resilient project design.   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  H  A L  IF A  X  R  E G  IO N  A L   M U  N IC  IP A  L IT  Y    12 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  2.5 COVENANTS AND EASEMENTS Covenants and easements (known as real servitudes in  Quebec) are formal agreements that place restrictions on  the use of land or grant a person (or the public) the right  to use land owned by another.31,32 For example, a covenant  may prohibit building a structure that casts a shadow on  a neighbouring property. An easement may allow the  public to pass through private land to reach a beach. Both  covenants and easements are said to “run with the land,”  which means they bind current as well as future owners.  There are strict and complex legal requirements that apply  when creating easements or covenants.   Covenants may serve local planning goals in different ways:   •  as a development control tool – Municipalities  may use covenants when entering development  agreements, applying controls on subdivisions and  other development projects or imposing conditions  on issuing a development permit. In such cases,  these instruments ensure that community interests  are protected and that the developer’s promises  about the operation and maintenance of the  property are enforceable long after construction.  Covenants may be used in “green developments”  that use innovative energy, waste water treatment  and other systems that require public access and the  collaboration of future owners for proper operation  and maintenance.33  •  as a conservation tool – A special form of  covenant, known as a conservation covenant or  easement has been established by law in many  provinces. It places restrictions on the use of land to  protect its natural values. For example, a conservation  covenant may prohibit the removal of native  vegetation and prohibit any structures on a portion  of the property that contains sensitive ecosystems.  The owner who enters into a conservation covenant  continues to own the land and may live on it, sell it,  or pass it on to heirs but the covenant’s restrictions  on development are followed in the future, regardless  of who owns the land.34 In exchange, the land owner  may be eligible for tax reductions or credits.  Covenants and easements can play an important role  in climate change adaptation planning. For example,  a municipality may acquire a conservation easement  to prevent residential development on a coastal area  threatened by sea level rise and storm surge flooding.   A covenant may be negotiated with owners in an area to  prevent construction of docks, sea walls or other coastal  protection structures in order to allow marshes and dunes  to migrate inland naturally.35 Covenants and easements may  also support local efforts to monitor climate change by, for  example, allowing access to a coastal property for purposes  of measuring erosion rates.   Island Trust’s NAPTEP Covenant The Islands Trust (population 25 000) is a federation of local governments  in the Gulf Islands and Howe Sound islands of British Columbia. The Islands  Trust Fund acts as the conservation arm of the federation, charged with  protecting the ecosystems in the region through land acquisition, conservation  covenants and education programs. Since 1990, it has protected more than  1073 hectares (ha) of land on 84 properties.36   Adaptation to climate change, especially the protection of biodiversity, is one  key concern of the Trust Fund. The effects of changing climate are already  evident in local ecosystems: vegetation is experiencing earlier green-up,  wildlife migration patterns are changing, and insect outbreaks are more  common.37 Up to 30 percent of assessed animal species are believed to be  at high risk of extirpation (local extinction).38 By establishing, monitoring and  managing conservation areas, the Trust Fund aims to maintain the ecological  functions of high biodiversity areas in the face of a changing climate. Under  the Trust Fund’s Natural Area Protection Tax Exemption Program (NAPTEP)  Covenant, land owners receive a 65 percent reduction in property taxes on  the protected portion of their land. The Trust Fund is developing a tool to  estimate the biodiversity value of properties to prioritize future acquisitions.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  E  .  G  O N  Z A  L E  S    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  13   Kamloops wildland-urban interface covenant Kamloops (population 85 678), in the Thompson River Valley of central southern British Columbia, is particularly  vulnerable to wildfires because of its dry climate. Wildfires are one of several risks projected to increase as a result  of changing climate. In the summer of 2003, three large wildfires reached the city’s perimeter, threatening homes  and infrastructure. They increased local awareness and concern about the impacts of wildfires on the community.  Covenants are one of a suite of tools the City uses in its efforts to reduce wildfire risk.39 In 1992, the City instituted  a policy specifying that, as a condition of subdivision approval, all new subdivisions within hazardous zones must  register a restrictive covenant.40 Under such a covenant, developers and home owners are bound to undertake  actions to reduce fire risks, including maintaining fuel-buffer zones around homes; controlling roofing materials  and installation of wooden shacks and shingles; screening of all eaves, attics, decks and openings under floors  to prevent the accumulation of flammable material; and installing approved spark arresters in all wood stoves. All  subdivisions constructed since 1992 in high to extreme wildfire hazard areas have registered restrictive wildfire  covenants. Kamloops is revising the 1992 covenant to improve clarity and ensure it conforms to the City’s latest fire  hazard assessment mapping.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  B  R IA  N  A  V E  R Y    14 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  2.6 DESIGN GUIDELINES Design guidelines describe preferred practices in the design  of certain aspects of a development project (for example,  buildings, public areas, infrastructure, mechanical systems,  landscaping). Municipalities may develop design guidelines  for several reasons: to improve environmental performance,  reduce infrastructure costs, enhance aesthetics, increase  public safety or create more accessible public spaces.  Examples include guidelines for the design of parking lots,  streetscapes, building facades, storm water ponds, heritage  districts and public squares. A combination of text and  photographs, sketches and architectural drawings describe  preferred designs.   Municipalities often develop these publications as  supplementary educational tools to help developers, design  professionals (such as architects, landscape architects,  engineers and planners) or the general public to improve  upon existing design and construction practices. They  also illustrate various ways in which developers may meet  required municipal or provincial development standards.   Some municipalities require that developers comply with  such design guidelines and demonstrate compliance during  the formal review of development proposals.  The design of a community’s physical components – such  as parking lots, parks and roadways, drainage ditches or  a neighbourhood as a whole – can reduce or magnify  the impacts of climate change at the local scale.41,42  Good design can contribute to building resilience to  climate change at the local level.43 For example, selecting  appropriate building materials and landscaping can reduce  the risk of wildfires. Although many municipalities have  developed design guidelines without climate change in  mind, their use can improve resilience to the impacts  of climate change. Conversely, design guidelines may  recommend or impose development standards that may  inadvertently decrease resilience to climate change. For  example, a municipality may prescribe building wide roads  to accommodate emergency vehicles. However, those wide  roads may also increase storm water volumes and magnify  the urban heat island effect.  Regina’s Xeriscape Workbook44  Regina, Saskatchewan (population 193 100), is situated in the middle of the southern prairies, the driest major  region of Canada. The city has very little local access to water. For the Canadian prairies, increases in water scarcity  and drought are one of the most serious risks presented by climate change.   Xeriscape is an alternate form of landscaping that relies on drought-tolerant plants to reduce outdoor watering  requirements during the summer. In 1993, the City of Regina produced the Xeriscape Workbook, which provides  practical guidelines for low-water, low-maintenance landscaping. The Workbook is distributed at free workshops in  the spring and fall and on the   City’s Web site. In the late 1990s,   the City partnered with a local school  to create a xeriscape educational  and demonstration site. The garden  features 45 plant types, a false creek  and an amphitheatre with a teacher’s  rock for outdoor classes and lessons.  Climate change was not a consideration  when the City first developed the  Workbook. However, the application  of the landscaping practices within  the Workbook helps reduce water  consumption, an important climate  change adaptation action. PH  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  C  H E  T  N  E U  F E  L D    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  15   Toronto’s Draft Design Guidelines for “Greening” Surface Parking Lots45  The City of Toronto developed guidelines for green parking lot design with the goal of improving the urban design  and environmental performance of surface parking lots within city boundaries. Traditionally, parking lot design  has been based mainly on functional criteria (to maximize parking lot spaces and minimize maintenance costs)  with little regard to the quality of the urban design or environmental performance. The new guidelines provide  design options and strategies, in both graphic and written form, to meet the following objectives: enhance the  safety and attractiveness of the public realm, provide shade and high-quality landscaping, reduce the urban  heat island effect, manage storm-water quality and quantity on-site, and incorporate sustainable material and  technologies. All proposals for new parking lots within city limits, both public and private, must consider the  guidelines before receiving development approval. The guidelines also help developers comply with the Toronto  Green Standard. Although not designed explicitly as a climate change adaptation measure, the application of the  guidelines, particularly the urban heat island and storm-water management measures, increase the city’s resilience  to climate change.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  T  H E   C IT  Y  O  F  T  O R  O N  T O    16 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  2.7 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW OF DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS   Saint John waterfront redevelopment Saint John (population 70 063), the largest municipality in New Brunswick, is located on the north shore of the  Bay of Fundy at the mouth of the Saint John River. Climate change in this region is expected to cause a rise in  coastal water levels, more intense precipitation and storm events, and more significant coastal and inland erosion  and flooding.48  The Saint John Waterfront Development Corporation, on behalf of the City, plans to redevelop 2.43 ha of land  on the waterfront. The street grid is to be extended, buildings renovated and new residences, shops and a hotel  constructed. A portion of the development site was formerly a Canadian Coast Guard base and is owned by  Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Accordingly, the transfer of the property to the Corporation requires a screening  under the Canadian Environmental Assessment Act.49 The EA screening, completed in March of 2010, included  consideration of the potential impacts of climate change and sea level rise on the project.50 The Corporation  agreed to ensure that the climate and potential sea level rise are considered where relevant in the design of the  infrastructure components of the project. The loadings and stresses associated with climate change, potential sea  level rise and other environmental forces are to be addressed through engineering design as the planning for the  project continues.   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  M  A C   M A  R O  O N  An environmental assessment (EA) is a structured process  used by governments to evaluate the environmental, social  and economic impacts of development. It can be applied  to a specific project, such as the construction of a bridge  or to a plan or policy intended to guide future projects.  Many kinds of developments are required to undergo  an EA. For instance, federal and provincial law may  require EAs for major industrial projects, projects that use  federal or provincial funds or for development on crown  lands.46 Some municipal infrastructure projects such as  extensions of sewers and the construction of water mains,  roads and transit systems may be subject to provincial  EA requirements. In 2003, the Canadian Environmental  Assessment Agency issued guidelines for incorporating  climate change considerations in EAs, one of the first  federal agencies in the world to do so.47   In addition, municipalities can require formal environmental  reviews, sometimes called environmental impact studies  (EISs), as part of the local process for the evaluation of   development proposals. For example, developers may be  required to submit an EIS for plans of a subdivision or for  a building project located in or near sensitive or protected  areas. The scope and process for a particular EIS will  vary depending on the nature of the project, applicable  environmental and planning laws, policies in the official  community plan and municipal bylaws, and the resources  available to local authorities.   EAs, EISs and other forms of environmental review have  proven to be ready platforms for consideration of climate  change concerns. The applicable legislation and guidelines  for EAs and EISs may require that local climate change be  incorporated as one aspect of the natural environment to  be considered and that measures to address climate change  impacts be incorporated into the project’s design and  management plan. In other cases, climate change impacts  may not be a direct consideration in the EA process.  Despite this, measures enacted in response to the EA may  help build resilience to a changing climate.     L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  17   Town of Ajax environmental review of land development and infrastructure projects Ajax, Ontario (population 109 600), is located on the north shore of Lake Ontario. Climate change is expected to  bring Ajax more frequent and more severe extreme weather. This, plus proposed urbanization in the region, could  increase local risks such as flooding, fouled beaches and decreased water quality in Lake Ontario, the primary  source of water for Ajax.51   Ajax proactively uses EAs and EISs in its efforts to address climate change concerns. For example, to improve the  quality of water discharged into Lake Ontario, Ajax is developing a master plan for the retrofit of its storm-water  system. As part of that process, the Town conducted a Municipal Engineers Class EA to evaluate various retrofit  measures.52 The EA recommended a two-stage action plan involving (1) adopting “Healthy Community Practices,”  such as more strategic street sweeping practices, low-impact development approaches, community education  programs and ongoing storm-water quality monitoring; and (2) using results from the monitoring program to  determine whether engineered measures, such as retrofits to sewers, trenches and channel expansions, are needed.   Further, pursuant to environmental and climate change adaptation policies in its Official Plan, Ajax requires that  an EIS be submitted with all applications for developments on land designated as a natural heritage or hydrologic  features of provincial, regional or local significance. The EIS must evaluate adverse impacts of the proposed  development and establish appropriate actions to address those impacts.   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  K  E V  IN  G  A Y  N O  R    18 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  Decision-support tools are designed to assist decision  makers in the process of developing and implementing  climate change adaptation plans and policies. This section  describes five decision-support tools that are particularly  relevant to planners and local officials involved in the  preparation and implementation of plans and measures  that address climate change adaptation. Many of the tools  described here help planners to translate scientific findings  about climate change into a language and format that is  suitable for making decisions about adaptation. These tools   3.0 Decision-support tools  DECISION-SUPPORT TOOLS ADAPTATION EXAMPLES PAGE  3.1  Assessments of   community vulnerability and risk  Heat and health vulnerability assessment in Windsor, Ontario 20  Dawson Climate Change Risk Evaluation 21  3.2  Climate projections Halifax Harbour plan for sea level rise 23  Climate projections informing adaptation planning in Prince George 24  3.3 Scenario planning Whitehorse Community Climate Change Adaptation Project 25  3.4 Visualizing climate change impacts Toronto’s heat vulnerability mapping tool 26  Delta’s visualization of climate change impacts 27  3.5 Adaptation planning guidebooks Windsor’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan 28  Nova Scotia’s Municipal Climate Change Action Plan Guidebook:   Yarmouth pilot project   29 P  H O  T O   C O  U R  T E  S Y   O F   JA M  E S   M A  LO N  E  can also be useful for integrating local and traditional  knowledge into the planning process.53 Appendix B lists  additional resources on decision-support tools.  Recommended criteria for decision making (for example,  no-regrets, win-win, the precautionary principle,  reversible strategies)54 and techniques for appraising  adaptation options (for example, cost-benefit analysis, cost  effectiveness, multicriteria analysis),55 although important in  the adaptation process, are not discussed in this document.    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  19   One of the first steps in the local adaptation planning  process is an assessment of how climate change affects  a community. Assessments can take several forms.i Some  emphasize projections of climate change impacts in  the community, while others focus on the factors that  produce local vulnerability and constrain the ability of the  community to take adaptive actions. The knowledge gained  through vulnerability and risk assessments can help decision  makers develop effective adaptation measures.   Many guidelines and frameworks have been developed  to help communities undertake local climate change  assessments.57 Some are generic tools that may apply  generally to all communities, while others are targeted  to certain types of communities (for example, rural  communities) or particular forms of climate change impacts  (for example, heat-related health risks). Many forms of  knowledge, including scientific and technical expertise and  local and traditional knowledge, can contribute to local  assessments of climate change impacts and adaptation.   VULNERABILITY ASSESSMENTS   A vulnerability assessment is a structured process for  identifying the vulnerability of human and natural systems  to climate change.58 The more exposed and sensitive an  individual or community is to climate change, the higher  its vulnerability. Vulnerability is also a function of adaptive  capacity; the higher a community’s capacity to undertake  adaptive actions, the less vulnerable it is.   When conducting a vulnerability assessment, a broad  range of socio-economic and physical factors should be  considered, including climate conditions, the adequacy of  housing and local infrastructure, the quality of emergency  response systems and assistance networks, the availability   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  J  E R  R Y   M O  U L  A N  D  i The IPCC56 described several distinct conceptual frameworks for assessments of local climate change, including impact-based approaches that are climate scenario driven, adaptation-based  approaches that focus on the capacity of communities and natural systems to respond effectively to stress, vulnerability-based approaches centered on the factors driving the susceptibility  of individuals and groups to harm, integrated approaches that include modelling and other procedures for investigating climate change across sectors and scales and risk management  approaches that focus directly on decision making.  of material and financial resources, and the general health  and risk awareness of the population.59,60 Consultation with  local stakeholders and residents is crucial in assessments,  both to understand existing vulnerabilities and to develop  effective strategies to reduce them. The information gained  from vulnerability assessments allows local officials to  develop appropriate interventions such as improved health  services, better access to transportation networks, and  healthier buildings and urban spaces. The assessments also  help to prioritize measures to assist the most vulnerable  individuals and groups in a timely and cost-effective manner.   RISK MANAGEMENT  Risk management is a process widely used by businesses,  governments and non-governmental organizations to  identify and manage the adverse impacts of a change  in conditions. The magnitude of a risk is calculated by  examining the probability of the occurrence of an event and  the severity of its impact. Risk management helps decision  makers evaluate multiple threats and prioritize policy  responses under conditions of uncertainty.   Risk management processes can be used by a community  to evaluate risks associated with climate change and  suggest adaptation measures. Risk management  methodologies can provide a way to explore public  attitudes and perceptions of risk, and this information can  feed back into the assessment. The evaluation process  may be formal or informal and may be quantitative  or qualitative, depending on what works best for the  municipality. In addition to common risk management  processes (for example, ISO31000, CSA Q850), which can  be used to assess climate change risks, several climate  change-specific risk assessment tools have been developed  to assist Canadian communities (see Appendix A).   3.1  ASSESSMENTS OF COMMUNITY VULNERABILITY  AND RISK    20 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  Heat and health vulnerability assessment in Windsor, Ontario Windsor (population 210 891) is Canada’s most southerly city and has summertime temperatures that are among  the highest in Canada.61 Climate change is expected to significantly increase the number of extreme heat days  annually in the region. This may exacerbate the risk of heat-related illness and deaths, particularly among seniors,  the chronically ill and other vulnerable groups.   Windsor was one of four pilot communities in a Health Canada project to develop community-based Heat Alert  and Response Systems (HARSs) to alert local residents when extreme temperatures pose a serious health concern  and to activate a coordinated public health response. The City of Windsor and Health Canada collaborated to  conduct a heat-health vulnerability assessment to help strengthen the design of the HARS as well as to engage  important stakeholders. The vulnerability assessment proceeded in five steps:62 (1) an initial assessment of the  scope, objectives, work plan and stakeholders involved; (2) the collection and analysis of data, including an  examination of the relationship between temperature and mortality; (3) the projection of future climate for the  Windsor region; (4) a literature review to provide background information about the impacts of heat on health,  vulnerability assessment methods, and best adaptation practices; and (5) workshops to consult with stakeholders  and the community about existing vulnerabilities, adaptive capacity and potential adaptation actions. The  vulnerability assessment provided information that allowed public health officials to develop more effective  adaptation interventions.63   P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  T  O U  R IS  M    W IN  D S  O R   E S  S E  X  P  E L  E E   I S  L A  N D    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  21   Dawson Climate Change Risk Evaluation64  Dawson City, Yukon (population 1350), is located just below the Arctic Circle at 64°N. In 2007, Dawson partnered  with a local non-profit organization, the Northern Climate ExChange, to develop a community adaptation plan.   An evaluation of climate change-related risks was an important component of the planning process.   Public consultations were undertaken to identify community vulnerabilities and potential opportunities arising   from climate change. The project team and a local advisory committee distilled community issues into a list of   78 “community consequences” of climate change. For each of those, risk evaluation tables were completed jointly  by the project team and the advisory committee. An overall priority level (low, medium and high) for each impact  was established through consideration of the severity and likelihood of a particular impact and the capacity of the  community to take action to address it. Suggested adaptation actions were formulated for all consequences, and  one or more partner organizations (for example, Yukon government and Dawson City council) were identified to  provide leadership. See the framework example, in this case used to analyse agriculture/urban land-use conflicts.  Risk evaluation framework  Community consequence Agriculture expands and potentially conflicts with  other land use types (urban development, industry and  wilderness areas).  Ri sk    ev  al ua  tio n   cr ite  ria    Level of impact Medium  Likelihood Medium  Adaptive capacity Unknown  Overall priority level High  Suggested adaptation action Incorporate flexible regulations and policies into land use  and other planning processes (e.g. local area planning and  environmental assessments).  Lead partner Yukon Land Use Planning Council, Yukon Government    22 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  3.2 CLIMATE PROJECTIONS A climate projection is a representation of the climate in   an area at some specified time in the future.65,66 Projections  indicate plausible changes in a set of climate variables.  Examples include changes in average and extreme  precipitation and temperature, the number of frost-free  days, sea level, and the length of the growing season.   This information may be presented in numerical, visual  (graphs or maps) or narrative form.   Climate projections are generated from the outputs of  one or more climate models. These models are complex  computer programs that simulate the behaviour of the  atmosphere, the oceans, land surfaces, clouds and other  key components of the climate system.67 The models depict  future conditions at different scales – some encompass  the entire globe while others focus on specific regions.  Generally, uncertainty increases at the finer spatial  scales. To examine future climates, models incorporate  assumptions about greenhouse gas emissions in the  future. For example, some assume fast-rising emissions  while others assume more gradual growth and eventual  reductions in emissions. Uncertainty is an inherent part of  all climate projections, owing to challenges in modelling  complex climate systems and in foreseeing future global  actions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.  Climate change projections may be applied to local  planning processes in various ways, including the following:  •  as tools for learning and public engagement.  Planners may present climate projections to  stakeholders and the public to raise awareness  about the nature and magnitude of possible changes  to the local climate, thus stimulating discussion  amongst stakeholders about potential impacts,  local vulnerabilities, adaptive capacity and preferred  approaches to adaptation.  •  as part of assessments of community  vulnerabilities and risks. In formulating adaptation  plans, communities often utilize climate projections  when studying the nature and extent of local risk  and vulnerabilities, including the capacity of key  stakeholders and residents to cope with and respond  effectively to increased stress.   •  as parameters for setting the design tolerance  of systems and structures. For example, a  municipality may, based on projected changes in the  intensity of future rainfall events, change the design  criteria for the diameter of storm-water pipes to  accommodate greater flows.  Although projections are a useful decision-support tool,  there are adaptation measures that communities can take  without having to use or commission climate projections.  Communities can, for example, base their adaptation  planning decisions on an analysis of current vulnerabilities  or on information gleaned from reliable regional, national  or international assessments (which make use of climate  projections). It is important that planners are cognizant of  the inherent uncertainties embedded in projections and  communicate them accurately to decision makers and  the public.     L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  23   Halifax Harbour plan for sea level rise68,69  Halifax (population 390 000), the capital of Nova Scotia, is a major seaport with significant industrial, military and  municipal infrastructure on the coast. Rising sea level, along with increased storm intensity and associated waves  and storm surges, presents risks to residents, property and infrastructure in coastal areas of the city. To respond  to these impacts, in 2006 the city recognized the need to gather scientific data on sea level rise, storm surges and  vulnerability to inform development of an area-specific land use plan for Halifax Harbour.  City planners partnered with a team of scientists to develop projections of future sea levels and storm water levels  in Halifax Harbour under three climate scenarios for 2100: (1) a continuation of the historical rate of change, (2) the  upper-limit projection for mean sea level rise from the fourth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change (IPCC) and (3) a projection based on more recent scientific literature. High-resolution mapping  of possible future flood levels was then produced for each scenario. Following a presentation by scientists and  city staff, Halifax Regional Municipality (HRM) Council in 2010 chose scenario 2c as a policy reference point from  which to develop the adaptation strategy. HRM is also committed to re-examining this choice when additional  scientific information becomes available. This example demonstrates that credible climate projections, based  on best available science that are communicated to the public and decision makers in a format that is easily  understandable, provide a helpful foundation for adaptation action at the municipal level.   S C  E N  A R  IO  2  C  -   I M  A G  E  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  D  O N   F O  R B  E S    24 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  Climate projections informing adaptation planning in Prince George The City of Prince George (population 77 000) is situated at the confluence of the Nechako and upper Fraser rivers  in central British Columbia. Flooding and the devastation of the region’s forests by the mountain pine beetle are  the climate-related impacts of greatest concern to the community. In 2008, the City partnered with the University of  Northern British Columbia (UNBC)70 to mainstream climate change adaptation into the city’s policies and programs.  The City and UNBC partnered with the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium at the University of Victoria to produce  a climate trends and projections report specific to the Prince George region.71 The report assessed historical  trends (1918 to 2006) for precipitation, temperature and stream flow as well as projected changes (for the 2020s,  2050s and 2080s) in temperature and precipitation using global climate models. UNBC and the City organized  two adaptation workshops and other information events that brought together city staff, the public and key  stakeholders to discuss approaches to dealing with climate change impacts. Climate experts from PCIC presented  a summary of the projections at the workshops. Participants were asked to discuss the potential social, economic  and environmental implications of the projected changes for Prince George and define key impacts for the city. The  climate change projections were a useful tool for establishing a credible baseline from which workshop participants  could engage and discuss impacts and adaptation actions. Prince George has since integrated the findings from the  workshops, including recommended measures to reduce risks from forest fires and flooding, into the Integrated  Community Sustainability Plan72 and draft Official Community Plan.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  C  IT Y   O F   P R  IN C  E  G  E O  R G  E    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  25   3.3 SCENARIO PLANNING  Whitehorse Community Climate Change Adaptation Project Whitehorse (population 25 690) is the capital of Yukon and, like other northern communities, already faces many  climate-related impacts, including forest fires, flooding and ecosystem changes. To help the community prepare for  future climate changes, a scenario planning project was conducted in 2009, led by a local college in collaboration  with the territorial government, local and First Nations governments, private sector firms and community groups.76,77   In a series of meetings, members of the community identified local vulnerabilities under four possible “future  histories” of Whitehorse. To create those histories, two climate change scenarios and two development scenarios  were generated. For instance, Scenario 4, entitled City of Crossroads, envisions a high degree of climate change  (median temperature rise of 4°C) as well as significant population growth (24 000 new residents). The other future  histories have different assumptions regarding climate change and development. Participants brainstormed on the  social, economic and environmental consequences associated with each scenario. Certain impacts or concerns  that were common across the four histories were deemed to be consequences most likely to occur and therefore  became priorities for developing adaptation actions. The priorities included increased risk of forest fire, shifts in the  availability of water, infrastructure decline, energy and food security, and potential land use conflicts. The study  also allowed planners to identify the range of impacts that any one adaptation measure could address and how  these measures may fit with other planning initiatives.   Climate changes (e.g. extent of temperature   rise and increase in snow)  some climate change lots of climate change  Development trajectory  (e.g. population growth)  low Scenario 1:   City of Wilderness  Scenario 2:   City of People  high Scenario 3:   City of Mettle  Scenario 4:   City of Crossroads  A scenario is a plausible, simplified description of  how the future may develop. Scenario planning is a  strategic medium- to long-term planning tool in which  planners develop multiple scenarios describing potential  social, economic and environmental conditions in a  community and then formulate strategies and measures  to achieve planning goals under one or more of those  scenarios.73 Long used by government and the private  sector for managing uncertainty, scenario planning is  now being applied by some communities to prepare for  climate change.  In planning for adaptation to climate change, planners  devise scenarios that demonstrate how changes in climate  may affect the community under different development  trajectories (see the diagram in the following Whitehorse  example). The development trajectories are based on a few  key variables expected to drive change, such as population  growth, technological shifts or energy demand. Different  narratives about how climate change may unfold in the   community are derived from scientific projections, expert  assessments and other sources.74  Planning scenarios assist adaptation planning and policy- making in several ways. The process of constructing the  scenarios educates stakeholders about the nature and  extent of future climate-related risks and opportunities.  Scenarios may provide information that helps to identify  emerging vulnerabilities (for example, potential conflict  over access to water) and support efforts to prioritize  climate change risks. They also assist in devising adaptation  strategies and actions to address vulnerabilities. The  most robust measures are those effective across different  scenarios. For example, in communities at risk from  wildfires, proper firebreak maintenance can be a useful  adaptation measure regardless of the magnitude of climate  change experienced and the rate of development. In  other cases, planners may develop contingent adaptation  strategies that would be implemented in the event a  particular scenario begins to unfold.75    26 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  3.4 VISUALIZING CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS  Toronto’s heat vulnerability mapping tool79  As the climate changes, Toronto is expected to  experience more intense and prolonged heat  waves. Extreme heat is a public health issue of  particular concern to the city’s senior citizens, to  persons suffering from respiratory illnesses and to  other vulnerable populations. Toronto Public Health  (TPH) has developed a mapping tool to visualize  areas of elevated human vulnerability to extreme  heat. The maps incorporate numerous indicators of  vulnerability, including surface temperatures, green  space coverage, housing and social characteristics  of at-risk populations, access to air conditioning,  and the location of cool places. The tool helps TPH  and community partners identify and prioritize  geographic hot spots for delivering resources during  a heat alert. The City also plans to use the tool for  long-term climate adaptation planning.   Maps and other landscape visualizations can illustrate, in  a simple and effective manner,78 the nature and extent of  the changes expected in the local climate, the severity of  possible impacts, and what proposed adaptation responses  might look like. Such visualizations support decision making  by translating scientific concepts into maps or images  that have clear and practical meaning to non-scientists  and the public. They can facilitate dialogue during the  planning process.  MAPS  Maps are one of the most common adaptation decision- support tools used by planners. They can range from  simple hand-drawn maps to those developed by using  sophisticated computer software. Maps have been used  to identify geographic areas of the municipality at risk  from climate-related impacts, the location of vulnerable  infrastructure and populations, or to demarcate places  where certain adaptation-related policies apply. For  example, the potential extent of shoreline erosion or storm  surge flooding under various climate change scenarios   can be mapped. Maps can also be readily referenced or  incorporated into land use planning tools, such as zoning  bylaws, official plans and policy documents.   VISUALIZATIONS  Increasingly, municipalities employ computer animation  software to create three-dimensional visualizations at the  street and neighbourhood scales. The software combines  images of the existing features of the community (for  example, roads, buildings and trees near the shore) with  climate-related impacts projected for the area (for example,  higher sea level). The animations help people visualize  the losses that may be incurred under such conditions  and illustrate the consequences of a particular adaptation  measure. For example, planners may want to create an  image showing how raising a dike or levee would affect  views of the ocean from various waterfront properties. The  resulting images may be useful in engaging the affected  land owners and the public when evaluating the merits of a  proposed adaptation measure, such as raising a sea dike.  M A  P  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  T  O R  O N  T O   P U  B L  IC  H  E A  LT H    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  27   Delta’s visualization of climate change impacts80,81  Delta, British Columbia (population 99 863), is 17 kilometres south of Vancouver, at the mouth of the Fraser River.  The low-lying community is at risk of flooding from sea level rise and increased intensity and frequency of storm  surges.82 Since 2005, Delta has partnered with the Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning (CALP) at  the University of British Columbia (UBC) to develop visualizations of the flooding risk to Delta. CALP and UBC’s  Okanagan campus developed a 3D virtual environment where Delta residents could see what adaptation actions  would look like. For example, the following image shows a typical residential street inundated by flood waters  following a major storm surge event. Delta officials found the visualization process useful in engaging local  residents. Since the public consultations in 2007, Delta has integrated adaptation into various infrastructure and  operational decisions.     28 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  3.5 ADAPTATION PLANNING GUIDEBOOKS  Windsor’s Climate Change Adaptation Plan Windsor (population 216 000) is located in southwestern Ontario on the south shore of the Detroit River and Lake  St. Clair. Climate change impacts of concern include an expected increase in the frequency and intensity of heavy  rain storms and heat waves (a doubling of the number of 30°C days has been projected by 2050).83 These changes  could pose serious problems for the city. In 2010, for example, a significant rainstorm that delivered 90 mm of rain  in a 24-hour period led to widespread basement flooding throughout the city.84  Windsor began developing its adaptation plan in 2010. The City is working through the five-step adaptation  planning process outlined in Changing Climate, Changing Communities, a guidebook published by ICLEI Canada.85  The steps are initiate, research, plan, implement and monitor. The City is midway through that planning process.  The development of Windsor’s adaptation plan builds on existing initiatives, including a heat alert and emergency  response system, the expansion of a waste water treatment facility, various initiatives aimed at reducing basement  flooding, and the construction of a new retention treatment basin to reduce combined sewer overflows. City officials  intend to integrate the actions identified in the adaptation plan into existing policies, programs and operations.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  T  O U  R IS  M  W  IN D  SO R   E SS  E X   P E  LE E   I SL  A N  D  Several Canadian guidebooks have been produced that  describe the steps a community can take to formulate  an adaptation strategy and action plan (see Appendix B).  Several of these guidebooks outline a standard planning  process that is then tailored with information that is  relevant to preparing for the impacts of climate change.   The guidebooks are typically based on the experience and  insights of pilot communities and may include case studies  and prepared worksheets, as well as tips and practical  information. The other decision-support tools described in  this document – visualizations, vulnerability and risk assess- ments, and scenario planning – may be included within the  adaptation planning process described in the guidebooks.     L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  29   Nova Scotia’s Municipal Climate Change Action Plan Guidebook: Yarmouth  pilot project  The Town of Yarmouth (population 6761) is on the  Gulf of Maine in southwestern Nova Scotia. The town  is vulnerable to sea level rise and storm surge flooding.  In 2010, the Government of Nova Scotia required  municipalities to prepare and submit a climate change  action plan by 2013 as a condition for receiving federal  gas-tax funds. In November 2011, the Province published  the Municipal Climate Change Action Plan Guidebook  to help municipalities prepare their action plans.86  Yarmouth was one of three pilot communities to work  through the Guidebook. The lessons learned were used  to assist other municipalities in undertaking similar  initiatives.  Yarmouth is developing a long-term strategic approach  for managing climate change hazards. Between October  2011 and February 2012, with assistance from the  Dalhousie School of Planning, Yarmouth worked through the six steps in the Guidebook. Before submitting its  Plan to the Province in 2013, the Town intends to host a public consultation session and continue to refine its  Action Plan. Despite some challenges, town staff found it to be a useful process. In particular, the formation of  the steering committee, composed of staff from different departments, has allowed colleagues to work together  across functional areas.   Steps to develop an action plan  1. Build an adaptation team/committee.   2. Assess impacts and hazards.  3. Identify affected locations.  4. Identify and evaluate the impacts to  affected facilities, infrastructure and  services.   5. Identify local social, economic and  environment considerations.   6. Determine priorities for adaptive actions.  P H  O T  O  C  O U  R T  E S  Y  O  F  M  IC H  A E  L  B  L A  S E  R    30 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  Appendix A  Provincial and territorial role in local adaptation planning  PROVINCES  Under the Canadian constitution, provinces have jurisdiction  over many matters of local concern including land use  planning.87,88 Accordingly, Provinces play a role in land use  planning for local adaptation to climate change through   •  enabling legislation – Provinces enact and revise  laws that guide planning by local and regional  authorities. Those laws establish the regulatory and  policy tools that control land use at the local level  and define how and when they may be used. For  example, provincial planning acts prescribe the kinds  of zoning bylaws a municipality may adopt. The  provinces define the suite of tools available to local  government to design and implement adaptation  plans and measures.  •  provincial planning policies – Provinces adopt  regulations and policies, to which local and regional  plans generally must conform, on planning issues  of concern across the province. Those policies may  address topics relevant to local adaptation efforts. For  instance, a province may prescribe planning standards  designed to protect agricultural land and contain  urbanization at the fringes of a metropolitan area.  Those standards may facilitate enhanced regional  food security and the design of more resilient urban  communities.  •  provincial adaptation plans and programs –  Many provinces have their own formal plans for  adapting to climate change. Typically, such plans  specify provincial goals and objectives; identify the  impacts of climate change on government programs,  operations and infrastructure; and suggest specific  actions. For example, a plan may call for more high- definition aerial mapping or enhanced monitoring of  water quality. Provinces also disseminate guidelines  and technical information and can act as facilitators  and conveners to assist local governments, the private  sector and civic organizations in adapting to climate  change. Finally, provinces fund programs that can  support local adaptation (for example, subsidies for  an urban tree planting program to reduce the urban  heat island effect).   •  direct involvement in development decisions –  In most local planning matters, the provincial  government plays an indirect, oversight role (for  instance, as appellate bodies on a zoning dispute  or as the final approving authority on local official  plans). In some circumstances, provincial officials  are directly involved in local development decisions.  This may be the case for sites and issues that fall  under direct provincial jurisdiction, such as highway  construction, unincorporated communities, local  projects on crown land, projects affecting heritage  properties, and environmental assessments of large  infrastructure projects. In such cases, provincial  officials may contribute directly to decisions on the  design and implementation of local adaptation  measures.  •  intergovernmental relations – Provinces negotiate  agreements, collaborate on programs and projects,  and manage their relations with other provinces  and the federal government. In that capacity, a  province can help set the conditions for participation  by local governments in programs that support or  complement adaptation. An example is the set of  agreements between the Government of Canada and  various provinces governing the allocation of federal  gas-tax funds.   The nature and extent of provincial involvement in local  adaptation planning varies between provinces, depending  on legal and institutional frameworks, the planning culture  and practice of each location, and many other factors.  TERRITORIES  Like provincial governments, the governments of the  territories of Nunavut, the Northwest Territories and  Yukon have jurisdiction over land use planning and many  other local matters. However, these legislative powers do  not spring directly from the Constitution but instead are  delegated to the territories by the Government of Canada  under various laws.89,90,91 Territorial governments in turn  enact legislation and adopt policies to guide planning by  local and regional authorities within their borders.92,93    L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  31   While the legal framework for land use planning in the  territories differs from that in the provinces, the roles  that territorial governments play in adaptation to climate  change roughly correspond to those described in the  Provinces section of this appendix. For example, territorial   governments also adopt climate change strategies and  actions plans.94,95,96 Territorial land-use planning practices  and territorial government involvement in local adaptation  planning vary by territory, depending on the enabling  federal legislation and other factors.  British Columbia’s Climate Action Plan97  British Columbia released its Climate Action Plan in June 2008. Chapter 5 describes the Province’s vision, strategies  and activities as it prepares for climate change. In responding to the increased likelihood of severe weather events,  the provincial government is taking action to (1) ensure that new development on flood plains will be flood-proofed  to provincial standards, (2) consider the impacts of climate change when awarding provincial infrastructure grants,  (3) develop a comprehensive plan for green community development and (4) ensure that community development  strategies recognize the importance of streams and rivers. The Province is currently updating its planning policy  statements and guidelines, including the Guidelines for Management of Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use. The  Guidelines describe new land use tools that local governments may adopt, including sea level rise planning areas and  risk-based zoning.98   Prince Edward Island’s Climate Change Strategy99  Prince Edward Island’s Climate Change Strategy outlines measures to both reduce greenhouse gas emissions and to  deal with the impacts of climate change. The strategy adopts a risk-based approach to adaptation as it “is the most  practical way to ensure that adaptation responses are socially acceptable, cost-effective and consistent with the  community’s wider social, environmental and economic goals.” The impacts of climate change on coasts – such as sea  level rise, increased storm surge flooding and erosion – are highlighted as issues of concern. The strategy identifies  five overarching adaptation objectives and actions, all of which have direct implications at the municipal level. For  example, the Province committed to reviewing all provincial land use and development policies to encourage more  sustainable options for future land development and to better adapt to changing climate conditions.  Manitoba’s Provincial Planning Regulation  Manitoba’s Provincial Planning Regulation100 (the Regulation) identifies both climate change mitigation and adaptation  as strategic priorities, along with other key concerns such as clean water and public safety. Community resilience is  recognized as a key principle of sound land use planning.   The Regulation identifies issues of provincial interest to be addressed in local development plans and goals to be  pursued in various policy areas. For instance, with respect to general development policy, the provincial interest  includes directing development toward areas where risk can be minimized and taking into account climate change  vulnerabilities. With regard to water, provincial interest includes the development of strategies to prioritize allocation  and implementation of conservation measures to build community resilience. The Regulation prohibits certain kinds of  development in or near water bodies and prescribes minimum setbacks for new development. The policy on planning  for agriculture recognizes the potential increased demand for food production in response to climate change and  encourages local authorities to promote food security. At a strategic level, the Regulation requires that each local  planning authority assess local vulnerabilities to climate change and consider existing climate change action plans  when preparing, amending or replacing the local development plan.     32 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  Appendix B  Additional resources on select decision-support tools  VISUALIZING CLIMATE  CHANGE IMPACTS  Local Climate Change Visioning and Landscape  Visualizations: Guidance Manual (2010).   This manual, published by the Centre for Advanced  Landscape Planning at the University of British Columbia,  assists communities in developing climate change visioning  processes.   http://www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/news/viz-guidance-manual/  ADAPTATION PLANNING GUIDANCE  Climate Change Adaptation Planning: A Handbook  for Small Canadian Communities (Canadian Institute  of Planners, 2011)  The handbook helps small Canadian communities prepare  and implement a climate change adaptation plan. The  handbook details the key steps that municipal planners  and decision makers can take to plan for climate change  adaptation and determine what strategic actions need to  be taken.   www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/ CIPReports/RURAL%20HANDBOOK%20FINAL%20COPY.PDF  Changing Climate, Changing Communities: Municipal  Climate Adaptation Guide and Workbook (ICLEI  Canada, 2010)  This guide provides a Canadian-based framework that  helps local governments develop an adaptation plan  that addresses the most significant climate risks and  opportunities for their community. The accompanying  workbook includes practical tools and exercises to support  practitioners during the planning process.  www.iclei.org/index.php?id=11710   RISK ASSESSMENT  Adapting to Climate Change: A Risk-based Guide for  Local Governments (Black et al., 2010)  This guide, based on risk-management guidelines from the  International and Canadian standards associations, uses a  simple, practical approach for identifying and ranking risks.  http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca.earth-sciences/ files/pdf/projdb/pdf/ris_e.pdf  Climate Change Adaptation Framework Manual  (Ministry of Sustainable Resource Development,  Alberta, 2010)  This risk management manual helps government and non- government organizations anticipate and prepare for the  economic and ecological impacts of climate change in a  comprehensive and consistent manner.  http://www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsPhotosPublications/Publications/ ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx  Managing the Risks of Climate Change – A Guide  for Arctic and Northern Communities (Centre for  Indigenous Environmental Resources, 2009).   This guide provides northern communities with a simple  and practical risk management process.  http://ccrm.cier.ca   CLIMATE PROJECTIONS  Plan2Adapt (Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium)  This Web site generates maps, plots and data describing  projected future climate conditions for British Columbia.  http://www.plan2adapt.ca/  Localizer (Canadian Climate Change  Scenarios Network)  On this Web site developed by Environment Canada, when  users enter a postal code, the site provides climate change  projections for future temperature and precipitation for  that location.  http://www.cccsn.ec.gc.ca/?page=viz-localizer  http://www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/news/viz-guidance-manual/ http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/RURAL%20HANDBOOK%20FINAL%20COPY.PDF http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/RURAL%20HANDBOOK%20FINAL%20COPY.PDF www.iclei.org/index.php?id=11710  http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca.earth-sciences/files/pdf/projdb/pdf/ris_e.pdf http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca.earth-sciences/files/pdf/projdb/pdf/ris_e.pdf http://www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsPhotosPublications/Publications/ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx http://www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsPhotosPublications/Publications/ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx http://ccrm.cier.ca http://www.plan2adapt.ca/ http://www.cccsn.ec.gc.ca/?page=viz-localizer   L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  33   A Guide for Quebec Municipalities for Developing  a Climate Change Adaption Plan (Élaborer un plan  d’adaptation aux changements climatiques. Guide  destiné au milieu municipal québécois [Ouranos,  2010])  This French-language guide uses five steps to help  municipalities identify climate risk, set adaptation priorities  and implement effective adaptation strategies.  http://ouranos.ca/media/publication/111_PlanadaptationCC- Guidemunicipalites-Ouranos.pdf   Climate Change Adaptation Resource Kit   (Columbia Basin Trust, ongoing)  The Columbia Basin Trust and partners developed this  Web site to share experiences and lessons learned from  year-long adaptation planning processes in Elkford and  Kimberley, British Columbia. The text focuses on the  communities’ experiences, resources dedicated, timelines  and lessons learned.  adaptationresourcekit.squarespace.com  Climate Change Planning Tools for First Nations  (Centre for Indigenous Environmental Resources,  2006)  The six guidebooks provide user-friendly and culturally  appropriate climate change and adaptation manuals to  guide First Nations through the planning process. They  outline a framework for decision making applicable to a  variety of contexts and permitting on-going modification.   www.cier.ca/information-and-resources/publications-and- products.aspx?id=412   Model Standard of Practice for Climate Change  Planning (Canadian Institute of Planners, 2011)  The standard includes two elements: (1) a statement that  establishes principles of responsible professional practice  for addressing climate change and (2) a framework to serve  as a model to planners as they consider climate change in  their professional practice.   http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/ Docs/Library/CIPReports/CIP%20STANDARD%20OF%20 PRACTICE%28ENGLISH%29.PDF  Planning Resource Guide: Climate Change Adaptation  through Land Use Planning (Manitoba government,  2011)  This resource guide was developed to help inform land use  planning and ensure that communities will be adaptable to  the most likely effects of climate change.  www.gov.mb.ca/ia/plups/pdf/cca.pdf   Canadian Communities’ Guidebook for Adaptation to  Climate Change (Bizikova et al., 2008)   The guidebook “provides a process closely tied to on- going planning cycles to help decision makers incorporate  climate change science, impacts, adaptation and mitigation  solutions into their sustainable development initiatives.”  http://fcm.ca/documents/tools/PCP/canadian_communities_ guidebook_for_adaptation_to_climate_change_EN.pdf  http://ouranos.ca/media/publication/111_PlanadaptationCC-Guidemunicipalites-Ouranos.pdf http://ouranos.ca/media/publication/111_PlanadaptationCC-Guidemunicipalites-Ouranos.pdf adaptationresourcekit.squarespace.com www.cier.ca/information-and-resources/publications-and-products.aspx?id=412 www.cier.ca/information-and-resources/publications-and-products.aspx?id=412 http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/CIP%20STANDARD%20OF%20PRACTICE%28ENGLISH%29.PDF http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/CIP%20STANDARD%20OF%20PRACTICE%28ENGLISH%29.PDF http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/Docs/Library/CIPReports/CIP%20STANDARD%20OF%20PRACTICE%28ENGLISH%29.PDF www.gov.mb.ca/ia/plups/pdf/cca.pdf http://fcm.ca/documents/tools/PCP/canadian_communities_guidebook_for_adaptation_to_climate_change_EN.pdf http://fcm.ca/documents/tools/PCP/canadian_communities_guidebook_for_adaptation_to_climate_change_EN.pdf   34 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  References INTRODUCTION 1 IPCC (2007). Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation   and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the  Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change. M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof,  P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson (Eds.). Cambridge, UK:  Cambridge University Press, 976pp.  2 Lemmen, D. S., Warren, F. J., Lacroix, J. and   Bush, E. (Eds.). (2008). From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada  in a Changing Climate 2007. Ottawa, Ont.: Government of  Canada. Retrieved from   http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/index_e.php.  3 Davoudi, S., Crawford, J., & Mehmood, A. (2009).  Planning for Climate Change: Strategies for Mitigation and  Adaptation for Spatial Planners. Sterling, Va.: Earthscan.   4 Wilson, E., & Piper, J. (2010). Spatial Planning and Climate  Change. Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon; New York:  Routledge.  5 Burby, R. J. (1998). (Ed.) Cooperating with Nature:  Confronting Natural Hazards with Land-Use Planning for  Sustainable Communities. Washington, D.C.: Joseph Henry  Press.  6 Davidson, G., & Bowron, B. (2012). Perspectives on   Climate Change: Benchmarking CIP Members. Ottawa,  Ont.: Canadian Institute of Planners. Retrieved from   www.planningforclimatechange.ca.  LAND USE PLANNING TOOLS Official plans 7 Hodge, G. (2008). Planning Canadian Communities: An   Introduction to the Principles, Practice, and Participants (5th  ed.). Toronto, Ont.: Thomson/Nelson.  8 City of Iqaluit. (2010). City of Iqaluit General Plan. By-law  703. Iqaluit, NU. Retrieved from http://www.city.iqaluit.nu.ca/ i18n/english/pdf/GeneralPlanOctober2010Eng.pdf.  9 District of Elkford. (2010). District of Elkford Official  Community Plan Bylaw No. 710, 2010 Schedule “A.”  Retrieved from www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan.  10 Gorecki, K., Walsh, M., & Zukiwsky, J. (2010).   District of Elkford: Climate Change Adaptation Strategy.  District of Elkford, B.C. Retrieved from   www.elkford.ca/include/get.php?nodeid=93.  Local plans on special matters  11  City of Montréal. (2012). Grands dossiers. Retrieved from   http://ville.montreal.qc.ca.  12 Greene, K., & Robichaud, A. G. (2010). Climate Change  Adaptation Action Plan for Stratford, P.E.I. Retrieved from  http://www.fcm.ca/documents/reports/PCP/climate_change_ adaptation_action_plan_for_stratford_pei_EN.pdf.  13 City of Edmonton. (2010). Draft Urban Forest Management  Plan. Edmonton, Alta.  14 City of Calgary. (2006). imagineCalgary Plan for Long  Range Urban Sustainability. Calgary, Alta. Retrieved   from http://www.imaginecalgary.ca/imagineCALGARY_long_ range_plan.pdf.  15 Timilsina, G. R., & Kralovic, P. R. (2005). Potential Effects of  Climate Change on the City of Calgary: Adapting to a New  Environment. Calgary, Alta.: Canadian Energy Research  Institute. Retrieved from   www.imaginecalgary.ca/library/imagineCALGARY_Climate_ Change_Megatrend_Paper.pdf.  Zoning 16 Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. (2010).   Citizens’ Guides to Land-use Planning. Toronto, Ont.  Retrieved from www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page338.aspx.  17 Quebec Ministry of Municipal Affairs, Regions and Land  Occupancy. (2011). Outils de réglementation, réglement de  zonage. Québec, Que.: Government of Quebec. Retrieved  from http://www.mamrot.gouv.qc.ca/amenagement-du-territoire/ guide-la-prise-de-decision-en-urbanisme/reglementation/ reglement-de-zonage.  18 Ontario Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. (2010).  InfoSheet: Planning for Climate Change. Toronto, Ont.  Retrieved from www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page6857.aspx.  19 See, for example, Section 911 (“Non-conforming uses  and siting”) of British Columbia Local Government Act,  RSBC 1996, c 323, Part 26 – Planning and Land Use  Management. Retrieved from http://canlii.ca/en/bc/laws/stat/ rsbc-1996-c-323/87653/part-31/rsbc-1996-c-323-part-31.html.  20 Platt, R. H. (1998). Planning and land use adjustments in  historical perspective. In R. J. Burby (Ed.), Cooperating  with Nature: Confronting Natural Hazards with Land-Use  Planning for Sustainable Communities. Washington, D.C.:  Joseph Henry Press.  21 Teter, K. (1987). Coping with Natural Hazards Through  Land Use Regulations: The Role of Local Governments.  Emmitsburg, Md.: National Emergency Training Center.  22 Kreutzwiser, R. D. (1988). Municipal Land Use Regulation  and the Great Lakes Shoreline Hazard in Ontario. Journal of  Great Lakes Research, 14(2), 142–147.  23 Communauté rurale Beaubassin-est. (2011).   ARRÊTÉ 09-1B. Grand-Barachois, N.B. Retrieved from  www.beaubassinest.ca/userfiles/file/09-1E%20Modifiant%20 l%27arr%C3%AAt%C3%A9%20adoptant%20le%20plan%20 rural.pdf.  http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/index_e.php www.planningforclimatechange.ca http://www.city.iqaluit.nu.ca/i18n/english/pdf/GeneralPlanOctober2010Eng.pdf http://www.city.iqaluit.nu.ca/i18n/english/pdf/GeneralPlanOctober2010Eng.pdf www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan www.elkford.ca/include/get.php?nodeid=93 http://ville.montreal.qc.ca http://www.fcm.ca/documents/reports/PCP/climate_change_adaptation_action_plan_for_stratford_pei_EN.pdf http://www.fcm.ca/documents/reports/PCP/climate_change_adaptation_action_plan_for_stratford_pei_EN.pdf http://www.imaginecalgary.ca/imagineCALGARY_long_range_plan.pdf http://www.imaginecalgary.ca/imagineCALGARY_long_range_plan.pdf www.imaginecalgary.ca/library/imagineCALGARY_Climate_Change_Megatrend_Paper.pdf www.imaginecalgary.ca/library/imagineCALGARY_Climate_Change_Megatrend_Paper.pdf www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page338.aspx http://www.mamrot.gouv.qc.ca/amenagement-du-territoire/guide-la-prise-de-decision-en-urbanisme/reglementation/reglement-de-zonage http://www.mamrot.gouv.qc.ca/amenagement-du-territoire/guide-la-prise-de-decision-en-urbanisme/reglementation/reglement-de-zonage http://www.mamrot.gouv.qc.ca/amenagement-du-territoire/guide-la-prise-de-decision-en-urbanisme/reglementation/reglement-de-zonage www.mah.gov.on.ca/Page6857.aspx http://canlii.ca/en/bc/laws/stat/rsbc-1996-c-323/87653/part-31/rsbc-1996-c-323-part-31.html http://canlii.ca/en/bc/laws/stat/rsbc-1996-c-323/87653/part-31/rsbc-1996-c-323-part-31.html www.beaubassinest.ca/userfiles/file/09-1E%20Modifiant%20l%27arr%C3%AAt%C3%A9%20adoptant%20le%20plan%20rural.pdf www.beaubassinest.ca/userfiles/file/09-1E%20Modifiant%20l%27arr%C3%AAt%C3%A9%20adoptant%20le%20plan%20rural.pdf www.beaubassinest.ca/userfiles/file/09-1E%20Modifiant%20l%27arr%C3%AAt%C3%A9%20adoptant%20le%20plan%20rural.pdf   L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  35   24 Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie. (2012). Lutte contre les îlots de  chaleur. Ville de Montréal. Retrieved from   http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_ pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL.  25 Rosemont–La Petite-Patrie. (2011). Toitures. Ville de  Montréal. Retrieved from http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/ page?_pageid=7357,82733669&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL.  Land subdivision and development controls 26  City of Toronto. (2008). Ahead of the Storm: Preparing   Toronto for Climate Change. Toronto, Ont. Retrieved from  www.toronto.ca/teo/pdf/ahead_of_the_storm.pdf.  27 City of Toronto. (2010). Toronto Green Standard For New  Low-Rise Non-Residential Development. Toronto, Ont.  Retrieved from www.toronto.ca/planning/environment/pdf/ lr_nonres_tech.pdf.  28 Halifax Regional Municipality. (2007). HRM Climate  Change: Developer’s Risk Management Guide. Halifax,  N.S. Retrieved from www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/ DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf.  29 Halifax Regional Municipality. (2006). Regional Municipal  Planning Strategy (Policy 2.2.5 and E-16). Halifax, N.S.  Retrieved from www.halifax.ca/regionalplanning/documents/ Regional_MPS.pdf.  30 Municipal Government Act, SNS 1998, c 18. (n.d.).  Retrieved from http://canlii.ca/t/lc4k.  Covenants and easements 31  Kibert, N. C. (2009). Green Building in the Residential   Development Context. In J. E. Furr, N. C. Kibert, J. T. Mayer,  & S. D. Sentman (Eds.), Green Building and Sustainable  Development: The Practical Legal Guide. Chicago, Ill.:  American Bar Association.  32 Atkins, J., Hillyer, A., & Kwasniak, A. (2004). Conservation  Easements, Covenants and Servitudes in Canada: A Legal  Review (Report No. 04–1). Ottawa, Ont.: The North  American Wetlands Conservation Council (Canada).  Retrieved from www.wetlandscanada.org/conseasecov04-1.pdf.  33 Yip, E.H. & Rivkin, O. (2009). Keeping it Green Through  Covenants and Easements. Vancouver, B.C.: McCarthy  Tétrault LLP. Retrieved from www.mccarthy.ca/pubs/Keeping_ it_Green_through_Covenants_and_Easements.pdf.  34 Environment Canada. (2011). The Canadian Ecological Gifts  Program Handbook: a legacy for tomorrow — a tax break  today. Ottawa, Ont.: Canadian Wildlife Service. Retrieved  from www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/B426E1B0-BA44-452C-A0FB- 3BD2427E70D5%5CTheCanadianEcologicalGiftsProgramHandbo ok2011.pdf.   35 Titus, J. G. (2011). Rolling Easements. Washington, D.C.:  United States Environmental Protection Agency. Retrieved  from www.epa.gov/cre/downloads/rollingeasementsprimer.pdf.  36 Islands Trust Fund. (2012). Protected Area Successes.  Retrieved from www.islandstrustfund.bc.ca.  37 Austin, M. A., Buffett, D. A., Nicolson, D. J., Scudder, G. G.  E., & Stevens, V. (2008). Taking Natures Pulse: The Status of  Biodiversity in British Columbia. Victoria, B.C.: Biodiversity  BC. Retrieved from www.biodiversitybc.org.  38 Islands Trust Fund. (2012). Regional Conservation Plan:  2011–2015. Retrieved from www.islandstrustfund.bc.ca.  39 City of Kamloops FireSmart Committee. (2008). City of  Kamloops Community Wildfire Protection Plan. Kamloops,  B.C. Retrieved from www.kamloops.ca/firerescue/pdfs/cwpp. pdf.  40 City of Kamloops. (1992). Council Policy: Development  in Urban/Wildland Interface Hazards Areas (No. EDS-8).  Kamloops, B.C. Retrieved from https://kamloops.civicweb.net/ Documents/DocumentDisplay.aspx?ID=8299.  Design guidelines 41 Gill, S. E., Handley, J. F., Ennos, A. R., & Pauleit, S. (2007).   Adapting Cities for Climate Change: The Role of the Green  Infrastructure. Built Environment, 33(1), 115–133.  42 Givoni, B. (1991). Impact of planted areas on urban  environmental quality: A review. Atmospheric Environment.  Part B. Urban Atmosphere, 25(3), 289–299.  43 Lisø, K. R., Aandahl, G., Eriksen, S., & Alfsen, K. (2003).  Preparing for climate change impacts in Norway’s built  environment. Building Research & Information, 31(3), 200– 209.  44 City of Regina. (1999). Xeriscape Workbook – A practical  guide to low-water, low-maintenance landscaping.   4th Edition. Regina, Sask. Retrieved from www.regina. ca/residents/water-sewer/Protecting_our_water/save-money/ benefits-xeriscaping/.  45 City of Toronto. (2007). Draft Design Guidelines for  “Greening” Surface Parking Lots. Toronto, Ont. Retrieved  from www.toronto.ca/planning/urbdesign/greening_parking_ lots.htm.  Environmental review of development projects 46  See, for example, Ontario Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990   (Chapter P.13), Sections 2 & 51(24) (http://www.e-laws. gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_statutes_90p13_e.htm)  & Ontario Environmental Assessment Act, R.S.O. 1990  (Chapter E.18), Section 3. http://canlii.ca/t/kxbr.  47 The Federal-Provincial-Territorial Committee on  Climate Change and Environmental Assessment.  (2003). Incorporating Climate Change Considerations  in Environmental Assessment: General Guidance for  Practitioners. Ottawa, Ont.: Canadian Environmental  Assessment Agency. Retrieved from http://publications.gc.ca/ pub?id=251921&sl=0.  http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7357,82287591&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7357,82733669&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL http://ville.montreal.qc.ca/portal/page?_pageid=7357,82733669&_dad=portal&_schema=PORTAL www.toronto.ca/teo/pdf/ahead_of_the_storm.pdf www.toronto.ca/planning/environment/pdf/lr_nonres_tech.pdf www.toronto.ca/planning/environment/pdf/lr_nonres_tech.pdf www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf www.halifax.ca/regionalplanning/documents/Regional_MPS.pdf www.halifax.ca/regionalplanning/documents/Regional_MPS.pdf http://canlii.ca/t/lc4k www.wetlandscanada.org/conseasecov04-1.pdf www.mccarthy.ca/pubs/Keeping_it_Green_through_Covenants_and_Easements.pdf www.mccarthy.ca/pubs/Keeping_it_Green_through_Covenants_and_Easements.pdf www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/B426E1B0-BA44-452C-A0FB-3BD2427E70D5%5CTheCanadianEcologicalGiftsProgramHandbook2011.pdf www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/B426E1B0-BA44-452C-A0FB-3BD2427E70D5%5CTheCanadianEcologicalGiftsProgramHandbook2011.pdf www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/B426E1B0-BA44-452C-A0FB-3BD2427E70D5%5CTheCanadianEcologicalGiftsProgramHandbook2011.pdf www.epa.gov/cre/downloads/rollingeasementsprimer.pdf www.islandstrustfund.bc.ca www.biodiversitybc.org www.islandstrustfund.bc.ca www.kamloops.ca/firerescue/pdfs/cwpp.pdf www.kamloops.ca/firerescue/pdfs/cwpp.pdf https://kamloops.civicweb.net/Documents/DocumentDisplay.aspx?ID=8299 https://kamloops.civicweb.net/Documents/DocumentDisplay.aspx?ID=8299 www.regina.ca/residents/water-sewer/Protecting_our_water/save-money/benefits-xeriscaping/ www.regina.ca/residents/water-sewer/Protecting_our_water/save-money/benefits-xeriscaping/ www.regina.ca/residents/water-sewer/Protecting_our_water/save-money/benefits-xeriscaping/ www.toronto.ca/planning/urbdesign/greening_parking_lots.htm www.toronto.ca/planning/urbdesign/greening_parking_lots.htm http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_statutes_90p13_e.htm http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/html/statutes/english/elaws_statutes_90p13_e.htm http://canlii.ca/t/kxbr http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=251921&sl=0 http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=251921&sl=0   36 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  48 Vasseur, L., & Catto, N. (2008). Atlantic Canada. In D. S.  Lemmen, F. J. Warren, & J. Lacroix (Eds.), From Impacts  to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007 (pp.  119–170). Ottawa, Ont.: Government of Canada.  49 Canadian Environmental Assessment Act, SC 1992, c 37.  Retrieved from http://canlii.ca/t/kwcj.  50 Public Works and Government Services Canada. (2010).  CEAA Screening Report: Disposal and Redevelopment of a  Portion of the Canadian Coast Guard Base (PWGSC Project  No. R.720000.141). Halifax, N.S.: Government of Canada.  51 Auer, M. T. (2011). Monitoring, Modeling and Management  of Nearshore Water Quality in the Ajax-Pickering Region of  Lake Ontario. Waterloo, Ont. Retrieved from www.ajax.ca/ en/doingbusinessinajax/PDENG_D_Report_by_Dr_Martin_Auer. asp.  52 Ontario Ministry of Environment. (2011). Approved   Class Environmental Assessments. Retrieved from   www.ene.gov.on.ca/environment/en/industry/%20assessment_ and_approvals/environmental_assessments/STDPROD_075722. html.  DECISION-SUPPORT TOOLS 53 Riedlinger, D., & Berkes, F. (2001). Contributions of   Traditional Knowledge to Understanding Climate Change in  the Canadian Arctic. Polar Record, 37(203), 315–328.  54 Hallegatte, S. (2009). Strategies to adapt to an uncertain  climate change. Global Environmental Change, 19(2), 240– 247.  55  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  (2011). Assessing the costs and benefits of adaptation  options: an overview of approaches. Bonn, Germany.  Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/nairobi_work_ programme/knowledge_resources_and_publications/application/ pdf/2011_nwp_costs_benefits_adaptation.pdf.  Assessments of community vulnerability and risk 56 Carter, T.R., R.N. Jones, X. Lu, S. Bhadwal, C. Conde, L.O.   Mearns, B.C. O’Neill, M.D.A. Rounsevell and M.B. Zurek.  (2007). New Assessment Methods and the Characterisation  of Future Conditions. Climate Change 2007: Impacts,  Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working  Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, M.L. Parry,  O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E.  Hanson (Eds.) Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press,  133–171.  57 UNFCCC 2010. Adaptation Assessment, Planning and  Practice: An overview from the Nairobi work programme  on impacts, vulnerability and adaptation to climate change.  Bonn, Germany. Retrieved from http://unfccc.int/resource/ docs/publications/10_nwp_adap_assess_en.pdf.  58 Adger, Neil W. (2006). Vulnerability. Global Environmental  Change 16(3): 268–281.  59 Berry, P., McBean, G., & Séguin, J. (2008). Vulnerabilities  to Natural Hazards and Extreme Weather. In J. Séguin  (Ed.), Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian  Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity.  Ottawa, Ont.: Health Canada.   60 Ebi, K. L. (Ed.). (2012). Protecting Health from Climate  Change: Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment.  World Health Organization and Pan American Health  Organization. Retrieved from www.who.int/globalchange/ publications/Final_Climate_Change.pdf.  61 Berry, P., Richters, K., Clarke, K.-L., & Brisbois, M.-C. (2011).  Assessment of Vulnerability to the Health   Impacts of Extreme Heat in the City of Windsor.   Prepared for City of Windsor. Retrieved from   www.cleanairpartnership.org/files/Windsor%20Heat%20 Health%20Vulnerability%20Assessment%20-%20Final%20 %28Sept%2016.%202011%29.pdf.  62 Richters, K. (2011). Update Pilot Heat Alert and Response  System (HARS). LiveLink Report # 15240 MH2011. Windsor,  Ont.: Environment & Transportation Standing Committee,  City of Windsor. Retrieved from   http://www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing- Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety- Standing-Committee/Documents/ETC_Report%202.pdf.  63 Health Canada. (2011). Adapting to Extreme Heat Events:  Guidelines for Assessing Health Vulnerability. Ottawa, Ont.  Retrieved from www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/climat/adapt/ index-eng.php.  64 Hennessey, R., Jones, S., Duerden, F., & Swales, S. (2009).  Dawson Climate Change Adaptation Plan. Dawson, Y.T.:  Northern Climate ExChange. Retrieved from http://www. yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/Dawson_CAP_final_2011.pdf.  Climate projections 65 Baede, A. P. M. (Ed.). (2007). Annex I: Glossary. In S.   Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K. B.  Averyt, M. Tignor, et al. (Eds.), Climate Change 2007: The  Physical Science Basis: Contribution of Working Group I to  the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK and New York,  USA: Cambridge University Press.  66 Lemmen, D. S., Warren, F. J., Lacroix, J., & Bush, E. (Eds.).  (2008). From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing  Climate 2007. Ottawa, Ont.: Government of Canada.  Retrieved from http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/ index_e.php.  67 Meehl, G. A., Stocker, T. F., Collins, W. D., Friedlingstein, P.,  Gaye, A. T., Gregory, J. M., Kitoh, A., Knutti, R., Murphy,  J. M., Noda, A., Raper, S. C. B., Watterson, I. G., Weaver,  A. J., & Zhao, Z.-C. (2007). Global Climate Projections. In  S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis,  K. B. Averyt, M. Tignor, & H. L. Miller (Eds.), Climate  Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of  Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge,  United Kingdom and New York, N.Y., USA: Cambridge  University Press.   http://canlii.ca/t/kwcj www.ajax.ca/en/doingbusinessinajax/PDENG_D_Report_by_Dr_Martin_Auer.asp www.ajax.ca/en/doingbusinessinajax/PDENG_D_Report_by_Dr_Martin_Auer.asp www.ajax.ca/en/doingbusinessinajax/PDENG_D_Report_by_Dr_Martin_Auer.asp www.ene.gov.on.ca/environment/en/industry/%20assessment_and_approvals/environmental_assessments/STDPROD_075722.html www.ene.gov.on.ca/environment/en/industry/%20assessment_and_approvals/environmental_assessments/STDPROD_075722.html www.ene.gov.on.ca/environment/en/industry/%20assessment_and_approvals/environmental_assessments/STDPROD_075722.html http://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/nairobi_work_programme/knowledge_resources_and_publications/application/pdf/2011_nwp_costs_benefits_adaptation.pdf http://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/nairobi_work_programme/knowledge_resources_and_publications/application/pdf/2011_nwp_costs_benefits_adaptation.pdf http://unfccc.int/files/adaptation/nairobi_work_programme/knowledge_resources_and_publications/application/pdf/2011_nwp_costs_benefits_adaptation.pdf http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/publications/10_nwp_adap_assess_en.pdf http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/publications/10_nwp_adap_assess_en.pdf www.who.int/globalchange/publications/Final_Climate_Change.pdf www.who.int/globalchange/publications/Final_Climate_Change.pdf www.cleanairpartnership.org/files/Windsor%20Heat%20Health%20Vulnerability%20Assessment%20-%20Final%20%28Sept%2016.%202011%29.pdf www.cleanairpartnership.org/files/Windsor%20Heat%20Health%20Vulnerability%20Assessment%20-%20Final%20%28Sept%2016.%202011%29.pdf www.cleanairpartnership.org/files/Windsor%20Heat%20Health%20Vulnerability%20Assessment%20-%20Final%20%28Sept%2016.%202011%29.pdf http://www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETC_Report%202.pdf http://www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETC_Report%202.pdf http://www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETC_Report%202.pdf http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/climat/adapt/index-eng.php http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/ewh-semt/pubs/climat/adapt/index-eng.php http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/Dawson_CAP_final_2011.pdf http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/Dawson_CAP_final_2011.pdf http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/index_e.php http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/index_e.php   L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  |  37   68 Forbes, D. L., Manson, G. K., Charles, J., Thompson, K. R.  and Taylor, R. B. (2009). Halifax Harbour Extreme Water  Levels in the Context of Climate Change: Scenarios for  a 100-year Planning Horizon. Ottawa, Ont.: Geological  Survey of Canada, Open File 6346, iv+22 p. Retrieved  from http://www.halifax.ca/regionalplanning/documents/HRM- OF_v5.pdf.  69 Halifax Regional Municipality, Geological Survey of Canada  and Natural Resources Canada. (2010, February 9). Sea  Level Rise Adaptation Planning for Halifax Harbour. Halifax,  N.S.: Presentation to the Committee-of-the-Whole – Halifax  Regional Council. Retrieved from www.halifax.ca/council/ agendasc/documents/100209cow4.pdf.  70 Picketts, I. M., Werner, A. T., Murdock, T. Q., Curry, J.,  Déry, S. J., & Dyer, D. (2012). Planning for climate change  adaptation: lessons learned from a community-based  workshop. Environmental Science & Policy, 17(0), 82–93.  71 Picketts, I. M., Werner, A. T., & Murdock, T. Q. (2009).  Climate Change in Prince George: Summary of Past Trends  and Future Projections. Victoria, B.C.: Pacific Climate  Impacts Consortium, University of Victoria. Retrieved from  http://pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Werner. ClimateChangePrinceGeorge.Aug2009.pdf.  72 City of Prince George. (2010). myPG: an Integrated  Community Sustainability Plan for Prince George. Prince  George, B.C. Retrieved from http://mypg.ca.  Scenario planning 73 Dessai, S., Lu, X., & Risbey, J. S. (2005). On the role   of climate scenarios for adaptation planning. Global  Environmental Change, 15(2), 87–97.  74 Parry, M. L., Canziani, O. F., Palutikof, J. P., van der  Linden, R. J., & Hanson, C. E. (Eds.). (2007). Appendix I:  Glossary. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and  Vulnerability: Contribution of Working Group II to the  Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University  Press.  75 Chakraborty, A., Kaza, N., Knaap, G.-J., & Deal, B. (2011).  Robust Plans and Contingent Plans. Journal of the American  Planning Association, 77(3), 251–266.  76 Hennessey, R., & Streicker, J. (2010). Future Histories  of Whitehorse: Scenarios of Change. Whitehorse, Y.T.:  Northern Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre,  Yukon College. Retrieved from http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/ downloads/future-histories-of-whitehorse.pdf.   77 Hennessey, R., & Streicker, J. (2011). Whitehorse Climate  Change Adaptation Plan. Whitehorse, Y.T.: Northern  Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College.  Retrieved from http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/ Whitehorse_CAP_Plan_FINAL.pdf.  Visualizing climate change impacts 78 Pond, E., Schroth, O., Sheppard, S., Muir-Owen, S., Lipa, I.,   Campbell, C., Salter, J., et al. (2010). Local Climate Change  Visioning and Landscape Visualizations: Guidance Manual  (Version 1.1). Vancouver, B.C. Retrieved from www.calp. forestry.ubc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/CALP-Visioning- Guidance-Manual-Version-1.1.pdf.   79 Medical Officer of Health. (2010). Hot Weather  Response Plan Update. Toronto, Ont.: City of Toronto.  Retrieved from www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/hl/bgrd/ backgroundfile-28173.pdf.  80 Shaw, A., Sheppard, S., Burch, S., Flanders, D., Wiek,  A., Carmichael, J., Robinson, J., et al. (2009). Making  local futures tangible—Synthesizing, downscaling, and  visualizing climate change scenarios for participatory  capacity building. Global Environmental Change, 19(4),  447–463.  81 Burch, S., Sheppard, S. R. ., Shaw, A., & Flanders, D.  (2010). Planning for climate change in a flood-prone  community: municipal barriers to policy action and the use  of visualizations as decision-support tools. Journal of Flood  Risk Management, 3(2), 126–139.  82 Natural Resources Canada, & Canadian Institute of  Planners. (2007). Municipal Case Studies: Climate Change  and the Planning Process – Delta. Ottawa, Ont. Retrieved  from www.cip-icu.ca/web/la/en/fi/4c182dbfef17451990493ccf748 456db/get_file.asp.  Adaptation planning guidebooks 83 Richters, K. (2011). Update on the Climate Change   Adaptation Initiative – Milestone 2. LiveLink Report # 15549  EI/10822. Windsor, Ont.: Environment & Transportation  Standing Committee, City of Windsor. Retrieved  from www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/ Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public- Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETSC%20rpt%20 35_20120301095541.pdf.  84 Mario, S. (2011). Basement Flooding – June 5 & 6, 2010  Rainfall Event. LiveLink Report # 15162 SW2011. Windsor,  Ont.: City of Windsor. Retrieved from   www.citywindsor.ca/residents/maintenanceandfieldservices/ Sewers-/Documents/Basment%20Flooding%20Report.pdf.   85 ICLEI Canada. (2010). Changing Climate, Changing  Communities: Guide and Workbook for Municipal Climate  Adaptation. Toronto, Ont. Retrieved from   www.icleicanada.org/images/icleicanada/pdfs/changing_climage_ changing_communities.pdf.  86  Province of Nova Scotia. (2011). Municipal Climate Change  Action Plan Guidebook. Halifax, N.S.: Published by Service  Nova Scotia and Municipal Relations & Canada-Nova  Scotia Infrastructure Secretariat. Retrieved from http://www. nsinfrastructure.ca/pages/Municipal-Climate-Change-Action-Plan- Guidebook1.aspx.  http://www.halifax.ca/regionalplanning/documents/HRM-OF_v5.pdf http://www.halifax.ca/regionalplanning/documents/HRM-OF_v5.pdf www.halifax.ca/council/agendasc/documents/100209cow4.pdf www.halifax.ca/council/agendasc/documents/100209cow4.pdf http://pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Werner.ClimateChangePrinceGeorge.Aug2009.pdf http://pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/Werner.ClimateChangePrinceGeorge.Aug2009.pdf http://mypg.ca http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/future-histories-of-whitehorse.pdf http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/future-histories-of-whitehorse.pdf http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/Whitehorse_CAP_Plan_FINAL.pdf http://www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/downloads/Whitehorse_CAP_Plan_FINAL.pdf www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/CALP-Visioning-Guidance-Manual-Version-1.1.pdf www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/CALP-Visioning-Guidance-Manual-Version-1.1.pdf www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/CALP-Visioning-Guidance-Manual-Version-1.1.pdf www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/hl/bgrd/backgroundfile-28173.pdf www.toronto.ca/legdocs/mmis/2010/hl/bgrd/backgroundfile-28173.pdf http://www.cip-icu.ca/web/la/en/fi/4c182dbfef17451990493ccf748456db/get_file.asp http://www.cip-icu.ca/web/la/en/fi/4c182dbfef17451990493ccf748456db/get_file.asp www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETSC%20rpt%2035_20120301095541.pdf www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETSC%20rpt%2035_20120301095541.pdf www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETSC%20rpt%2035_20120301095541.pdf www.citywindsor.ca/cityhall/committeesofcouncil/Standing-Committees/Environment-Transportation-and-Public-Safety-Standing-Committee/Documents/ETSC%20rpt%2035_20120301095541.pdf www.citywindsor.ca/residents/maintenanceandfieldservices/Sewers-/Documents/Basment%20Flooding%20Report.pdf www.citywindsor.ca/residents/maintenanceandfieldservices/Sewers-/Documents/Basment%20Flooding%20Report.pdf www.icleicanada.org/images/icleicanada/pdfs/changing_climage_changing_communities.pdf www.icleicanada.org/images/icleicanada/pdfs/changing_climage_changing_communities.pdf http://www.nsinfrastructure.ca/pages/Municipal-Climate-Change-Action-Plan-Guidebook1.aspx http://www.nsinfrastructure.ca/pages/Municipal-Climate-Change-Action-Plan-Guidebook1.aspx http://www.nsinfrastructure.ca/pages/Municipal-Climate-Change-Action-Plan-Guidebook1.aspx   38 |  L A N D  U S E  P L A N N I N G  T O O L S  APPENDIX A: PROVINCIAL AND  TERRITORIAL ROLE IN LOCAL  ADAPTATION PLANNING 87 Hogg, P. W. (1997). Constitutional Law of Canada    (4th ed.). Scarborough, Ont.: Carswell. p.569.  88  Constitution Act, 1867, s.92.  89  Nunavut Act, SC 1993, c 28. (n.d.). Retrieved from   http://canlii.ca/t/j0fq.  90  Northwest Territories Act, RSC 1985, c N-27. (n.d.) Retrieved  from http://canlii.ca/t/hzrv.  91 Yukon Act, SC 2002, c 7. (n.d.). Retrieved from   http://canlii.ca/t/j10j.  92 Planning Act, RSNWT (Nu) 1988, c P-7. (n.d.). Retrieved  from http://canlii.ca/t/khn5.  93  Government of the Northwest Territories. (1998). Land  Development Policy 21.17. Yellowknife, N.W.T. Retrieved  from http://www.gov.nt.ca/publications/policies/maca/Land_ Development_%2821.17%29.pdf.  94 Government of Nunavut. (2003). Nunavut Climate Change  Strategy. Iqaluit, NU. Retrieved from   http://www.gov.nu.ca/env/ccs.shtml.  95 Government of Yukon. (2009). Yukon Government Climate  Change Action Plan. Whitehorse, Y.T. Retrieved from http:// www.env.gov.yk.ca/pdf/YG_Climate_Change_Action_Plan.pdf.  96 Government of the Northwest Territories. (2008).  NWT Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Report.  Yellowknife, NT. Retrieved from http://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/_ live/documents/content/NWT_Climate_Change_Impacts_and_ Adaptation_Report.pdf.  97  Government of British Columbia. (2008). Climate  Action Plan. Victoria, B.C.: British Columbia Ministry of  Environment. Retrieved from http://www.livesmartbc.ca/ government/plan.html.  98 BC Ministry of Environment. (2011). Climate Change  Adaption Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood  Hazard Land Use: Guidelines for Management of Coastal  Flood Hazard Land Use. See pages 16–18. Retrieved from  www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/pdfs_word/coastal_ flooded_land_guidelines.pdf.  99 Prince Edward Island. (2008). Prince Edward Island and  Climate Change: A Strategy for Reducing the Impacts  of Global Warming. Charlottetown, P.E.I.: Dept. of  Environment, Energy and Forestry. Retrieved from   www.gov.pe.ca/photos/original/env_globalstr.pdf.  100 Provincial Planning Regulation, Man Reg 81/2011. Retrieved  from http://canlii.ca/t/l3c9.  http://canlii.ca/t/j0fq http://canlii.ca/t/hzrv http://canlii.ca/t/j10j http://canlii.ca/t/khn5 http://www.gov.nt.ca/publications/policies/maca/Land_Development_%2821.17%29.pdf http://www.gov.nt.ca/publications/policies/maca/Land_Development_%2821.17%29.pdf http://www.gov.nu.ca/env/ccs.shtml http://www.env.gov.yk.ca/pdf/YG_Climate_Change_Action_Plan.pdf http://www.env.gov.yk.ca/pdf/YG_Climate_Change_Action_Plan.pdf http://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/_live/documents/content/NWT_Climate_Change_Impacts_and_Adaptation_Report.pdf http://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/_live/documents/content/NWT_Climate_Change_Impacts_and_Adaptation_Report.pdf http://www.enr.gov.nt.ca/_live/documents/content/NWT_Climate_Change_Impacts_and_Adaptation_Report.pdf http://www.livesmartbc.ca/government/plan.html http://www.livesmartbc.ca/government/plan.html www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/pdfs_word/coastal_flooded_land_guidelines.pdf www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/pdfs_word/coastal_flooded_land_guidelines.pdf www.gov.pe.ca/photos/original/env_globalstr.pdf http://canlii.ca/t/l3c9   1.0 Introduction  2.0 Land use planning tools  2.1 Official plans  2.2 Local plans on special matters   2.3 Zoning   2.4 Land subdivision and development controls  2.5 Covenants and easements  2.6 Design guidelines  2.7 Environmental review of development projects    3.0 Decision-support tools  3.1 �Assessments of community vulnerability and risk  3.2 Climate projections  3.3 Scenario planning  3.4 Visualizing climate change impacts  3.5 Adaptation planning guidebooks   Appendix A Provincial and territorial role in local adaptation planning  Appendix B Additional resources on select decision-support tools  References  