                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Municipal Climate Change Action Plan Guidebook Canada-Nova Scotia Agreement on the Transfer of Federal Gas Tax Funds  www.nsinfrastructure.ca     CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  © Crown copyright, Province of Nova Scotia, 2011  Published by:  Service Nova Scotia and Municipal relations  Canada-Nova Scotia infrastructure Secretariat  Published November 2011   For further information contact:  Service Nova Scotia and Municipal relations  Canada-Nova Scotia infrastructure Secretariat  Maritime Centre, 14 North  1505 Barrington Street  Po Box 216  Halifax, NS  B3J 2M4  rene Frigault, Planning and development officer  Federal Gas Tax Fund  e:  frigaurj@gov.ns.ca   P:  (902) 424-2088  F:  (902) 424-0821     Guidebook prepared by:  Graham Fisher, Planner  Service Nova Scotia and Municipal relations  e:  fishergr@gov.ns.ca  P:  (902) 424-2990     CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN i  Purpose The purpose of this guide and the accompanying template is to  help municipalities prepare Municipal Climate Change Action  Plans (MCCAP) that meet the municipal obligation described in  the 2010 - 2014 Municipal Funding Agreement.  The guide aims  to help municipalities reduce greenhouse gas emissions and  identify priorities for climate change adaptation.  On December 17, 2008, the extension of the Canada-Nova  Scotia Agreement on the Transfer of Federal Gas Tax Revenues  was announced by the Governments of Canada and Nova  Scotia. The Gas Tax Fund Agreement was originally signed in  September 2005. It provided $145.2 million in federal funding  to invest in eligible municipal infrastructure projects from 2005  to 2010.   Additional gas tax funding of more than $223 million over four  years, starting in 2010, will enable municipalities to continue  to invest in environmentally sustainable infrastructure projects  that contribute to reduced greenhouse gas emissions, cleaner  water or cleaner air. The Gas Tax Fund promotes the economic,  social, environmental and cultural sustainability of Nova Scotia  municipalities.  As a requirement for the 2010 - 2014 Gas Tax Agreement and  the Municipal Funding Agreements (MFAs), municipalities will  be required to prepare and submit to Service Nova Scotia and  Municipal Relations (SNSMR) a Municipal Climate Change  Action Plan (MCCAP) by December 31, 2013.  The MCCAP will be an amendment to the Integrated  Community Sustainability Plans (ICSP), which were prepared  by municipalities and submitted to the province in March 2010.  The MCCAP will focus on both climate change adaptation and  mitigation and will describe how municipalities plan to respond  to climate change.   This handbook has been prepared to serve as a guide and to  assist municipalities in the preparation of their Municipal  Climate Change Action Plan.  In addition, the MCCAP will  move Nova Scotia towards honouring commitments made in  Toward a Green Future: Nova Scotia’s Climate Change Action  Plan, specifically:  Action 48 - Amend funding agreements with  municipalities by 2010 to require climate change strategies in  municipal Integrated Community Sustainability Plans.   The guide is divided into three parts, with two accompanying  appendices:   Part One General Background  Part Two Adaptation  Part Three Mitigation  Appendix A MCCAP Mandatory Plan Content    & Plan Templates  Appendix B Tools, Guidelines and Resources  The costs associated with the development of the MCCAP may  be funded through the Federal Gas Tax Transfer Program, in  whole or in part. The costs of engaging in-house resources are  limited as per Schedule 2, section 1 of the MFAs.   For more information, refer to the Municipal Funding  Agreement located on the infrastructure website:  www.nsinfrastructure.ca  Final MCCAP report Submission date:  december 31, 2013  Submissions can be sent to:  Service Nova Scotia & Municipal relations Maritime Building 1505 Barrington Street Po Box 216 Halifax NS   B3J 2M4  Submission Format: •  One copy printed and bound •  One copy on digital compact disc  Contacts: Graham Fisher, Planner, SNSMr (902) 424-2990 or fishergr@gov.ns.ca  rene Frigault, Planning & development officer, CNSiS (902) 424-2088 or frigaurj@gov.ns.ca    ii CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 1 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  introduction Climate change refers to both the warming of the earth’s  atmosphere and oceans, in addition to an increase in the natural  variability of  the climate. In Nova Scotia climate change poses  risks to communities. An increase in the frequency of extreme  weather events, changes in water availability and quality, sea  level rise and changes to the performance of infrastructure  systems, are creating a need for municipalities to change the way  they manage their capital assets and operations.   In the past few years there has been a remarkable increase in  the level of awareness associated with climate change. From  the municipal perspective, this awareness is focused toward  understanding how these changes impact communities. It is  the combination of historical evidence, anecdotal observations  and mounting scientific support that is increasing awareness  among municipal administrators and councillors about potential  climate change impacts. Concerns about causes and effect  have now found their way into municipal council chambers; as  evidence and first-hand experience demonstrates that changing  climate will cause varied and mostly harmful effects. Damage  resulting from climate change creates a financial burden on  municipalities, and for those officials in municipal governments  who must now plan for an uncertain future, strategies for  adapting to climate change and mitigating against climate  change are becoming extremely important.   For many municipalities, adaptation to climate change is  a challenge that can appear to be complex. This is mainly  because managing risk involves uncertain outcomes and  debatable probabilities. Moreover, every community within  Nova Scotia is unique in its setting and people, and therefore  faces environmental and social implications that will differ  from those of neighbouring communities. Even when climate  change threats are understood, the localized nature of impacts  and the seemingly distant timeframes involved can make it hard  to design and implement policies designed to address climate  change. Identifying a suitable approach to managing climate  change is often difficult, however communities across the world  now recognize that a planned approach to dealing with the issues  helps build resilience and minimize risks.   understanding Mitigation & Adaptation There are two main responses to tackling the issues related to  climate change: mitigation, and adaptation. This guide presents  processes designed to assist municipalities address both of these.  Mitigation Mitigation is defined as a human intervention to reduce the  sources or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases. Examples  include using fossil fuels more efficiently for industrial  processes or electricity generation, switching to renewable  energy (solar energy or wind power), improving the insulation  of buildings, and expanding forests and other “sinks” to remove  greater amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. The  objective of mitigation efforts is to reduce greenhouse gas  emissions (GHG), with the result of lowering the volume of  carbon that enters the atmosphere on an annual basis.   Mitigation actions over the long-term will reduce GHG levels  in the atmosphere and help to reduce the heating trends that  are behind many of the climate changes we are currently  experiencing. Mitigation is an extremely important aspect  of dealing with climate change, and many of the province’s  municipalities have already undertaken actions, through their  ICSP that fall into the category of climate change mitigation.  The starting point for most of these actions involves an energy- use and greenhouse gas emissions inventory. The inventory  allows municipalities to determine where they consume energy  and the amount of GHG they emit. This baseline information  is critical for implementing policies to reduce greenhouse gas  emissions and develop energy conservation programs.   Energy conservation programs help local governments and  citizens manage energy costs and reduce the production of  harmful carbon dioxide emissions, which contribute to climate  change and affect public health. Conserving energy and reducing  overall energy demand is becoming an important part of both  daily and long-term municipal management decision-making.  The recognition that energy prices will continue to rise into  the near future, in addition to the inevitable development of a  carbon market, makes energy management an important issue  for municipalities, both now and into the future.  Adaptation Adaptation to climate change is an essential compliment to  mitigation. Adaptation is viewed as: an adjustment in natural  or human systems in response to actual or expected climatic  effects, which moderate harm, or takes advantage of beneficial  opportunities.    The main goals of adaptation usually include: alleviating current  and projected future impacts; reducing sensitivity and exposure  to climate-related hazards; and increasing resiliency to climatic  and non-climatic stressors.   PArT oNe General Background    2 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Successful adaptation does not mean that negative impacts  will not occur, only that they will be less severe than would be  experienced had no adaptation occurred. Simply put, adaptation  is all about understanding climate impacts and effects, in order  to undertake substantive actions that make communities and  municipal investments more resilient to the harmful effects of  weather and climate. In addition, actions undertaken may also  capitalize on any positive long-term opportunities that will result  from these changes.   Municipalities with adaptive climate change initiatives and  actions already described in detail in their ICSP documents  will have a head-start in the development of the adaptation  requirements of the MCCAP. Work already completed can be  transferred directly into the appropriate section of the final plan,  and will form the foundation for any additional actions that  may be result from working through the adaptation planning  framework described in Part Four of this guide.   Be Prepared: The Benefits of  Planning for Climate Change Planning at the municipal and community level presents  an important avenue for local adaptation as well as for  greenhouse gas mitigation; and there are a number of reasons  why municipalities should be actively involved in planning  for climate change. The foremost, is that many impacts and  hazards associated with climate change translate into issues  that are local in nature, and directly affect communities, people  and businesses. Other reasons to plan include the protection of  municipal investments (such as infrastructure and municipally- owned and operated facilities) because climate change can  seriously damage expensive infrastructure and affect the delivery  of municipal services. One of the most widely accepted, and  effective ways to mange climate change within the context of  municipal operations, is to develop a plan or strategy that strives  to understand the problems and present realistic approaches to  dealing with them.   Municipalities cannot simply rely on the assumption that the  prevailing climate will be more or less the same as it was over  the past 50 to 100 years. We can expect to live in a climate with  different rainfall patterns, warmer temperatures, more frequent  storms, and severe weather events. These changes in climate will  directly affect municipalities across Nova Scotia. In particular,  infrastructure location and design, where and how land is zoned  and subdivided for development, how water and wastewater  treatment plants, or how local roads and other municipal assets  are maintained, renewed and managed.  estimated Storm damage Costs  Hurricane Juan, 2003 – 100 million  Meat Cove, oct. 2010 – 7.2 million  Central Nova, dec. 2010 – 13 million  Southwest Nova, Nov. 2010 – 5.6 million  Early adoption of policies on climate change will help to  develop a strategic approach to determining where to best focus  municipal efforts, resources and new infrastructure expenditures.  Planning for climate change helps to make decisions more  cost-effective and also helps to guard against unforeseen  and burdensome costs. This approach is in direct opposition  to reactive policies and actions that attempt to minimize  consequences after an event that has already occurred. A reactive  approach has been shown over and over to be far more costly to  municipalities. Hurricane Juan, for example, is estimated to have  cost over 100 million dollars in damages.  How Municipalities will be affected:  rising costs of damaged infrastructure  Protection and repair  Public safety  drinking water quality  Wastewater and Storm water management  liability  Public expectation  Like any program, the sooner municipalities begin to plan  for climate change, the more likely the behavior will become  institutionalized, and integrated into daily practice so that  eventually, all decisions will be framed within a context that  ensures that climate change criteria are applied.  Public Participation For the purposes of the MCCAP the public participation  component of the plan will be adequately covered through the  inclusion of stakeholders in the process (see Part Two, Step  One). Municipalities may also expand this part of the process to  involve a broader scope of public participation.  Regional Action Plans Municipalities can work together on a regional level to tackle  common impacts, issues and problems associated with climate  change, at both the mitigation and adaptation levels. Regional  collaboration allows municipalities to pool resources which can  be directed towards regional-scale objectives; and wherever  possible, municipalities are encouraged to work together in this  capacity.     MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 3 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Municipalities that do wish to work with one another should  contact SNSMR to understand what the final plan content  would entail, and what individual MCCAP, MFA and Gas  Tax responsibilities remain, regardless of the inter-municipal  adaptation partnership.   department of environment  Climate Change Portal During the preparation of the MCCAP, municipalities should  contact or visit the website of the Climate Change Directorate  with Nova Scotia Environment (NSE). The Climate Change  Directorate actively gathers and conducts research relating to  climate change as it applies to Nova Scotia.   The Climate Change Directorate also collects and disseminates  provincial and local climate data, in addition to providing other  types of information and resources which apply to both climate  change adaptation and mitigation.  The Directorate also host and administers a Climate Change  Adaptation Clearinghouse that houses information that will help  your municipality find information about adapting to climate  change.   http://www.gov.ns.ca/nse/climate.change/  Climate Change Directorate Adaptation Clearinghouse: http://climatechange.gov.ns.ca/content/adaptation  Acronyms and definitions  Acronyms  AER Annual Expenditure Report CIP  Capital Investment Plan CNSIS  Canada/Nova Scotia Infrastructure Secretariat GHG Greenhouse Gases ICSP Integrated Community Sustainability Plan LUB Land Use Bylaw MCCAP  Municipal Climate Change Action Plan MFA Municipal Funding Agreement MPS Municipal Planning Strategy SNSMR  Service Nova Scotia and Municipal Relations UNSM  Union of Nova Scotia Municipalities  Definitions  (Source IPCC 2007)  Adaptation:  Initiatives and measures to reduce the  vulnerability of natural and human systems against actual or  expected climate change effects. Various types of adaptation  exist, e.g. anticipatory and reactive, private and public, and  autonomous and planned. Examples are raising river or coastal  dikes, the substitution of more temperature-shock resistant  plants for sensitive ones, etc.  Anthropogenic:  Caused or influenced by humans.  Anthropogenic carbon dioxide is that portion of carbon dioxide  in the atmosphere that is produced directly by human activities,  such as the burning of fossil fuels, rather than by such processes  as respiration and decay.  Adaptive Capacity: The whole of capabilities, resources  and institutions of a country or region to implement effective  adaptation measures.  Climate Change: Climate change refers to a change in the state  of the climate that can be identified (e.g., by using statistical  tests) by changes in the mean and/or the variability of its  properties, and that persists for an extended period, typically  decades or longer. Climate change may be due to natural internal  processes or external forcings, or to persistent anthropogenic  changes in the composition of the atmosphere or in land use.   Note that the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC), defines climate change as: ‘a change  of climate which is attributed directly or indirectly to human  activity that alters the composition of the global atmosphere  and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed  over comparable time periods’. The UNFCCC thus makes  a distinction between climate change attributable to human  activities altering the atmospheric composition, and climate  variability attributable to natural causes.   Climate Change Mitigation:  Technological change and  substitution that reduce resource inputs and emissions per unit  of output. Although several social, economic and technological  policies would produce an emission reduction, with respect to  Climate Change, mitigation means implementing policies to  reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance sinks.  Climate Scenario: A plausible and often simplified  representation of the future climate, based on a consistent set  of climatological relationships and assumptions, typically  constructed for explicit use as input to climate change impact  models. A “climate change scenario” is the difference between a  climate scenario and the current climate.  Eligible Project:  Capital infrastructure projects and capacity- building projects which meet the terms of the Municipal  Funding Agreement, and are listed in Schedule 1 of the  Agreement.  Extreme Weather Event: An event that is rare at a particular  place and time of year. Definitions of “rare” vary, but an extreme  weather event would normally be as rare as or rarer than the  10th or 90th percentile of the observed probability density  function. By definition, the characteristics of what is called  extreme weather may vary from place to place in an absolute     4 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  sense. Single extreme events cannot be simply and directly  attributed to anthropogenic climate change, as there is always  a finite chance the event in question might have occurred  naturally. When a pattern of extreme weather persists for some  time, such as a season, it may be classed as an extreme climate  event, especially if it yields an average or total that is itself  extreme (e.g., drought or heavy rainfall over a season).  Greenhouse Effect: Greenhouse gases effectively absorb  thermal infrared radiation, emitted by the Earth’s surface, by  the atmosphere itself due to the same gases, and by clouds.  Atmospheric radiation is emitted to all sides, including  downward to the Earth’s surface. Thus, greenhouse gases trap  heat within the surface-troposphere system. This is called the  greenhouse effect.   Greenhouse Gases (GHGs): Greenhouse gases are those  gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and  anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specific  wavelengths within the spectrum of thermal infrared radiation  emitted by the Earth’s surface, the atmosphere itself, and by  clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapour  (H2O), carbon dioxide (CO2), nitrous oxide (N2O), methane  (CH4) and ozone (O3) are the primary greenhouse gases in the  Earth’s atmosphere. Moreover, there are a number of entirely  human-made greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, such as  the halocarbons and other chlorine and bromine containing  substances, dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Beside CO2,  N2O and CH4, the Kyoto Protocoldeals with the greenhouse  gases sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs)  and perfluorocarbons (PFCs).  Mitigation: Technological change and substitution that reduce  resource inputs and emissions per unit of output. Although  several social, economic and technological policies would  produce an emission reduction, with respect to Climate Change,  mitigation means implementing policies to reduce greenhouse  gas emissions and enhance sinks.  Planned Adaptation: Adaptation that is the result of a  deliberate policy decision, based on an awareness that  conditions have changed or are about to change and that action  is required to return to, maintain, or achieve a desired state.  Resilience: The ability of a social or ecological system to  absorb disturbances while retaining the same basic structure and  ways of functioning, the capacity for self-organization, and the  capacity to adapt to stress and change.  Retrofitting: Retrofitting means to install new or modified parts  or equipment, or undertake structural modifications, to existing  infrastructure that were either not available or not considered  necessary at the time of construction. The purpose of retrofitting  in the context of climate change is generally to ensure that  existing infrastructure meets new design specifications that may  be required under altered climate conditions.  Risk: A combination of the likelihood (probability of  occurrence) and the consequences of an adverse event (e.g.  climate-related hazard).  Risk management: A systematic approach to setting the best  course of action under uncertainty, by applying management  policies, procedures and practices to the tasks of analysing,  evaluating, controlling and communicating about risk issues.  Salt-water intrusion: Displacement of fresh surface water  or groundwater by the advance of salt water due to its greater  density. This usually occurs in coastal and estuarine areas due to  reducing land-based influence (e.g. either from reduced runoff  and associated groundwater recharge, or from excessive water  withdrawals from aquifers) or increasing marine influence (e.g.  relative sea-level rise).  Storm surge: Generally used to refer to a temporary increase,  at a particular locality, in the height of the sea due to extreme  meteorological conditions (low atmospheric pressure and/or  strong winds). The storm surge is defined as being the excess  above the level expected from the tidal variation alone at that  time and place. Negative storm surges also occur and can  present significant problems for navigation.  Vulnerability: The degree to which a system is susceptible  to, and unable to cope with adverse effects of climate change,  including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a  function of the character, magnitude, and rate of climate change  and variation to which a system is exposed, its sensitivity, and  its adaptive capacity.    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 5 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  What is Adaptation to Climate Change? Adapting to climate change involves undertaking actions and  activities that are specifically designed to reduce and minimize  the harmful consequences of changing climate. Conversely,  adaptive actions can also be designed to take advantage of  any potential long-term opportunities that come with changes  in local and regional climate. For example, a longer growing  season in agricultural areas of the province.   Adaptation is built on the premise that appropriate actions are  undertaken before major impacts occur or shortly after they  take place, so that similar damage in the future is anticipated  and minimized. Both of these types of adaptation responses can  be planned in advance. In most cases, planned adaptation will  incur lower long-term costs and is seen to be far more effective  than simply reacting to climate change in an unplanned, ad-hoc  manner.  Adaptation at the municipal level also involves new ways of  thinking about infrastructure design, renewal and maintenance.  It involves adaptive land-use planning and neighbourhood  design and also adaptive water and energy management, in  addition to other adaptive measures that will help to ensure that  our communities are prepared and will be resilient.  determining vulnerability & Managing risk The measure of how sensitive certain elements of a municipality  or community are to climate change impacts is often known  as vulnerability. The overall vulnerability of a community to  climate change will vary between one community and another.  In other words, a variety of factors and variables dictate  vulnerability. For example, communities located within close  proximity to the coast or watercourses are more susceptible to  storm surges than inland communities which are more sheltered.  Coastal communities are therefore, more vulnerable (at greater  risk) because their location makes them susceptible to shoreline  erosion, flooding, and wind damage.   How Can Municipalities Adapt? Vulnerability can be reduced through the careful implementation  of adaptive management practices, actions, policies and  initiatives that are specifically designed to limit and minimize  negative impacts. For example, identifying vulnerable  infrastructure, incorporating adaptive planning into land-use  policies, revising emergency response measures, and accounting  for sea-level rise when planning and building new infrastructure  will serve to protect new developments, private property,  municipal capital investments, as well as the environment.   Municipalities can also adapt by considering the vulnerability  of their services and the supporting infrastructure. For example,  water treatment facilities and water distribution systems provide  safe drinking water. Sewage treatment facilities and distribution  systems collect and treat waste. Adaptive planning takes these  considerations into account by developing measures which  ensure that important services continue to operate during, or  following extreme weather events.   Other effective adaptation measures include: managing  development in coastal areas and flood-prone watercourses;  protecting coastlines around significant sites; and restricting or  preventing construction in areas of known vulnerability.  There is little doubt that climate change will affect a broad range  of municipal assets and local government services, in addition  to municipal operations and policy decisions. Climate change  adaptation is a matter of risk management and good governance;  and at the local government level, there are several key areas of  municipal influence where adaptation can begin:   A. Licensing and Regulation – Municipalities can use  their powers to set the local regulatory environment in  conjunction with their ability to enforce regulations, to  implement and enforce adaptive policies.  B. Facilitation, Advocacy, Leadership and   Public Education – Municipalities can use their close   contact and relationship with community organizations,  businesses, residents and other stakeholders at the local  level, to develop a shared understanding of the issues    and to develop collaborative responses to climate   change.  C. Service Delivery, Community Development and  Civic Engagement – Many of the services provided  by municipalities for businesses and residents can be  reviewed in light of adaptive climate change initiatives.   What Are Municipalities Adapting To? There is now widespread scientific consensus that accelerated  climate change is happening and human activities are the  principal cause. The ability for communities to adapt and  effectively respond to these challenges now ranks alongside  other pressing environmental, social and economic imperatives  affecting municipalities.    PArT TWo   Climate Change Adaptation    6 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  It is now widely accepted that a warming world will be  accompanied by changes in the intensity, frequency, duration and  geographic extent of weather and climatic extremes. Changes in  climate and weather extremes are already observed to be having  an impact on communities throughout Nova Scotia. There is  little doubt that future changes will present additional challenges  to municipalities. In addition to extreme weather, climate change  is also linked to sea-level rise, which will have long-term  planning implications for coastal areas of the province.   Nova Scotia Coastal Facts  13,300 Km of Coastline  70% of Nova Scotia’s population lives on the coast  14% of jobs are coastal and ocean-related sectors  Coastal lot development accounts for a significant portion of all  new development  Source:  NS State of the Coast Report, 2009.  It is evident that uncertainties exist with respect to the various  kinds of hazards and impacts the province will experience from  climate change. Often the focus of these uncertainties lies with  uncertain future climate conditions. However, past and current  climate trends and impacts do give us some indication of what  we might anticipate in the future and who and what places might  be most vulnerable.  There is a temptation for those faced with issues of climate  change at the local level, to focus attention on more pressing  matters, however, it is at the municipal and community level  where practical knowledge and experience can be drawn from,  and where adaptation will begin.   Nova Scotia: Projected Climate Change  Trends & Hazards  • More frequent storm events • Increasing storm intensity • Changes in precipitation and extreme precipitation events • Sea level rise • Storm surges and floods • Accelerated coastal erosion • Flooding and flash-floods • Wetter, warmer winters • Hotter summers • Loss of sea ice • Drier summers with droughts • Water (availability) constraints • Greater ultraviolet radiation exposure  More Frequent Storm events  & increasing Storm intensity Each year, several large storms pass through the Atlantic region  and cause damage along the coast. Powerful storm waves  increase the risk of erosion on soft sediment shores and storm  surges put low-lying coastal areas at risk of flooding.   Major impacts expected from storm surges include an increase  in the rate and extent of coastal erosion and coastal inundation.  There will also be an increase in flooding in low-lying coastal  areas, resulting from high tide events and/or storm surges. This  could mean that areas normally flooded once every 100 years  could potentially experience floods every 10 years, and areas  previously safe from flooding could now be at risk.   In Nova Scotia, rain-on-snow events have led to more than 50  periods of severe floods since the beginning of records in 1759,  including recent events in Colchester, Cumberland, Hants and  Kings Counties. Regardless of the cause of a flood, human  health can be negatively affected and serious injury or death  may result. Drowning, hypothermia and electrocution are all  risks directly associated with floods (Environment Canada,  2004; Health Canada, 2005). Contamination of floodwater by  sewage and wastes, both domestic and industrial, in addition  to agricultural chemicals is common; resulting in lengthy and  expensive cleaning procedures and delay in reoccupation of  communities. Sewage systems and water treatment facilities  may be overwhelmed with a sudden influx of contaminated  floodwater. Submergence of buildings in floodwaters produces  more favourable conditions for the growth of moulds and fungi  that, if not removed, can lead to health difficulties when the  buildings are reoccupied (Health Canada, 2005).   Research indicates the Atlantic region will experience an  increase in extreme weather events and all climate models  suggest that storm activity will worsen.  Legend:   extreme Storms  runoff  & drainage   issues  localized  Flooding  Washouts  & erosion  Heavy  Precipitation   & Strong  Winds  drinking Water Contamination  Public Safety Concerns  damage to Structures, Property & infrastructure  interruptions in Power Supply  economic implications  Climate Event Impact Hazard/Issue    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 7 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  rising Sea level Climate change models (reviewed by the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change), suggest that the projected increase  in the global average surface temperature will likely result in  a global sea level rise on of a meter or more by the end of this  century. This change in sea level will occur due to the thermal  expansion of seawater and the melting of glaciers and ice  caps. On a regional level sea level increases will depend on a  variety of factors such as the local coastline variations, changes  to currents, vertical land movements, and differences in tidal  patterns.  According to a report completed by the Geological Survey of  Canada in 1998, approximately 80% of the Atlantic Region’s  coastline is considered to be highly sensitive to global sea level  rise. Areas already vulnerable to erosion and flooding will be at  even greater risk as a result of sea-level rise. For example, along  the Bay of Fundy, an extensive system of dykes was started in  the 1630s and now protects 85% of the former marsh area from  flooding and inundation. Since the 1630s, regional sea level  has risen by 1.3 metres due to coastal subsidence and although  the dykes have been maintained and upgraded to keep them at  levels adequate enough to prevent flooding from regular high  water events, many are currently 2 metres below the level of an  extreme storm surge superimposed on a high tide, and by 2100  they could be as much as 3 metres below. In Halifax sea level  has risen about 30 cm over the last century. This means that with  climate change, Halifax could potentially experience an increase  in sea level of 80 cm by the year 2100.  Sea level rise  Coastal  inundation & erosion  Storm  Surge  Coastal  Flooding  Salt Water intrusion  erosion of headlands &  Shoreline Areas  drinking Water Contamination  damage to infrastructure  damage to Structures & Property  Storm Surges, Coastal erosion & Flooding Increased erosion and flooding will likely mean significant  impacts on coastal communities with damage to houses,  buildings, roads, bridges, and other types of infrastructure, as  well as the risk of contamination to fresh water supplies, damage  to drainage systems and sewage treatment facilities. Important  coastal resources and sensitive coastal habitats could also be at  risk from the impacts of increased erosion and flooding. There  are also a host of other areas that may experience impacts  from increased erosion and flooding such as human activities,  human health and safety, emergency preparedness, insurance,  construction, maintenance and repair costs, property ownership,  jurisdiction, liability and legal issues.   While some coastal ecosystems may be able to naturally adapt  or migrate landwards in response to rising sea levels, those  areas backed or fringed by human development, where natural  processes of coastal evolution have been disrupted, may be  permanently inundated or squeezed out.  Coastal wetlands are  extremely diverse and productive ecosystems and are critical  in the life-cycles of many marine and terrestrial species, so the  loss of these ecosystems could have significant implications for  biodiversity and coastal resources.  Coastal communities and their infrastructure and industries,  including fisheries and tourism, are vulnerable to these changes.  Impacts on coastal infrastructure, such as bridges, roads and  energy facilities have already affected trade and tourism  in the region, and some coastal communities have started  experiencing saltwater intrusion in their groundwater supply.  Future disruptions to transportation, electricity transmission and  communications will have widespread implications, including  increasing the susceptibility of some communities to isolation.  Storm Surges  runoff  & drainage   issues  localized  Flooding  Coastal  erosion   & Washouts   Heavy  Precipitation   & Strong Winds  drinking Water Contamination  Public Safety Concerns  damage to Structures, Property & infrastructure  interruptions in Power Supply  economic implications  Wetter Winters and drier Summers  Climate projections indicate that Atlantic Canada will  experience drier summers, with an accompanying increase in  summer-time droughts. Nova Scotia is projected to experience  increases in mean annual temperature and precipitation. By  2050, there trends indicate a 2 to 4 C° increase in summer  temperature, depending on geographic location, and drier  summer months will characterize inland regions of the province.  Future warming of 1.5 to 6 C° during winter can also be  anticipated (From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing  Climate, 2007).   Wetter Winters  decrease in  Snow Cover  localized  Flooding  erosion  & Washouts  landslides  damage to Property  damage to infrastructure  economic implications    8 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  drier Summers  reduced Water  recharge  Heat & drought Forest Fires  decreased Water Quality damage to Property  Public Health implications damage to  infrastructure  economic implications  Water resources  Changes in water resources can have far reaching effects.  Reductions in summer stream flow, which is predicted for  all of Atlantic Canada’s provinces, could impact tourism and  recreation, freshwater fisheries, hydroelectric power generation,  municipal water supplies and agriculture. Lowered water levels  or decreased river flows could also lead to poor drinking water  quality in some parts of the province. Many municipalities  across nova Scotia rely on surface water supplies, leaving them  exposed to declines in water levels, and the increased risk from  contamination; resulting in the need for a greater level of water  treatment. Changes in snow cover are also expected to further  impact the water supply, by reducing recharge to aquifers (From  Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate, 2007).  Water resources: issues  drinking water degradation and contamination  reduced groundwater flows and stream recharge  Saltwater intrusion, salinization and contamination of wells  Groundwater reserves will also be affected by climate change.  If water is withdrawn at rates in excess of recharge by  precipitation, the result is a drop in the water table. One of the  areas of Atlantic Canada that is most dependent on groundwater  is southern Nova Scotia. Reductions in water tables would result  from decreased infiltration of seasonal precipitation, caused by a  combination of reduced summer rainfall, and increased surface  runoff of winter rain (From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a  Changing Climate, 2007). Sea level rise may also increase the  risk of salinization to groundwater in low-lying coastal regions  or threaten the viability of freshwater coastal aquifers (The Road  Ahead – Adapting to Climate Change in Atlantic Canada, 2003).  Adaptation: Six-Step Planning Framework   The next part of the guide will assist in the preparation of a  Climate Change Adaptation Plan. It presents a six-step planning  process. Each step begins by outlining key objectives. The  objectives summarize what will be achieved upon completion  of the step. Each step will take you through a series of ‘self- assessment’ questions, designed to probe more deeply into  climate change impacts, affects and accompanying municipal  issues. More specifically, the steps will help you to understand  where impacts are already being felt, where you might expect  them to occur in the future, what parts of your municipality are  vulnerable, who might be affected, what kinds of actions are  required, and where they will be applied.    Preparing careful and thoughtful responses to the questions  listed in each step will contribute to a flow of gained knowledge  and new information. The overall intention is to help your  municipality determine where to focus adaptation efforts.  Many questions are designed to lead to additional questions  and new avenues of analysis that are directly applicable to  the circumstances characterizing your municipality. The  accompanying research and analysis required to answer these  questions, will over time, help to build internal capacity.  Questions which require your team to develop deeper analysis,  or follow-up with subsequent research, will form the basis for a  broader understanding of the issues.   Step One: Build a Team  Step Two:  impacts & Hazards  Step Three: Affected locations  Step Four: Affected Facilities & infrastructure  Step Five (a): Social Considerations  Step Five (b): economic Considerations  Step Five (c):  environmental Considerations  Step Six: Priorities for Adaptive Actions    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 9 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Step One:  Adaptation Team/Committee  Step One: Objectives  a) Assemble a climate change adaptation team consisting of  local government officials, staff and stakeholders.  b) Establish a mandate and terms of reference for preparing  the plan.  c) Identify limits of the committee’s authority and level of  resourcing.  local Government officials  (council, Mayor, Warden,   Chief Administrative officer  MCCAP Team/ Committee  Administrative Staff  (various local government   departments)  Terms of reference,  mandate, resources,   vested powers &  authority, timelines and   deliverablesStakeholders  Committee Composition The first step in this process is compulsory, and involves the  formation of a climate change adaptation team consisting of  local government staff, officials, council members, and where  applicable, stakeholders. The final composition of the team  will be important because members will be fully responsible  for preparing the plan, and will remain in this capacity as it  moves into implementation. Moreover, the members of this  team will be accountable to SNSMR in regard to any elements  of the plan, which require explanation, elaboration for Gas Tax  purposes, revisions, or requirements regarding its development  or implementation.  Consequently, when forming your adaptation team, it is  important to ensure a diversity of expertise which draws on all  relevant municipal departments or programs.  Potential Membership - Climate Change Adaptation  Team Committee Members  economic development Parks & recreation  Tourism & Culture Planning & Zoning  energy Public Health  engineering Transportation  environment Water & Wastewater  emergency Management Solid Waste  Finance & Administration Port & Harbour Authorities  Fire & Police Services emergency Measures (eMo)  legal Services  Stakeholder Involvement Public consultation is not a mandatory part of preparing the  climate change adaptation plan. Instead, municipalities should  consider contacting and consulting with stakeholders affected by  climate change issues, where appropriate. The committee may  want to consult with developers responsible for building new  subdivisions and neighbourhoods in coastal areas, or contact  academics in your community who can contribute knowledge  and experience to the process of planning for adaptation. How  and where in the process municipalities engage stakeholders will  be determined at the discretion of each municipality.   Stakeholders can be an inclusive part of the team, or brought in  only when necessary to provide specific advice and input. It is  important to remember that involving a variety of stakeholders  will help to secure widespread support for any initiatives that are  undertaken during the process of MCCAP implementation.   Facilitation of stakeholder sessions is an eligible project,  under the capacity-building category of projects listed in the  2010/2014 Municipal Funding Agreement.  Preparing a Mandate Working with your team, each municipality will develop a  mandate. Its purpose is to clearly establish and record the roles,  responsibilities, authority, etc. of the team. The following  questions are intended to help guide the development of the  mandate:  1. Is your adaptation team being established as a permanent  working group?  2. What is the ultimate deliverable the team is responsible for?  3. How much time does the group have to accomplish their  tasks?  4. What resources are available for the team to accomplish  their work?  5. What authority does the team have?  6. To whom is the team accountable?  7. Who does the team report to, and how often?  8. What level of support can be expected from council?  9. What is your schedule for completing the work?    10 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Step Two:  impacts & Hazards  Step Two: Objectives   a) Develop a deeper understanding of the types of weather- related and climate related changes the municipality has  experienced in the past.  b) Look at what climate changes are expected and how these  changes may exacerbate or cause new hazards in your  municipality: (a) today and (b) in the future.  c)  Identify any opportunities which may result from future  changes in the climate.  rising Sea level issue   identification erosion  Flooding  landslides  understand the issues  that are happening now,   and also understand  issues that might   happen in the future in  your municipality.  Storm Surge  Hurricanes & High Winds  Forest Fires  drought  others  Climate changes range in scope, from a slow but continual  rise in sea level, to an increase in the frequency and severity of  extreme storms. In general, the range of potential impacts and  hazards associated with climate and weather varies on a local  and regional scale, and in turn, will vary from municipality to  municipality.   Climate change becomes an issue for the municipality when  it directly impacts the community. For example, a storm surge  along undeveloped portions of a coastline is for the most part,  not a pressing issue for the municipality. However, when a  storm surge damages buildings or impacts infrastructure or other  vital elements of the community, it becomes an issue for the  municipality that requires attention, and management through  adaptation. Particularly if it becomes evident that another similar  event will take place in the future.   Coastal erosion, for example, will affect some municipalities  more than others, due to variability in factors like the underlying  bedrock and surficial geology, wave energy and direction and the   location of development and infrastructure. Municipalities that  are directly affected by coastal erosion will be concerned with  finding ways to adapt, especially those places where erosion has  the potential to harm public safety, infrastructure or economic  elements that are important to the long-term viability of the  community.   Extreme storm events provide another good example  that demonstrates how climate impacts can vary between  municipalities. Increased runoff resulting from heavy rainfall  can impact municipalities with extensive wastewater treatment  infrastructure. Unforeseen consequences can occur when an  increase in water volume exceeds the design capacity of the  facility. Operating at full capacity can cause a number of issues  such as: increased wear-and-tear on moving parts, the discharge  of inadequately treated wastewater in receiving waters, the  potential contamination of nearby drinking water supplies,  or the closure of downstream shellfish beds, to list a few.  Adaptation for municipalities with this type of infrastructure  will involve reviewing the design capacity of the existing system  and integrating changes which accommodate the new weather  regime, during maintenance and infrastructure renewal.  Municipalities without wastewater and drinking water  infrastructure do not have to worry about these kinds of issues;  however, other issues of concern might result from heavy  rainfall. For example, heavy rain can cause flooding which can  impact communities by limiting or restricting access to local  roads. This in turn can affect residents and businesses and  hamper emergency response procedures.  The following questions will help your team identify  impacts and hazards:  1. What hazards or impacts resulting from the changing  climate and the weather have become issues for your  municipality in the past?  2. What kinds of events caused these issues (ex: extreme  weather, flooding, hurricane)  3. What kind of actions or measures (if any) were undertaken  in order to address or respond to these issues?  4. How well prepared is your municipality if such events  occur again; especially if such an event becomes more  frequent or severe as a result of climate change?   5. Does your municipality have the capacity/resources to  manage the next event?  6. How often do these events occur; are they occasional  or frequent; do they affect a large or small part of your  municipality; was the impact level severe or minimal?    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 11 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  7. Describe and record the range of issues which occurred as  a result of past climate events. Document as much specific  detail as possible regarding the effects on your municipality.   Preparing a matrix, such as the one illustrated below will  help the committee to assign a relative degree of impact to  the change events affecting your municipality. Filling in the  matrix is a subjective ‘best-estimate’ exercise, and will be  based on collective experience of the committee members  and stakeholders. It enables the team to summarize  information derived from answering the questions. Hazards  with a severe impact will obviously require closer attention  and more adaptive planning.   8. Do you think these types of events and associated hazards  will continue into the future and become more problematic  unless actions are taken to minimize their effects?   9. Describe how and why you think climate impacts will  become more of a problem for your municipality over time  (ex: expansion of development into affected areas, more  paved surfaces, aging infrastructure, etc.)  10. Do you think your municipality will experience other kinds  of climate related issues in the future, which have not  affected you in the past – what are they?   11. What new information do you need to know to be able to  plan effectively for the future of your municipality, with  respect to the impacts and issues you have identified?  12. Do you have this information, and/or do you know where it  can be obtained?  13. Do you see any new opportunities for your community in  the future as the climate changes?  Hazard Severity Frequency Area  Severe Moderate Minor often Sometimes rarely large Medium Small  Sea level rise X NA X  erosion X X X  Flooding X X X  landslides X X X  Storm Surge X X X  Hurricanes & Wind X X X  Forest Fires X X X  drought X X X  Example: Climate Change Hazard Impact Matrix    12 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Step Three:  Affected locations  Step Three: Objectives  a) Identify locations within your municipality where these  issues have occurred; and where are they likely to occur in  the future.   b) To determine where within your municipality, these impacts  will become an issue that should be addressed through  adaptation.  Topography location   Assessment Town Planning/Zoning  Geology  Flood risk Areas  determine where  impacts and issues may   occur, and which parts of  the municipality may be   at high risk.  erosion Prone Areas  Hazard Prone Areas  Cultural & Historic Sites  other  There are several factors that can significantly influence which  locations within your municipality will most likely by affected  by climate change. For example, the local geography and  geology, topography, and proximity to the ocean, play a role in  determining what parts of the municipality are affected and to  what degree.   The objective of Step Three is to develop a deeper understanding  of the locations within the municipality where climate change  impacts could, or will become a considerable issue that requires  management. As discussed in Step Two, an impact becomes an  issue when it intersects with the management and operation of  the municipality, or where it affects people and property.   The following questions will help your team to understand  where climate change could present issues for your  municipality:  1. Do the climate changes related hazards you identified in  Step Two, impact your entire municipality or only certain  portions or geographic areas?   2. If there is variation, can you identify and map areas where  impacts and issues are most likely?  An effective ways to get your adaptation team thinking about  this question is to create a map (see above) illustrating those  places and locations within the municipality, community or  town which have been subject to climate change impacts that  have caused issues in the past. This undertaking will be largely  based on anecdotal recounts and historical events that have been  recorded and archived, in addition to events that have taken  place within living memory.   Preparing a simple map like above will help the committee  compile information on vulnerable parts of the municipality,  in addition to the type and geographical extent of the impact.  Gathering information and transferring it to community maps is  an effective way to build-up layers of data that will inform the  preparation of the adaptation plan and help the committee make  decisions regarding an appropriate approach to managing the  issues.  The same technique can be used to answer some of the following  questions. By combining topographic, geological, soils and  drainage maps (among others) with municipal maps showing for  example: (a) the location of major infrastructure; (b) areas with  existing development; (c) areas zoned for new development; (d)  roads, bridges and utility corridors; (e) the location of seniors     MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 13 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  homes; (f) emergency response routes; and (g) areas that are  critical to the local and regional economies (such as important  agricultural areas or business parks) the committee will get a  far better indication of where within the  municipality climate  impacts and hazards may become significant issues which  warrant action.   3. Will the issue cause more of a problem (or benefit) in  certain areas of the municipality?  4. If issues are specific to certain areas, which parts of the  municipality are most greatly affected?  5. Do you think this pattern will change in the future: will  these issues become more problematic with predicted  changes in weather and climate?  6. What resources and tools can your municipality use in order  to map-out and determine which parts of your municipality  are at higher risk?  It is recommended that municipalities look first to internal  resources before deciding upon what additional tools are  required to develop greater understanding of impacts and  issues. The latest digital mapping and modeling may provide  exceptional levels of detail, but in many cases, this level of  detail may only be necessary under specific circumstances.  For example, in the case of built areas that are located in  close proximity to the coast, detailed modeling that helps  the committee to understand risk and vulnerability may be  warranted. This level of modeling may be both appropriate  and necessary to make informed decisions, especially where  people and property are concerned. However, it may not be  necessary for parts of the municipality with a low potential  for development, or places with minimal infrastructure and  urbanization.   7. What additional information, skills, expertise or resources  do you need to make proper decisions?  There are going to be instances where municipalities will require  resources and/or expertise that cannot be provided internally.  Capacity building projects related to understanding climate  change, are generally eligible under the terms of the MFA,  and can be paid for using Gas Tax funds. Questions regarding  capacity building projects should be directed to Canada/Nova  Scotia Infrastructure Secretariat branch of SNSMR to confirm  project eligibility.  Step Four:   Facilities, infrastructure   & Service delivery  Step Four: Objectives  a) Identify key facilities and infrastructure in your  municipality.  b) Identify where they are located and determine if some  facilities and infrastructure will be more affected by climate  change than others.  c) Evaluate the impact of climate change on the delivery of  municipal services.  Water Supply & Treatment Affected: Facilities,  infrastructure & Service   delivery Wastewater Collection &   Treatment  roads, Bridges, Culverts &  Trails  Power utilities/Supplies  determine where  impacts and issues may   occur, and which parts of  the municipality may be   at high risk.  Police & Fire  Hospitals & Nursing Homes  Schools  Community & Municipal  Buildings  other  Municipal infrastructure has enormous value, both directly as a  capital asset and indirectly as an essential element contributing  to a productive local and regional economy. The objective of  Step Four is to look at the key facilities and infrastructure to  ensure the services they support and the people they affect are  taken into consideration when setting priorities for adaptive  actions.   Climate change hazards include (among others): damage or  destruction resulting from extreme events (rain, wind and snow),  flooding of facilities and equipment, inundation from sea level  rise; changes in patterns of water availability; and the overall  effects of climate change on operating costs.     14 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  It is evident that an increase in the frequency of extreme storms,  flooding, storm surges and other events associated with climate  change will place additional challenges on the management  of municipal infrastructure, beyond the need for regular  maintenance, refits and renewal.   Essentially, all infrastructure systems are located in natural and  engineered environments affected by climate change. Climate  change, for example, can and will affect water, wastewater, and  storm water utility infrastructure today and well into the future.  Moreover, infrastructure located in coastal zones is particularly  vulnerable, because it is subject to sea level rise and heightened  storm surges and in consequence municipal infrastructure must  be designed and managed in order to operate even in case of sea  level rise.   Simple infrastructure failures, for example municipal  infrastructure such as culverts failing due to heavy rain, can  lead to a domino effect that in-turn leads to road washouts, the  geographic isolation of communities, public safety issues, in  addition to potential health and economic ramifications. The  challenge, therefore, is to identify those parts of the municipal  infrastructure network that are at greatest risk from changing  climate and ensure that adequate measures are taken, in order to  prevent more dire consequences.   The following questions will help you to examine your  infrastructure and facilities:  1. What are the key facilities in your community?  2. How will the impacts and issues identified in Step Two  affect these facilities?  The first concern is proximity of public infrastructure to the  coast. Municipalities with infrastructure located in the coastal  zone should immediately be alerted to potential issues. The  second major concern is the ability of the infrastructure to  handle additional capacity over and above design specifications.  This analysis will involve recommendations and input from  engineers and other specialists. Other factors, such as the age of  the facility, will help to inform and guide this discussion. Your  team should also consider what types of impacts would have a  high, medium or low effect on the municipality; with regard to  the delivery of services.  3. Are there any facilities or infrastructure that you are  concerned about in an emergency?  This question is aimed at helping you to determine if  potentially impacted infrastructure is also crucial to the short- term wellbeing of your municipality. For example: roads  interconnecting communities or leading to hospitals.  4. Are any of your facilities in need of repair, replacement or  upgrades?  This discussion should be lead by the engineering department  and the people responsible for the day-to-day operations of  municipal infrastructure.  5. Do you have the types of information to answer these  questions?  Where existing information is insufficient, Gas Tax funds can  be used to build capacity in this area, or to hire experts where  necessary.  6. In light of goals and actions in your ICSP that specifically  address infrastructure, are there any places where climate  change needs to be taken into consideration?  All projects described within the ICSP that are related in any  way to infrastructure, should be examined in this context.  requirements for existing  infrastructure risk evaluation  The following section is a mandatory part of the MCCAP. To  complete this part of the MCCAP use the spreadsheets available  on-line at:  http://www.nsinfrastructure.ca/  A. Preliminary Risk Assessment  Reducing the vulnerability of existing infrastructure to climate  change risks will require a comprehensive evaluation of each  infrastructure and facility asset. First priority must be given to  essential services and potential for interruption or destruction of  each utility. Evaluation would include the individual elements  that comprise the utility and risks to the overall operation of the  system.  Each asset should be assessed for risks associated with sea  level rise, precipitation (snow, rain), extreme wind, flooding,  temperature change (high, low), erosion and earthquake.   The spreadsheets provide a list of the various infrastructure and  facility asset categories (others can be added) with potential  risks from climate change. Each assessment should include  adaptive measures to eliminate or minimize risk. The list  includes water systems, sanitary sewer systems, storm sewer  systems, municipal buildings, landfill/solid waste facilities, dams  and roads.    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 15 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  B. Prioritizing the Asset Risks  The spreadsheets provide a method for ranking adaptation  measures required for each asset and associated costs.  Adaptation measures may be classified as high, medium or low  risk and municipalities can establish priorities by ranking their  assets according to the assigned risks.  C. Estimating Costs of Adaptation Measures  High Risk priorities should be evaluated in detail and cost- estimates determined.  D. Cost Benefit  Each suggested adaptation measure should be evaluated for the  degree of magnitude as well as the significance of the desired  adaptation. This may be expressed as a cost benefit comparison.  Measures may be again re-prioritized.  E. Financing Adaptation  Municipalities must integrate the adaptation project(s) into their  regular Capital Investment Planning process.  F. New Infrastructure  For new infrastructure projects climate change risk assessment  should be included in the ‘Request for Proposal’ (RFP) for the  design engineer to consider. Appendix C can be used as a check- list to insure that climate change risks are considered in the  design of any new facilities. Decisions must be made as to the  degree of adaptation measures required.  Step Five (a):  Social Considerations  Step Five (a): Objectives  a) Determine which residents will be most affected.  b) Identify which residents, local groups and agencies can  help.  volunteer & emergency  Services Social   Assessment income  Age  literacy levels  Who is most likely to be  impacted by issues &   where are they located?  Who can help?  Special Needs  Single Parent Households  recreation & Cultural  Services  isolated locations  Community Support  other  Changes in the climate can affect the people. Power outages,  flooded homes and businesses, road washouts, compromised  bridges, contaminated drinking water, and wildfires (among  others) are hazards resulting from with climate change, which  have the potential to directly impact people.  In the event of climate-related emergencies there is a strong  likelihood some residents living in the municipality may be more  vulnerable than others. Seniors and people with special needs are  particularly vulnerable. Getting a better understanding of those  people that could be most affected, will help the municipality to  update emergency response procedures and identify volunteer  support mechanisms that can be employed in the event of these  kinds of emergencies.   Many of the elements covered in this step may have already  been addressed in your municipality’s Emergency Measures  Plan; however, it is prudent to review any municipal emergency  response or contingency plans, in light of the climate change  issues your team has identified so far.     16 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  The following questions will help your team to understand  the social implications of climate change issues affecting  your municipality:  1. Have you reviewed your ICSP’s social pillar’s goals and  actions in order to identify key priorities?  2. Are there any goals or actions under the social pillar which  warrant special attention when examined within the context  of climate change?  Reviewing your ICSP will enable you to re-visit your  municipality’s priorities around its social agenda. If for example,  you have major initiatives involving the long-term wellbeing of  seniors, you should consider taking another look at your goals  and actions in light of climate change issues.  3. Can you identify who in your municipality will be most  affected by climate related emergency events?  In Step Three you determined what parts of your municipality  are likely to be at greater risk from climate issues. Based on  information collected in Step Three, you will be able to get a  good sense of any groups of people who may be put at risk,  because they reside in vulnerable parts of the municipality.  4. What are the main barriers for at-risk people to receive  adequate help during an emergency in your municipality?  5. Does your municipality have an emergency plan?  6. Does the plan address barriers for at-risk people?       7. Does the plan take into consideration the location and  characteristics of the at-risk people and work their needs  into the plan?  8.  Are there heritage or cultural elements of your municipality  that could be affected?  9. How will these issues affect the quality of life, health and  safety in your community?  10. Are their groups or organizations in your community that  can help?    Step Five (b):  economic Considerations  Step Five (b): Objectives  a) Identify the most important economic sectors in your  municipality and determine how these issues impact  these sectors and, in addition, identify the most important  economic goals the municipality has identified in the ICSP.  b) Understand how climate change will affect the financial  resources of your municipality.  Agriculture economic Assessment  Fishery  Forestry  Tourism  examine your  municipality’s important   economic sectors and  understand how they   may be affected.  Food  Construction  Manufacturing & industry  Transportation  Services  other  Step Five (b) involves determining how climate change  issues will affect the local and regional economy. Although  climate change is seen to have mostly damaging effects on the  management and operations of municipalities, there may also  be a number of benefits which can help your municipality to  prosper in the future.   Because climate change is directly linked to the ‘business as  usual’ fossil-fuel economy that has predominated for the past  century, many municipal administrators view climate change  adaptation as good opportunity to move towards creating  a greener future for their municipality. Local government  investments in renewable energy, and green technologies,  particularly if coupled with adaptation and sustainability goals  and actions, will help local governments to become more  competitive in the twenty-first century. The integration of green  practices with adaptation, presents a chance for municipalities  to be both adaptive and competitive. Climate change adaptation  may also benefit municipalities in other ways. For example, a  warmer climate may help the agricultural sector and allow new  types of crops, fruits and vegetables to be grown.   Conversely, many climate change issues, for example the  flooding of homes and businesses, or damage to critical  municipal infrastructure, can have severe and far-reaching  consequences for local and regional economies. It is important  for your team to develop a good understanding regarding these  issues, so that adequate measures can be undertaken to minimize  negative impacts and advance positive ones.    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 17 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  The following questions will help you to understand  how the local and regional economy in your area may be  affected by climate change:  1. What are the most important industries in your community  today and where are they located?   Preparing a map illustrating the most important economic  elements of your municipality will, when combined with  the information and knowledge gathered so far; help you  to determine threats and benefits to the local and regional  economy.   2. How important is the municipal/community economy  to the economy of the province? For example, is it  strategically important to other economies (i.e., suppliers,  manufacturers)  3. What parts of the economy are expected to be the most  important in the future?  4. How could changes in the weather and climate affect these  industries?  5. Could any of the climate issues identified so far result in  the loss of an industry in your municipality? If so, describe  how.  6. What are the top weaknesses in your municipality’s  economic sectors related to the current and future issues  discussed in previous steps?  7. What are your options for reducing potential harm to the  economy: (a) in the short-term, (b) in the long-term?  8. Is dealing with the economic ramifications of climate  change a priority for your municipality?  9. Are there any potential economic opportunities that you  see that may result for your municipality as consequence in  changing climate?  10. In light of goals and actions in your ICSP that address the  economy, are there any places where climate change needs  to be taken into consideration?  Step Five (c):  environmental Considerations  Step Five (c):  Objectives  a) Evaluate how the natural environment will be affected and  identify potential environmental problems resulting from  climate change issues.   b) Understand how climate change may help or harm  important species or natural areas found within your  municipality.  Hazardous Sites environmental  Assessment  oil Facilities  Ports and Harbours  landfills  understand how  changes in climate   can lead to changes  in other parts of the  natural environment  in your municipality.   Areas that could lead to  more problems may be  priority areas for action.  retention and Tailing Ponds  Contamination  Pests and diseases  Fish and Wildlife  Parks and Protected Areas  Sensitive Habitats  Coastal erosion  others  The main purpose of Step Five (c) is to help the committee  identify and locate key sites in your municipality where climate  issues or weather events may cause dangerous environmental  impacts. For example: a severe storm can lead to the back-up  of a sewage treatment facility, causing sewage to breach its  containment and cause pollution and health hazards. Other  potential dangers, such as the storage of hazardous materials,  should also be evaluated in light of climate change because  of their potential to cause serious problems if they spill and  contaminate the local environment.  The following questions will help in your analysis of  environmental issues:  1. What have been the main environmental problems you have  experienced as a result of weather or climate related issues  in the past?  2. How might this change in the future?  3. Are there any concentrations of hazardous materials of  waste in your municipality?  4. Are they stored safely?  5. Have you undertaken any actions in the past that have  helped to reduce the impacts of any of these problems or  issues?  6. Are you prepared in the event of an environmental  emergency?  7. Do you think these same strategies will work in the future?    18 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  8. Do you have an environmental protection or emergency  preparedness plans?   9. In light of goals and actions in your ICSP that address the  environment, are there any additional areas where climate  change needs to be taken into consideration?  Step Six:  Priorities for Action    Step Six: Objectives  a) Prioritize the climate change adaptation issues considered  by the committee to pose the greatest risks to the  municipality, both now and in the future.   b) Identification of potential courses of action for the priority  adaptation issues.   c) Develop an approach to integrate adaptation priorities into  municipal planning documents.  Public Health & Safety Priorities (for adaptation)   infrastructure  existing development  New development identify your top   priorities for action  on adaptation and   begin the process of  identifying solutions   and appropriate courses  of action designed to  reduce and minimize   climate change impacts.  Policy and Planning  Social Considerations  economic Considerations  environmental  Considerations  Setting Priorities for Adaptive Action The main objective of Step Six is for the municipality to  establish key priorities for taking action on climate related  hazards and impacts considered by the committee to be issues  which require management through adaptation. These are  issues, which if left unmanaged, could cause problems (over the  short to long-term) for public safety, municipal infrastructure,  or harm other aspects of the community. Step Six is a starting  point for taking action. During Step Six, the committee will  establish priorities for municipal action, and start the process of  determining what methods (actions) might be undertaken by the  municipality to reduce risk.   Generally, more immediate concerns will have a higher priority,  while long-term changes and concerns often take a lower  priority. Issues or hazards impacting public safety or the delivery  of services should be high on the list of priorities, while those  which are less-immediate (and can be dealt with over time)  will tend to have a lower priority. The ways and means by  which your committee determines priorities will be based on a  number of variables which will be unique to each municipality.  Prioritization should be supported by sound reasoning that is  documented in the plan. The committee is encouraged to include  stakeholders in the decision-making process, regarding setting  priorities for adaptive action.  Step Six is important because it will serve as a roadmap for both  staff and council, with regard to adaptive planning. In particular  the role adaptation will play with respect to the development  of land. Consequently, the information recorded in this step is  instrumental in planning for the future of the municipality.   Once priorities are established, the committee is also required  (in this step) to investigate and report on the range of potential  actions which might be considered by the committee, in order to  address each priority. The requirement is not for a detailed action  plan for each item. Rather, the goal is for the municipality to  explore viable options for each issue and record the options.    Adaptation Priorities: Municipal Planning  Strategies, Land Use Bylaws  This section of the MCCAP will outline how climate  change concerns and adaptation will be integrated into the  municipality’s approach to the planning and regulation of  development.   Municipal Planning Strategies (MPS) are the primary vehicle for  articulating a community’s vision on sustainability and overall  planning policy direction. Municipalities with a Municipal  Planning Strategy and Land Use Bylaw (LUB) are required to  provide information in Step Six of the MCCAP guide outlining  council’s adaptation priorities with respect to land-use planning  and, in particular for new development.   At the time of the adoption of the MCCAP time municipalities  are not required to have detailed policies and provisions in place  in their MPS and LUB. Rather, municipalities will outline in the  MCCAP the general policy direction to be taken with respect to  adaptation. Policies and regulations specific to the circumstances  that characterize adaptation issues for individual municipalities  will take time to prepare properly, and will be part of a phased  approach to implementation.    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 19 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Municipalities with formal planning documents can begin the  process, by developing an understanding of how adaptation can  be integrated into:  • Statements of Provincial Interest  • Zoning Bylaws (i.e., setbacks)  • Site Plan Control  • Setbacks  • Storm Water Management  • Parkland Dedication  • Plans of Subdivision  Municipalities without Formal Planning Documents Municipalities without formal land-use planning documents,  i.e., Municipal Planning Strategy and Land Use Bylaw, are  required to explain and document how they plan to address new  development within the context of climate change adaptation.  The following questions will help you prioritize issues:  1. Of all of the issues discussed by your team so far, what are  the most significant, and why?  Determining the significance, in terms of priority, of the various  climate change hazards facing your municipality can be a  difficult task, influenced by numerous factors. When discussing  the ranking of priorities and potential courses of action with  your team, you should keep in mind the following fundamental  principles:   • The protection of  public safety   • The protection of structures, buildings, and infrastructure   • The protection of public drinking water supplies.  The committee may want to consider developing a series of  tables to help you to summarize and organize information  gathered during Steps One to Five. Tables can be particularly  useful when capturing information that influences decisions  on priorities and potential courses of adaptive action. A few  examples of the types of tables that can be generated the  committee are outlined below. The information and approaches  provided in the examples are presented as illustrations.   Example 1: Storm Surge - Impacts, Issues & Hazards  Storm Surge  Concern 1 residential cottages and properties located in  Shellfish Bay are vulnerable to erosion, flooding,  wind and water damage during severe storms  and storm surges.  Concern 2 The unpaved road leading to the campground  is prone to flooding and washouts and  undermining in several places along its route, and  may become impassable due to damage from  storm surges.  Concern 3 Several economically important wharfs, and  harbours are at risk during extreme wind,  flooding and wave damage, and boats and fishing  equipment are also at risk from severe storm  damage  Concern 4 Along route 1 there is an increased risk of  damage to power lines and poles due to their  close proximity to the shore. This risk for damage  is increased if snow and ice are a factor.    20 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Example 2: Storm Surge – Special Considerations &  Priorities for Action  effects on the  Municipality  Special  Considerations  Action  Priority   ranking*  Social A large number of the  residents in vulnerable  parts of the community  are elderly. Flooding  and road washouts  would prohibit the use  of emergency and other  vehicles in these places if  assistance is required.  High  economic local fishing industry  could be severely  affected by storm surge  damage to wharves,  harbours and associated  infrastructure.  High  environmental Contamination from fuel  and other petroleum  products used by  fishermen and stored  in accessory buildings  located near to the shore  could occur during  floods and extreme  storms.  High  infrastructure Culvert outlets may  become blocked with  debris and exasperate  localized flooding, and  cause road washouts.  Medium  other Sea wall will require  modifications and  maintenance to  accommodate rising sea  level.  low  *rank determined by committee members based on municipal  circumstances  2. Have you done anything in the past that has helped reduce  the impacts of these issues?         Moving Towards Adaptation                                 3. Based on your research and discussions, what options are  there for dealing with these issues?  There are a variety of factors that will affect the type of actions  your municipality may take into consideration. These include  local circumstances, overall practicality, the resources available  for implementation, the timing of consequences (immediate  or long-term) and the level of risk you are willing to incur  with respect to limiting damage, to list a few. As you consider  adaptive actions, keep in mind that these should not only address  climate change issues; but should do so in a sustainable way that  does not hinder any wider sustainability efforts.  Example 3: Storm Surge: Options for Taking Action  Adaptation options under Consideration  Action 1 educate residential property owners regarding  potential dangers and damages; ensure eMo  is aware of vulnerable residents; pass land use  regulations that ensure future development is  set-back from vulnerable locations.  Action 2 Take efforts to protect dunes and other  ecosystems that buffer the shoreline; consider  re-locating the road; ensure road has adequately  sized culverts and drainage structures, reinforce  elements of the road that are particularly  vulnerable.  Action 3 Meet with local fishermen and other vested  stakeholders to discuss the issue; develop  emergency procedures for boats and property;  look for solutions based on local knowledge of  the fishermen.  Action 4 Contact NSPC to develop response plan and  repair scenarios; consider burying power lines;  develop emergency procedures for affected  residents.  4. Which of your department’s responsibilities/roles would  these issues and impacts likely influence?    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 21 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Background Greenhouse gases (GHGs) generated by human activity,  primarily carbon dioxide, as well as methane, ozone and several  others, have risen sharply as the world’s population expands,  industrialization spreads and the consumption of resources  accelerates. The inevitable consequence of all this growth is  an increase in greenhouse gas emissions, leading to a rise in  average global temperature, the disruption of climate patterns  and the irreversible alteration of the ecological balance of our  planet. The effects of climate change are pervasive, and left  unchecked, could have both severe and indiscriminate impacts  on our social and economic systems.   Many Canadian cities have already taken the first step toward  reducing carbon emissions by conducting an inventory of GHG  emissions. This work has shown that electrical generation,  transportation and the combustion of heating fuels, account  for up to 95 per cent of a community’s direct GHG emissions.  The remainder comes from the management and disposal of  municipal waste and the emissions from certain industrial  processes, such as cement production, steel making and  chemical processing. This statistical breakdown varies from  one municipality to the next, depending on a number of factors  including the mix of heating fuels, the availability of public  transit, and the source of their electrical power.   A well-designed mitigation plan will help to reduce GHG  emissions and also has the potential to spur technological  advances, create new sources of employment and stimulate the  economic growth needed to propel communities forward into a  more sustainable future.   Building on Existing Mitigation Efforts SNSMR recognizes that many of the province’s municipalities  will have already completed some of the required elements  for the mitigation component of the MCCAP. Although this  work has been completed your municipality will be asked to  supply this information to SNSMR in the format outlined in the  Mitigation Plan Template, found in Appendix A.  Municipal requirements for Mitigation The purpose of developing a municipal mitigation plan is to start  the process of identifying where and how municipal facilities,  infrastructure and operations produce emissions, and to develop  an approach to reducing emissions over time. Ultimately this  will result in cleaner air for all Nova Scotians. To achieve this  purpose the mitigation component will focus only on corporate  (municipal) greenhouse gas emissions.   In order to assist municipalities prepare their mitigation action  plan SNSMR has partnered with the UNSM and Stantec, and  have developed a Municipal Climate Change Mitigation Plan  Workbook that will also be of assistance when undertaking this  part of the MCCAP. The workbook provides all the information  necessary to prepare a comprehensive mitigation plan, complete  with reduction targets and detailed actions, and can be used as  such by municipalities. Those municipalities wishing to develop  a comprehensive mitigation plan are strongly encouraged to  work through the workbook which is available on-line and can  be downloaded from the UNSM webpage.   It should be noted that the mandatory requirement for the  mitigation component of the MCCAP is described in Steps One  to Three (see below) and also in the submission template in  Appendix A.  Preparing a Corporate Mitigation Plan  There are three mandatory steps required for the mitigation  component of the MCCAP.   Step One:  Collect energy & emissions  information  Step Two:   Complete energy & emissions  inventory Table  Step Three:  Set Goals & identifying Actions for  Mitigation  PArT THree   Climate Change Mitigation    22 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Step One:   energy & emissions information  Step One: Objective  • Completion of Corporate Energy and Emissions  Spreadsheet  Corporate Energy & Emissions Spreadsheet Municipalities that have not already conducted an energy and  emissions inventory must use the Corporate and Emissions  Spreadsheet and User Guide, developed by the UNSM and  downloadable at:  http://www.sustainability-unsm.ca/our-work.html    It is recommended that you also download the instruction  manual and additional information provided in order to assist  you in completing the spreadsheet. For Step One, municipalities  are required to collect the relevant information and complete the  Corporate Energy and Emissions Spreadsheet.   Step Two:   energy & emissions   inventory Table   Step Two: Objective  • Completion of Energy and Emissions Inventory Table  Step Two involves transferring information from the spreadsheet  to the Inventory Summary Table (see below). The UNSM/ Stantec Workbook provides additional information on this  procedure.  Municipalities that have already conducted an Energy Audit  and Emissions Inventory can use existing data to populate the  Summary Inventory Table. The original energy and emissions  spreadsheet (with the detailed data) must also be submitted  along with the summary table.  Step Three:   Setting Goals and Actions    for Mitigation  Step Three: Objectives  • Identify the municipality’s goals for reducing greenhouse  gas emissions.  • Determine appropriate actions to be undertaken in order to  achieve mitigation goals.   Step Three involves setting goals for reducing emissions and  establishing actions that will carry-out the intent of each goal.  Actions must be linked with a specific time frame, responsibility,  and where possible costs. Step Three will serve as the roadmap  for the implementation the municipality’s mitigation efforts.  Typically, goals and actions are viewed as a living element of  the mitigation plan, and at times will be updated, adjusted and  adapted as circumstances change with the municipality.  Goals  Goals are a precise and realistic articulation of the desired end- state. Goals are required for each emission category listed in the  Inventory table.  Example: improved energy efficiency and annual cost savings  for the municipality’s building stock.  emission  Category  energy Type energy  Consumption  Cost ($) units emission Factor  (tCo2/units)  emissions (tCo2e)  Notes  Buildings electricity Nat. Gas Fuel oil  kWh M3 l  Water &  Wastewater  electricity kWh  Streetlights electricity kWh  vehicles reg. Gasoline diesel  l l  Solid Waste n/a  others tonnes  Energy & Emissions Inventory Summary Table    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 23 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Actions  Actions are specific priority items which must be achieved to  fully realize the stated goals. Actions must accompany the goals  established for each emission category.  Example: complete a detailed, professional energy audit  on the town hall and other municipal buildings, and act on  any recommendations resulting from the findings which will  improve energy efficiency and reduce energy costs.  Time Frame   The time frame is an articulation of the timing of the specific  action. Wherever reasonably possible, time frames should  accompany each goal and action.  Example: Short-Term (Year 1 and Year 2); Medium-Term (Year  3 and Year 4); Long-Term (Year 5 and beyond)  Accountability  Accountability describes the department or person responsible  for carrying-out the actions. Wherever reasonably possible, there  should be accountability for each action item.  document references  1. Environment Canada (1998) The Canada Country Study  (CCS) – Climate change impacts and adaptation measures;  in Canada: highlights for Canadians. Environment Canada,  8 Volumes.  2. Environment Canada (2004) Greenhouse Gas inventories  and Climate Change: Executive Summary.  3. Environment Canada (2005) Canada’s Top Ten Weather  Stories for 2005. Environment Canada  4. Environment Canada (2006) Vulnerability assessment,  climate change impacts and adaptation measures; in  Canada’s Fourth National Report on Climate Change,  Environment Canada, p. 153-168.  5. Environment Canada (2007) From Impacts to Adaptation:  Canada in a Changing Climate. Chapter 4, Atlantic Canada.  6. Geological Survey of Canada (1998) Climate Change in  Canada – Impacts and Adaptation  7. Government of Canada (2010) Adapting to Climate  Change: An Introduction for Canadian Municipalities.  8. Health Canada (2004) Your Health and Changing Climate:  Newsletter – Volume 1  9. Heath Canada (2005) Your Health and Changing Climate:  Newsletter – Volume 2  10. ICLEI (2011) Changing Climate, Changing Communities:  Guide and Workbook for Municipal Climate Adaptation.  11. ICLEI (2008) Five Milestone Framework for Reducing  Greenhouse Gas Emissions. FCM Centre for Sustainable  Community Development.  12. Natural Resources Canada (2005). An Overview of the Risk  Management Approach to Adaptation to Climate Change in  Canada. Global Strategies International. Ottawa, Ontario.  13. MacKenzie, Kyle. and Parlee, Kathryn. (2003) The Road  Ahead: Adapting to Climate Change in Atlantic Canada.  Canadian Climate Impacts and Adaptation Research  Network.  14. Public Safety Canada (2005) Canadian Disaster Database.  Public Safety Canada    24 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  APPeNdiX A  The following information is mandatory and is a  requirement of the final Municipal Climate Change Action  Plan Submission to Service Nova Scotia & Municipal  Relations.   MCCAP (AdAPTATioN) – TeMPlATe  Step One:  Adaptation Committee   This section of the MCCAP will:  o List the members of the adaptation committee and their role  within the organization, or stakeholder group.  o Present the mandate and terms of reference under which the  committee will operate.  Checklist & Deliverables:  o An accounting of the members of your adaptation  committee, and description of their present role in your  organization or as a member of a stakeholder group.  o List of potential stakeholders to be consulted during  preparation of the plan.  o Mandate or Terms of Reference which clarifies team  member’s roles, responsibilities, and deliverables.  o Description of your committee’s process for accountability.  Step Two:  Climate Change issues & Hazards  This section of the MCCAP will:  o Provide information on significant climate change issues  and hazards affecting your municipality and why they have  been flagged as being important.  Checklist & Deliverables:  o Description of the types of issues and hazards climate  changes have caused or exacerbated within your  municipality.  o A summary of the level of preparedness which  characterized your municipality with respect to the above.  o Description of climate related issues or hazards that could  cause problems in the future, and which of these your  committee acknowledges will require future action on the  part of the municipality.  o Analysis of how they might affect the future of your  municipality.   o Any maps which geographically illustrate where climate  change hazards are likely to occur and where they have  occurred in the past.  o Any information summarizing potential climate benefits for  your municipality, if you believe there are any.  o A description of any additional information your team may  require in order to fill-in information gaps related to hazards  caused by climate change.  o A description of any stakeholder involvement during this  step.  Step Three:  Affected locations  This section of the MCCAP will:  o Provide information that describes those parts of the  municipality that your committee has identified as being  subject to climate change issues. Affected locations may  range in scale from an entire region, to specific sites and  structures.  Checklist & Deliverables:  o Description of specific places where problems have  occurred in the past and are highly likely to occur again.  o Information describing where within your municipality  future climate hazards are likely to occur and how your  committee came to identify these areas/sites.  o Where possible, an analysis of the level of degree of impact  associated with vulnerable sites (for example, moderate  to severe effects anticipated in low-lying areas near the  coastline).   Submission Template -  Mandatory Plan Content    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 25 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  o An account or map showing municipal and community  assets located on vulnerable or at-risk areas of your  municipality, including specific sites and locations expected  to be affected, as well as structures, buildings, existing and  new development expected to be affected  o Description of the kinds of additional information that is  necessary to complete this analysis.  o A description of any stakeholder involvement during this  step.  Step Four:  Facilities and infrastructure  This section of the MCCAP will:  o Identify and describe how existing (and proposed new)  municipally-owned and operated facilities and infrastructure  are vulnerable to climate change.  Checklist & Deliverables:  o A description of key facilities and infrastructure.   o A map overlay that indicates whether or not these facilities  fall into areas identified in Step Three as being at risk dues  to their location with the municipality.  o A section describing specific issues that your committee  acknowledges will affect your infrastructure and key  facilities.  o Identification of those facilities and infrastructure  considered to be important during an emergency.  o Completion of the requirements for infrastructure and  facilities.  o A description of any stakeholder involvement during this  step.  Step Five (a):  Who will be Affected  This section of the MCCAP will:  o Provide information about whom within the municipality  might be most adversely affected by climate change issues.  Checklist & Deliverables:  o An account of  whom (communities, individuals, groups)  within your municipality may be particularly vulnerable to  climate change hazards, either because of their location, or  due to other factors, and why they are at greater risk.   o Any maps which help to convey this information.  o Any information regarding how EMO plans will be  incorporated into this analysis.  o General information regarding any climate hazards with the  potential to affect the health and safety of residents.  o A compilation of individuals, organizations, agencies or  groups that may be able to help in the event of a weather- related emergency.  o A description of any stakeholder involvement during this  step.  Step Five (b):  economic implications  This section of the MCCAP will:  o Provide information on the potential economic implications  of climate change on the municipality, at both the local and  regional levels.  Checklist & Deliverables:  o Information regarding how your committee anticipates  climate change could potentially impact local and regional  economies, with information relating to areas within the  local economy that may be particularly vulnerable to, or  exasperated by climate change.  o A list of ideas and/or options for dealing with potential  threats to the local economy.  o A description of any areas within the local economy where  climate change may prove to be beneficial.  o A description of any stakeholder involvement during this  step.    26 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Step Five (c):  environmental issues  This section of the MCCAP will:  o Report on any potential environmental issues of which the  municipality is aware, which could result from climate  change impacts.   Checklist & Deliverables:  o A summary of any environmental problems experienced  in your municipality in the past; caused by weather and/or  climate change.  o A section outlining how your committee anticipates these  problems may increase, become exacerbated or change with  future changes in the weather (based on information gained  during the completion of Steps One to Five).  o Any information and/or maps describing sensitive habitats,  ecosystems, wildlife and endangered species in your  municipality which may be impacted by changes in the  weather or by climate change.  o Any maps showing the location of sites with dangerous  and/or hazardous materials stored within your municipality.  o Any information which describes storage conditions and  overall safety standards in place for hazardous materials.  o A summary of how your municipality’s Emergency  Preparedness Plan fits into Step Five.  Step Six:  Priorities for Adaptation  This section of the MCCAP will:  o Outline the priorities for adaptive action acknowledged by  your committee to be important to the overall wellbeing of  your municipality.  Checklist & Deliverables:  o An accounting of the adaptation issues and hazards (with  implications for the future well-being of your municipality)  considered by the committee to warrant future action,  with a description of why they were identified as being  significant.  o A level of priority assigned to each issue (high, medium,  low).  o A description of any adaptive actions that are already being  undertaken by the municipality to address issues.  o Information on the range of potential actions which may  be under consideration for addressing priority issues.  Please note that: municipalities will be asked to provide  progress reports on adaptive actions undertaken in the years  subsequent to the submission of the final MCCAP in 2013.  o A list of tasks or additional information necessary to  develop deeper analysis and understanding of the priority  issues (for example detailed mapping or professional risk  analysis for infrastructure).  o For municipalities with a MPS and LUB (refer to Step Six):   o A section explaining how climate change adaptation will  influence, and be integrated into, land-use policy and  (future) land-use regulation.   o A discussion on potential planning approaches or tools  which might be used to facilitate adaptation.  o For municipalities without formal land use documents: a  section outlining how you plan to address new development  within the context of climate change adaptation.  MCCAP (MiTiGATioN) - TeMPlATe  The following information is a requirement of the MCCAP and  must be included as part of the final plan submission to SNSMR.  Introduction  o A short section describing key areas in which the  municipality intends to reduce energy demand and energy  use with the overall objective of reducing greenhouse gas  emissions (buildings, operations, vehicles, etc.).   Energy & Emissions Information  o Completion and submission of the UNSM corporate energy  and emissions spreadsheet.  o Completion and submission of an energy and emissions  inventory table.  Goals & Actions  o A description of emission reduction efforts to-date and/or  targets for GHG reduction set by the municipality.  o A description of any progress made towards meeting  the guiding principles outlined in the Memorandum of  Understanding on Climate Change, made between the  UNSM and the Province of Nova Scotia.    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 27 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  o A description of any significant projects related to reducing  emissions already undertaken by the municipality, and any  guiding principles or strategic approach already in use with  respect to municipal mitigation efforts.  o A section that describes the goals established by the  municipality for reducing energy demand and greenhouse  gas emissions over the short, medium and long-term.  o Any contextual notes required for understanding the goals.  o A description of the actions established for the plan, and an  indication of the goals that each action is associated with.  o Any contextual notes required to understand the actions.  Implementation  This section of the mitigation plan will include:  o The time frame, responsibility and estimated cost  information associated with each action which links to a  goal.  o Any contextual notes required for understanding this  content.    28 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  APPeNdiX B  Step Two:  identify the issues  • Climate change models  • Historical data  • Local knowledge  • Newspaper and municipal records  • Risk rating indices  • Integrated Community Sustainability Plan  • Peer-reviewed, published and non-published articles on  biophysical and socio-economic impacts of climate change  • Findings from technical assessments  • Results of climate change risk assessments  • Technical expertise – local, provincial, national  • UNDP’s Adaptation Learning Mechanism http://www. adaptationlearning.net  • UNFCCC http://unfccc.int/national_reports/items/1408.php   • National Capacity Self-Assessment http://ncsa.undp.org  • IPCC Climate Data & Models  http://www.ipcc.ch  Step Three:  Affected locations  • Maps (e.g. flood, topographic, hazard, zoning, geology,  soils, watershed)  • Local knowledge  • Google Earth  • Arial photographs  • Integrated Community Sustainability Plan  • HRM Climate Change: Developer’s Risk Management  Guide   http://www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/ DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf  • Atlantic Canada Adaptation Solutions http://adaptation. nrcan.gc.ca/collab/index_e.php  • Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change http://www. ipcc.ch/publications_and/data/publications_and_data_ reports.htm#1  • Natural Resources Canada http://www.nrc.ca  • Environment Canada http://www.ec.gc.ca  • Ouranos http://www.ouranos.ca  • Canadian Climate Change Scenario Network http://www. cccsn.ca  • Environmental Systems Research Institute Canada http:// www.esricanada.com/english/995.asp  Step Four:  Facilities and infrastructure  • Community Accounts infrastructure maps  • Municipal planning strategy and land use bylaw  • Public Sector Accounting Board (PSAB) reporting  • Municipal infrastructure maps  • Capital works plans  • Engineering studies and drawings  • Arial photographs  • Integrated Community Sustainability Plan  • Infrastructure Climate Risk Protocols (Engineers Canada)  www.pievc.ca  • Guide to Considering Climate Change in Project  Development in Nova Scotia   http://www.gov.ns.ca/nse/ea/docs/Development.Climate. Change.Guide.pdf  • Adapting Infrastructure to Climate Change in Canada’s  Cities and Communities – A Literature Review http://www. csa.ca/climatechange/downloads/pdf/Impacts_of_Climate_ Change_2006.pdf  • HRM Climate Change: Developer’s Risk Management  Guide   http://www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/ DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf  Adaptation Tools, Guidelines  & Helpful resources    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 29 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  • The Role of Standards in Adapting Canada’s Infrastructure  to the Impacts of Climate Change   http://www.csa.ca/climatechange/downloads/pdf/Impacts_ of_Climate_Change_2006.pdf  • Canadian Institute of Planners http://www.cip-icu.ca  • Engineers Canada http://engineerscanada.ca  • Environmental Systems Research Institute Canada http:// www.esricanada.com/english/955.asp  • Federation of Canadian Municipalities http://www.fcm.ca  • Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee  (PIEVC): Adapting Infrastructure to a Changing Climate   http://www.pievc.ca/e/index_.cfm  • Natural Disaster Mitigation in Drinking Water and  Sewerage Systems: Guidelines for Vulnerability Analysis  http://www.paho.org/English/DD/PED/natureng.htm  Step Five:  Socioeconomic & environmental  • Community Accounts Statistics  • Municipal planning strategy and land use bylaw  • Integrated Community Sustainability Plan  • Social Services Agencies  • Emergency Plans  • Archeological, Heritage & Cultural Studies  • Population and Demographic Assessments  • Community Development Grants  • Municipal planning strategy and land use bylaw  • Integrated Community Sustainability Plan  • Community Maps, Reports and Statistics  • Environmental Plans  • Local Knowledge  • Local Environmental Groups  • Maps (ex. Habitat, soils, geology, zoning)  • Guide to Considering Climate Change in Environmental  Assessments in Nova Scotia    http://www.gov.ns.ca/nse/ea/docs/EA.Climate.Change. Guide.pdf  Step Six:  Setting Priorities & Taking Action  • Municipal planning strategy and land use bylaw  • Integrated Community Sustainability Plan  • Community Maps, Reports and Statistics  • Local Knowledge  • Case Studies   Adapting to Climate Change: A Risk-based Guide for Local  Governments (Black et al.,2010)   http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/tools/abosuj_e.php  • Municipal Resources for Adapting to Climate Change  (Federation of Canadian Municipalities)    www.sustainablecommunities.ca/files/Capacity_ Building_-_PCP/PCP_Resources/Mun-Re-_Adapting- Climate-Change-e.pdf  • Adapting to Climate Change: An Introduction for Canadian  Municipalities   http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/mun/pdf/mun_e.pdf  • Guide to Considering Climate Change in Project  Development in Nova Scotia   http://www.gov.ns.ca/nse/ea/docs/Development.Climate. Change.Guide.pdf  • HRM Climate Change: Developer’s Risk Management  Guide   http://www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/ DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf  • Community Climate Change Adaptation Handbook    http://www.clean.ns.ca/files/01/59/CCAdaptBooklet.pdf  • FCM’s Model Climate Change Action Plan, from their  Partners for Climate Protection program:    http://fmv.fcm.ca/files/Capacity_Building_-_PCP/model- climate-change-action-plan-En.pdf   • Vancouver’s Corporate Climate Change Action Plan:    http://vancouver.ca/sustainability/documents/corp_ climatechangeAP-1.pdf   • Vancouver’s Community Climate Change Action Plan  (Climate-friendly City):   http://vancouver.ca/sustainability/documents/ CommunityClimateChangeActionPlan2005coverandreport. pdf     30 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  • Climate Change Adaptation Framework Manual (Ministry  of Sustainable Resource Development, Alberta)   www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsFormsPublications/Publications/ ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx  • Alberta Association of Municipal Districts and Counties  (AAMDC) and Alberta Urban Municipalities Association’s  Model Climate Change Action Plan   mccac.ca  • EPA’s guide to developing a climate change action plan:    http://www.epa.gov/statelocalclimate/local/activities/action- plan.html  • International examples of Climate Change Action Plans  from C40 cities:    http://www.c40cities.org/ccap/   • United Nations Conference on Climate Change: Local  Coping Strategies Database    http://maindb.unfccc.int/public/adaptation/  • Climate Change Scenarios: New Brunswick Municipalities    http://www.unb.ca/enviro/documents/Finalreport-March30. pdf  • Partners for Climate Protection: Municipal Resources for  Adapting to Climate Change    http://fmv.fcm.ca/files/Capacity_Building_-_PCP/PCP_ Resources/Mun-Re-_Adapting-Climate-Change-e.pdf  • Climate Change: Changing Communities A Guide and  Workbook for Municipal Climate Change Adaptation    http://www.iclei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/ Canada/Changing_Climate/ICLE076_-_NRCan_Guide.pdf  • Canadian Communities’ Guidebook for Adaptation to  Climate Change.    cbtadaptation.squarespace.com/guidebooks-papers- methologie/  • Institute for Local Government – Best Management  Practices    http://www.ca-ilg.org/ClimatePractices  • IPCC Technical Guidelines for Assessing Climate Change  Impacts and Adaptations    http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_ and_ data_reports.htm  • UNDP Adaptation Policy Framework    http://www.undp.org/climatechange adapt/apf.html  • Assessments of Impacts and Adaptations to Climate Change  in Multiple Regions and Sectors    http://unfccc.int/files/cooperation_and_support/Idc/ application/pdf/annguide.pdf  • Tool for Environmental Assessment and Management  (TEAM)    http://www.epa.gov/eims/global/team1.pdf  • Adaptation Actions    http://www.ukcip.org.uk/index.php?option=com_ content&task=view    MuNiCiPAl CliMATe CHANGe ACTioN PlAN 31 CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT  Mitigation Tools, Guidelines & Helpful resources  report Title organization Access  Climate Change 101 PeW Center for Global Climate  Change  Available online: http://www.pewclimate.org/global- warming-basics/climate_change_101   Climate Change 101 Government of Canada Available online: http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/default. asp?lang=en&n=65Cd73F4-1   Climate Change Basic information united States environmental  Protection Agency  Available online: http://www.epa.gov/climatechange/ basicinfo.html  Climate Change in Nova Scotia: A  Background Paper to Guide Nova  Scotia’s Climate Change Action Plan  Nova Scotia department of energy Available online: http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/Publications/ statistics/trends06/pdf/trends06.pdf   From impacts to Adaptation:  Canada in a Changing Climate 2007  Government of Canada Available online: http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/ assess/2007/pdf/full-complet_e.pdf   our Coast live. Work. Play. Protect.  The 2009 State of Nova Scotia’s  Coast Technical report  Province of Nova Scotia Available online: http://www.gov.ns.ca/coast/documents/ report/Coastal-Tech-report-Nov-09.pdf . Chapters 5 and 7.  Submission for Nova Scotia  department of energy’s energy  Strategy and Climate Change  Action Plan  Clean Nova Scotia Available online: http://www.clean.ns.ca/files/30/ CNS27s20submission20for20doe.pdf   Toward a Greener Future: Nova  Scotia’s Climate Change Action Plan  Nova Scotia department of  environment   Available online: http://climatechange.gov.ns.ca/doc/ ccap.pdf   energy efficiency Trends in Canada  1990-2004  Natural resources Canada Available online: http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/Publications/ statistics/trends06/pdf/trends06.pdf   Greenhouse Gas emissions  Forecasting: learning from  international Best Practices  National round Table on the  environment and the economy  Available online: http://www.ec.gc.ca/Content/6/3/ A/63A6d41e-8017-4826-A40C-6C940BF71BC5/nrtee-ghg- emissions-forecasting-eng.pdf   Halifax regional Municipality  Community local Action Plan to  reduce Greenhouse Gas emissions  Naturally Green Halifax regional Municipality dillon Consulting limited  improving energy Performance  in Canada. report to Parliament  under the energy efficiency Act for  the Fiscal Year 2007-2008  Natural resources Canada ecoeNerGY  Available online: http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/publications/ statistics/parliament07-08/pdf/parliament07-08.pdf  National inventory report 1990- 2008: Greenhouse Gas Sources and  Sinks in Canada  The Canadian Government’s  Submission to the uN Framework  Convention on Climate Change  Available online: http://www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/ default.asp?lang=en&xml=492d914C-2eAB-47AB-A045- C62B2CdACC29   Act locally. The Municipal role in  Fighting Climate Change  Federation of Canadian  Municipalities   Available online: http://www.fcm.ca//CMFiles/FCM_ Climate_en_Final1rSG-1272009-2598.pdf      CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT CANAdA-NovA SCoTiA iNFrASTruCTure SeCreTAriAT32 www.nsinfrastructure.ca  Secrétariat du Programme d’Infrastructures Canada - Nouvelle Écosse  Maritime Centre 14 Nord 1505  rue Barrington C.P.  Box 216 Halifax, Nouvelle-Ecosse  B3J 2M4  Canada - Nova Scotia Infrastructure   Secretariat  Maritime Centre 14 North 1505 Barrington Street  P.O.  Box 216 Halifax, Nova Scotia  B3J 2M4  Tel: 902.424.4141   |   Fax/Téléc: 902.424.0821   |     Web site: www.nsinfrastructure.ca   