                                          Canada’s Sixth National Report on Climate Change 2014   ]  Canada’s Sixth National Report   on Climate Change  2014  ACTIONS TO MEET COMMITMENTS UNDER THE  UNITED NATIONS FRAMEWORK CONVENTION ON CLIMATE CHANGE     Cat. No.: En4-73/2013E-PDF  ISBN: 978-1-100-22963-8  Information contained in this publication or product may be reproduced, in part or in whole, and by any  means, for personal or public non-commercial purposes, without charge or further permission, unless  otherwise specified.  You are asked to:  • Exercise due diligence in ensuring the accuracy of the materials reproduced; • Indicate both the complete title of the materials reproduced, as well as the author organization; and •  Indicate that the reproduction is a copy of an official work that is published by the Government of   Canada and that the reproduction has not been produced in affiliation with or with the endorsement  of the Government of Canada.  Commercial reproduction and distribution is prohibited except with written permission from the author.  For more information, please contact Environment Canada’s Inquiry Centre at 1-800-668-6767 (in Canada  only) or 819-997-2800 or email to enviroinfo@ec.gc.ca  © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of the Environment, 2013.  Aussi disponible en français     ]  iii  TABLE OF CONTENTS   001 1 Introduction  National Circumstances Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory Policies and Measures  Federal Policy Making Process Government of Canada’s Sector-by-Sector Regulatory Approach Cross-sectoral, Clean Energy Investments and Other Complementary   Measures Modifying Long-term Trends in GHG Emissions and Removals  Projections Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Measures Finance Technology and Capacity Building Research and Systematic Observation of Climate Change Education and Public Awareness  014 2 Canada’s National Circumstances  2.1 Introduction 2.2 Governance Structure 2.3 Addressing Climate Change in Canada 2.4 Population 2.5 Geographic Profile 2.6 Climate Profile 2.7 Economic Profile 2.8 Energy   2.8.1 Energy Reserves, Production, and Trade  2.8.1.1 Crude Oil  2.8.1.2 Natural Gas 2.8.1.3 Coal 2.8.1.4 Electricity  2.8.2 Energy Consumption  2.9 Transportation   2.9.1 Road Transportation 2.9.2 Aviation  2.9.3 Rail  2.9.4 Marine  2.10 Industry Profile 2.11 Waste  2.12 Building Stock/Urban Structure  2.12.1 Residential 2.12.2 Commercial/Institutional  2.13 Agriculture 2.14 Forest    TABLE OF CONTENTS  ]  iv  029 3 Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory  3.1 Canada’s 2011 Greenhouse Gas Emissions 3.2 Trends in Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Removals, 1990–2011 3.3 Greenhouse Gas Trends by IPCC Sector, 1990–2011  3.3.1 Energy 3.3.1.1 Energy Industries 3.3.1.2 Manufacturing Industries and Construction 3.3.1.3 Transport 3.3.1.4 Other Energy Sectors 3.3.1.5 Fugitive Emissions from Fuels  3.3.2 Industrial Processes 3.3.3 Solvent and Other Product Use 3.3.4 Agriculture 3.3.5 Waste 3.3.6 Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry  3.4 Uncertainties 3.5 National Inventory Arrangements  3.5.1 Institutional, Legal, and Procedural Arrangements 3.5.2 Process for Inventory Preparation 3.5.3 Quality Assurance and Quality Control 3.5.4 Key Categories 3.5.5 Process for Recalculations of Estimates  047 Annex I  Summary GHG Estimates from Common Reporting  Format Tables  054 4 Policies and Measures  4.1 Overall Policy Context 4.2 Policy Making Process  4.2.1 Description of Inter-Jurisdictional Decision-Making Bodies 4.2.2 Federal Legislative Instruments  4.2.2.1 The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 4.2.2.2 The Energy Efficiency Act, 1992 4.2.2.3 Canada Shipping Act, 2001 4.2.2.4 Aeronautics Act 4.2.2.5 Railway Safety Act  4.3 Federal Monitoring and Reporting Mechanisms 4.4 Federal Policies and Measures and their Effects  4.4.1 Regulations under the Sector-By-Sector Approach 4.4.1.1 Transportation Sector 4.4.1.2 Electricity Sector 4.4.1.3 Oil and Gas Sector    TABLE OF CONTENTS  ]  v  4.4.1.4 Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Sectors 4.4.1.5 Cross-Sectoral Measures  4.4.2 Federal Investments in Clean Energy Technology 4.4.2.1 Sustainable Development Technology Canada 4.4.2.2 ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative 4.4.2.3 Carbon Capture and Storage  4.4.3  Other Federal Complementary Measures 4.4.3.1 ecoENERGY for Aboriginal and Northern Communities   Program 4.4.3.2 ecoENERGY Efficiency program 4.4.3.3 Clean Transportation Initiatives  4.4.4 Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) Sector 4.4.5 Addressing Short-Lived Climate Pollutants  4.5 Provincial and Territorial Polices and Measures and their Effects  4.5.1 Provinces  4.5.1.1 Newfoundland and Labrador  4.5.1.2 Prince Edward Island  4.5.1.3 Nova Scotia  4.5.1.4 New Brunswick 4.5.1.5 Quebec  4.5.1.6 Ontario  4.5.1.7 Manitoba 4.5.1.8 Saskatchewan  4.5.1.9 Alberta 4.5.1.10 British Columbia   4.5.2 Territories 4.5.2.1 Yukon  4.5.2.2 Northwest Territories  4.5.2.3 Nunavut  4.6 How Policies and Measures are Modifying Long-Term Trends in Greenhouse  Gas Emissions and Removals  076 5 Projections and the Total Effect of Policies and Measures  5.1 Introduction 5.2 Comparing Activity Sector Categories to Economic Sectors 5.3 Historical Emissions Trends 5.4 GHG Emissions Projections by Economic Sector and Gas  5.4.1 National Emissions Projections 5.4.2 Emissions Intensity 5.4.3 Per Capita Emissions 5.4.4 Emissions by Gas 5.4.5 Emissions Projections by Sector  5.4.5.1 Transportation    TABLE OF CONTENTS  ]  vi  5.4.5.2 Oil and Gas 5.4.5.3 Electricity Generation 5.4.5.4 Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Industries 5.4.5.5 Buildings 5.4.5.6. Agriculture 5.4.5.7 Waste and Others 5.4.5.8  Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry  5.4.5.9 Foreign Passenger and Foreign Freight  5.5 Emissions by Province 5.6 Assessment of Aggregate Effect of Policies and Measures  096 Annex 1 Baseline Data and Assumptions  104 Annex 2 The Contribution of the Land Use, Land-use Change and  Forestry Sector  106 Annex 3 Modeling and Methodological Differences from Canada’s  5th National Communication  107 Annex 4 Alternate Emissions Scenarios  109 Annex 5 Methodology for Development of Emissions Scenarios  114 Annex 6 Land Use, Land-use Change, and Forestry Modeling  Methodology   117 Annex 7 Further Sources  119 6 Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change Impacts and  Adaptation Measures  6.1 Introduction  6.2 Canada’s Changing Climate  6.2.1 Temperature and Precipitation 6.2.2 Extreme Events 6.2.3 Arctic Sea Ice 6.2.4 Permafrost 6.2.5 Coastal Zones 6.2.6 Transportation Infrastructure 6.2.7 Agriculture  6.3 Building the Knowledge Foundation 6.4 Setting Direction: Adaptation Policies, Plans, and Frameworks    TABLE OF CONTENTS  ]  vii  6.4.1 Federal 6.4.2 Provincial and Territorial  6.4.2.1 Quebec 6.4.2.2 Ontario 6.4.2.3 Manitoba 6.4.2.4 British Columbia 6.4.2.5 Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut  6.4.3 Municipal 6.5 Fostering Effective Collaboration 6.6 Implementing Adaptation Measures  6.6.1 Natural Environment 6.6.2 Natural Resources 6.6.3 Water Resources 6.6.4 Coastal Zone Management 6.6.5 Municipalities and Infrastructure 6.6.6 Agriculture and Food Production 6.6.7 Human Health and Well-being  6.7  Contributing to International Initiatives  6.7.1 Research and Science 6.7.2 Regional and Bilateral Collaboration  6.7.3 Development Assistance, Multilateral Instruments and International   Aid Partnerships 6.8 Conclusion   144 7 Financial Resources and Transfer of Technology  7.1 Introduction 7.2 Financial Resources  7.2.1 New and Additional Resources 7.2.2 Geographic Distribution  7.2.3 Sectorial Distribution  7.2.4 Financial Support to the Global Environment Facility 7.2.5 Adaptation by the Poorest and Most Vulnerable Countries 7.2.6 Clean Energy 7.2.7 Forests and Agriculture 7.2.8 Mobilising Private Sector Investments  7.3 Transfer of Technology 7.3.1 Developing and Sharing Knowledge and Tools 7.3.2 Engaging Multilaterally 7.3.3 Working with Bilateral Partners    TABLE OF CONTENTS  ]  viii  167 8 Research and Systematic Observation of Climate Change  8.1 Introduction 8.2 Funding and Priorities  8.2.1 Overview 8.2.2 Funding within the Government of Canada  8.2.2.1 Clean Air Agenda 8.2.2.2 Canadian Space Agency Programs 8.2.2.3 Program of Energy Research and Development  8.2.3 Research Granting Agencies and Funded Initiatives in Canada 8.2.3.1 Climate Change and Atmospheric Research Grants 8.2.3.2 Networks of Centers of Excellence 8.2.3.3 Canada Research Chairs 8.2.3.4 Canada Excellence Research Chairs  8.2.4 Other Initiatives 8.2.4.1 International Polar Year 8.2.4.2 Beaufort Regional Environmental Assessment 8.2.4.3 Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences  8.3 Systematic Observation 8.3.1 Overview 8.3.2 Monitoring Networks  8.3.2.1 Atmosphere  8.3.2.2 Oceans 8.3.2.3 Cryosphere 8.3.2.4 Terrestrial Systems   8.3.3 Space-based Observations 8.3.3.1 Canadian Satellites and Missions 8.3.3.2 Canadian Instruments aboard International Satellites and   Missions 8.3.3.3 Canadian Involvement in International Missions  8.4 Research 8.4.1 Overview 8.4.2 Trends and Variability  8.4.2.1 Atmosphere 8.4.2.2 Oceans 8.4.2.3 Cryosphere 8.4.2.4 Forests  8.4.3 Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks 8.4.3.1 Agricultural Ecosystems 8.4.3.2 Forest Ecosystems 8.4.3.3 Ocean systems  8.4.3.4 Observation-based Approaches to Carbon Source Estimation    TABLE OF CONTENTS  ]  ix  8.4.4 Climate Processes 8.4.4.1 Land and Cryosphere 8.4.4.2 Oceans 8.4.4.3 Biophysical Sensitivities 8.4.4.4 Atmospheric Physics and Chemistry  8.4.5 Climate Modelling and Applications 8.4.5.1 Ocean Modelling 8.4.5.2 Global Climate Models 8.4.5.3 Regional Climate Modelling and Scenarios 8.4.5.4 Seasonal to Inter-Annual Prediction 8.4.5.5 Detection and Attribution of Climate Change  8.5 Climate Science Assessment  197 9 Education, Training, and Public Awareness  9.1 General Policy Towards Education, Training and Public Awareness  9.2 Primary, Secondary and Post-secondary Education   9.2.1 Primary and Secondary Education 9.2.2 Post-secondary Education  9.2.3 Networks of Centres of Excellence 9.2.4 Research Granting Agencies in Canada  9.3 Public Access to Information  9.3.1 Web and Social Media  9.3.2 Conferences and Trade Shows  9.4 Resource and Information Centres 9.4.1 Providing Energy Efficiency Information  9.5 Training Programs  9.6 Public and Non-Governmental Organizations  9.7 Provincial and Territorial Activities 9.8 Participation in International Activities  206 Annex 1: Canada’s First Biennial Report    001  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  1 Introduction Canada is pleased to present its 6th National  Communication and 1st Biennial Report on Climate  Change for 2014 to meet its reporting requirements  under the United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (UNFCCC).  Canada recognizes the importance of climate change  and, as an arctic nation, is particularly affected by its  impacts. To respond to this global challenge, Canada  is implementing a comprehensive climate change  plan, both domestically and internationally. This plan  is underpinned by a strong scientific foundation and  includes action on, and investments in mitigation  and adaptation, as well as international engagement  through a number of multilateral fora.  Since Canada’s 5th National Communication in 2010,  progress has been made in implementing a sector-by- sector regulatory approach to address emissions. These  actions are precedent-setting: for the first time, Canada  has national regulations to reduce greenhouse gas  (GHG) emissions.   The Government of Canada has started with the  transportation and electricity sectors—two of  the largest sources of emissions in Canada. The  Government of Canada has implemented regulations  setting progressively more stringent standards for  passenger automobiles and light-duty trucks and has  introduced proposed regulations to further improve  fuel efficiency and reduce GHG emissions from model  years 2017 and beyond. As a result of these regulations,  model year 2025 passenger vehicles and light-duty  trucks will emit about 50% less GHGs and consume up  to 50% less fuel than 2008 models. The Government  of Canada has also taken action to regulate heavy-duty  vehicles. In March 2013, the Government of Canada  released final regulations that establish progressively  more stringent emissions standards for heavy-duty   vehicles such as full-size pick-ups, semi-trucks, garbage  trucks, and buses.   The Government’s coal-fired electricity regulations  further strengthen Canada’s position as a world  leader in clean electricity production. With these  regulations, Canada became the first major coal  user to ban the construction of traditional coal-fired  electricity generation units. This approach will foster a  permanent transition towards lower- or non-emitting  types of generation such as high-efficiency natural gas  and renewable energy. Over the first 21 years, these  regulations are expected to result in a cumulative  reduction of about 214 megatonnes (Mt) GHGs,  equivalent to removing some 2.6 million personal  vehicles from the road per year over this period.   Building on this record, the Government of Canada is  working with provinces to reduce emissions from the  oil and gas sectors while ensuring Canadian companies  remain competitive.   The Government of Canada has also made significant  investments to begin Canada’s transition to a clean  energy economy and advance Canada’s climate change  objectives. Since 2006, the federal government has  invested over $10 billion in green infrastructure,  energy efficiency, the development of clean energy  technologies, and the production of cleaner energy and  cleaner fuels.  At the same time, climate change is a shared  responsibility in Canada. Provinces and territories have  been taking action to address climate change according  to their unique circumstances.  In combination, these actions have been generating  significant results. As a result of collective action by  governments, consumers, and industry, Canada’s  2020 emissions are projected to be 128 Mt lower than     002  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  they would have been under a no-action scenario.  This is the equivalent of shutting down 37 coal-fired  electricity generation plants. Moreover, Canada’s per  capita emissions are at a historic low of 20.4 tonnes of  carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eq) per person—their  lowest level since tracking began in 1990. Canada has  also demonstrated progress in decoupling emissions  growth from economic growth. Since 2005, Canadian  GHG emissions have decreased by 4.8%, even while the  economy has grown by 8.4%.  Addressing short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) is  also part of the Government of Canada’s comprehensive  climate change plan. Since the last National  Communication, Canada became a founding member  and large financial contributor to the Climate and  Clean Air Coalition to Reduce Short-Lived Climate  Pollutants (CCAC). Since its beginning in 2012, the  CCAC has grown to include over 70 partners. Canada  is also demonstrating leadership on addressing short- lived climate pollutants through its chairmanship  of the Arctic Council (2013–2015). One of Canada’s  priority initiatives in this context is to advance work on  addressing black carbon and methane. As part of this  effort, the Arctic Council ministers agreed to establish  a task force, co-chaired by Canada and Sweden, to work  towards actions to reduce emissions of these pollutants.  These international efforts complement the strong  action Canada has taken to address SLCPs domestically,  including regulations for both on-road and off-road  vehicle emissions and sulphur content in gasoline  and in diesel.   Beyond these efforts, Canada recognizes that the  climate is changing and Canadians are experiencing its  effects. Since Canada’s last National Communication,  Canadian governments have continued to take action to  help Canadians adapt to a changing climate.   The Government of Canada is providing $148.8 million  in funding over 5 years (2011–2016) to support an  improved understanding of climate change and to  help Canadians plan for climate impacts, including   in the North. Other levels of government are making  progress on impacts and adaptation issues. For  example, all provinces and territories have either  released adaptation strategies, or are in the process  of developing them, or have integrated adaptation  efforts into broader climate change action plans.  Adaptation has also become an increasingly important  risk management issue for the private sector. Shared  adaptation priorities across jurisdictions and economic  sectors include building community capacity,  undertaking climate change research, and enhancing  existing emergency preparedness initiatives. Continued  support for adaptation decision-making by businesses,  communities and Canadians contributes to effective  climate risk management in Canada.  Canada’s climate science is an integral part of the  global effort to understand climate system behaviour,  human influence on climate, and future climate change  scenarios. Canada’s science contributes to domestic  climate change policies and decisions, and informs  international bodies such as the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change, the Arctic Council, and  the Global Methane Initiative. In May 2013, the  Government of Canada provided funds for arctic  research through the Natural Sciences and Engineering  Research Council’s Climate Change and Atmospheric  Research initiative. This program supports collaborative  climate change and atmospheric research, and will  provide funding of more than $32 million over 5 years to  7 university-based research networks.  On the international stage, Canada is an active  participant in discussions under the UNFCCC  towards a new post-2020 international climate change  agreement. At the 19th Conference of the Parties in  Warsaw, Canada played a constructive role to help  create momentum under these negotiations. Canada’s  leadership was also instrumental in achieving a  breakthrough on an important initiative to help  developing countries reduce deforestation and forest  degradation, which account for nearly 15% of global  GHG emissions.     003  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  Canada is also committed to working with developing  countries to help them respond to the challenge of  climate change. The Government of Canada fulfilled  its commitment to deliver $1.2 billion of the $30 billion  fast-start funding pledge made by developed countries.  Issued over fiscal years 2010–2011 to 2012–2013, Canada’s  funding supports climate change mitigation and  adaptation in developing countries. This funding is  helping advance a range of climate change projects in  over 60 developing countries, with a specific focus on  adaptation, clean energy technology and transfer, and  sustainable forests and agriculture.   In addition to Canada’s engagement in the UNFCCC,  the Government of Canada continues to pursue a  number of collaborative international initiatives to  address global climate change, including the phase- down of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) under the  Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the  Ozone Layer.   Canada recognizes that climate change is a serious  challenge that requires collective action by businesses,  consumers and governments. The Government  of Canada is focused on a pragmatic approach to  addressing climate change that will reduce emissions  while continuing to create jobs and encouraging the  growth of the Canadian economy.  The following provides highlights of Canada’s 6th  National Communication and 1st Biennial Report to  the NFCCC.  National Circumstances  Canada’s unique geographic, demographic and  economic circumstances influence its GHG emissions  profile. Canada has an extreme, highly variable climate  that contributes to higher energy use for space heating  and cooling in both the commercial and residential  sectors. Canada also has a large landmass that  contributes to longer travel times and a higher demand  for freight transportation.   The Canadian population remains the smallest among  G8 countries but is also the fastest growing, with an  annual population growth rate of just over 1%. Canada’s  low population density contributes to a higher energy  demand (and GHG emissions) for the transportation  of people and goods as compared with smaller, more  densely populated countries.   In addition to its faster-than-average population growth  relative to other developed countries, Canada has  experienced sustained economic growth. As a natural  resource-rich economy, Canada is a net exporter of  agricultural products, energy (electricity and oil and  gas) and many resource-based commodities such as  mined metals, aluminum and pulp and paper. Over  the past decade, Canada’s exports of energy, extracted  resources and agricultural commodities as a share of  GDP have increased by almost 40%.   Canada relies on transportation for trade in the global  economy. Since 1990, there has been a 33% growth  in transportation emissions in Canada, an increase  that was mainly driven by an increase in cross-border  trade, on-road freight transportation activity and a  shift in personal vehicle ownership from cars to light- duty trucks.  Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory  UNFCCC Annex I Parties, including Canada, are  required to report annual inventories of GHG emissions  and removals. Canada’s National Inventory Report is  prepared and submitted annually to the UNFCCC and  includes estimates of CO2 equivalent in the following  six sectors: Energy, Industrial Processes, Solvent and  Other Product Use, Agriculture, Waste, and Land Use,  Land-use Change and Forestry (LULUCF). The most  recent report is entitled National Inventory Report:  Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks in Canada 1990–2011;  the report’s Executive Summary is available online at  http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg  http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg   004  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  Figure 1.1 Canada’s Emissions Breakdown by Sector (2011)   (all sectors are consistent with the definitions provided in the IPCC  1996 Guidelines for National GHG Inventories)  In 2011, Canada emitted 702 Mt CO2 eq 1 of GHGs to the   atmosphere, excluding LULUCF estimates. The Energy  Sector (comprising stationary combustion, transport  and fugitive emission sources) produced the majority of  Canada’s GHG total emissions in 2011, at 81% or 572 Mt.  The remaining 19% of total emissions was largely  generated by source within the Agriculture Sector   (8% of total emissions) and Industrial Processes  Sector (8%), with minor contributions from the  Waste Sector (3%) and Solvent and Other Product  Use Sector. Greenhouse gases in the LULUCF Sector  are not included in the inventory totals, due to large  annual fluctuations heavily influenced by the impact of  natural disturbances on managed forest land, notably  fires. In 2011, total emissions for the LULUCF Sector are  estimated at about 87 Mt.  In 2011, CO2 contributed 79% of Canada’s total GHG  emissions. The majority of these emissions are   produced by the combustion of fossil fuels. Methane  (CH4) accounted for 13% of Canada’s total emissions,  largely from fugitive emissions from oil and natural  gas systems, as well as activities in the Agriculture and  Waste Sectors. Nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions from  activities such as agriculture soil management and  transport accounted for 7% of the emissions, while  perfluorocarbons (PFCs), sulphur hexafluoride (SF6)  and HFCs constituted the remainder of the emissions  (slightly more than 1%).  Canada’s emissions in 2011 were 111 Mt (19%) above  the 1990 total of 591 Mt (Figure 1.2). Steady increases  in annual emissions characterized the first 15 years  of this period, followed by fluctuating emission  levels between 2005 and 2008, a steep drop in 2009  and more stable values thereafter. Between 2005 and  2011, emissions decreased by 36 Mt (4.8%), primarily  due to decreases from electricity generation and  manufacturing industries.  Figure 1.2 Canadian GHG Emissions Trend (1990–2011) and  Copenhagen Target    005  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  Figure 1.3 Indexed Trend in GHG Emissions and GHG Emissions  Intensity (1990–2011)  Though GHG emissions have risen by 19% since 1990,  Canada’s economy has grown much more rapidly,  with its GDP rising by 65%. As a result, the emission  intensity for the whole economy (GHG per GDP) has  improved considerably, dropping by 28% (Figure 1.3).   Canada has established a national system to ensure  the integrity of its annual inventory. Canada’s national  system for the estimation of anthropogenic   (i.e., human-induced) emissions from sources  and removals by sinks of GHGs encompasses the  institutional, legal and procedural arrangements  necessary to ensure that Canada meets its  reporting obligations.   The national system consists of institutional  arrangements for the preparation of the greenhouse  gas inventory, including formal agreements supporting  data collection and estimates development; a quality  assurance/quality control plan; the ability to identify  key categories and generate quantitative uncertainty  analysis; a process for performing recalculations for  improvement of the inventory; procedures for official  approval; and a working archives system to facilitate  third-party review.  Policies and Measures  All levels of government in Canada are taking action to  address climate change. The Government of Canada is  implementing a sector-by-sector regulatory approach  to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Government  of Canada has already begun to implement this plan  starting with the transportation and electricity sectors,  and is now moving to address other sectors of the  economy. The Government of Canada’s regulatory  approach is complemented by investments in clean  energy technology and other non-regulatory measures  that will help reduce emissions over the longer term.  Provinces and territories are also taking meaningful  action on climate change, and they are playing a role in  several international and regional climate action plans  and partnerships.   Federal Policy Making Process While several federal departments are involved in the  development and implementation of climate change  programming, the Minister of the Environment is the  lead minister for domestic and international climate  change policies and measures within the Government  of Canada. The Government of Canada uses bilateral  and multilateral fora (e.g., process working groups)     006  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  to develop its sector-by-sector regulatory approach,  working closely with provinces and territories, given the  shared jurisdiction for the environment in the country.  Federal climate change policies and measures are  underpinned by key legislative instruments, the most  important of which is the Canadian Environmental  Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA 1999). This act includes  authorities to regulate various aspects of GHG releases,  including setting the quantity or concentration of  a GHG that may be released from various types of  facilities, or from vehicles, engines and equipment.  Government of Canada’s Sector-by-Sector  Regulatory Approach The Government of Canada’s sector-by-sector  regulatory approach allows Canada to maximize  progress on reducing emissions while maintaining  economic competitiveness by making it possible to  tailor regulations to accommodate individual sector  circumstances. Regulations are being designed to drive  real reductions over the long term, provide regulatory  certainty, spur innovation, and leverage capital stock  turnover to avoid the lock-in of long-lived high- emitting infrastructure. This approach has already  been implemented in the transportation and electricity  sectors and the federal government is working on  regulations for other sectors.  In the transportation sector, the Government of Canada  has implemented GHG emission standards under   CEPA 1999 for passenger automobiles and light-duty  trucks for 2011–2016 model year vehicles. In 2012,  proposed amendments were published to include  standards for 2017 model years and beyond. With these  regulations, model year 2025 passenger vehicles and  light-duty trucks will emit about half as many GHGs  and consume up to 50% less fuel than 2008 model  year vehicles.  Canada has also taken action to regulate heavy-duty  vehicles. In March 2013, the Government of Canada  released regulations that establish progressively more  stringent emissions standards for heavy-duty vehicles,  such as full-size pick-ups, semi-trucks, garbage trucks   and buses. With these tough new regulations in place,  GHG emissions from 2018 model year heavy-duty  vehicles will be reduced by up to 23%. Both the light-  and heavy-duty standards are aligned with regulations  in the United States. Other regulatory actions in  the transportation sector include renewable fuels  regulations, which require an average of 5% renewable  fuel content for gasoline and 2% for most diesel fuels.  In the electricity sector, the federal government has  introduced a performance standard for coal-fired  electricity generation. The performance standard comes  into force in 2015 and applies an emissions intensity  limit to new coal-fired electricity generation units and to  old units that have reached the end of their useful life.  Over the first 21 years, these regulations are expected  to result in a cumulative reduction of about 214 Mt of  GHGs, equivalent to removing some 2.6 million personal  vehicles from the road per year over this period.  Addressing short-lived climate pollutants is also part of  the Government of Canada’s comprehensive approach  to addressing climate change. The federal government  completed an assessment that concluded that many  of Canada’s measures to address greenhouse gases and  air pollutants have led to reductions in emissions of  short-lived climate pollutants. These include Canada’s  regulations to address carbon dioxide emissions from  coal-fired electricity (which will reduce ozone precursor  emissions and particulate matter/black carbon), as well  as a suite of vehicle and fuel regulations (which have,  and will continue to significantly reduce black carbon  and ozone precursor emissions). Forthcoming measures  to address emissions from the oil and gas sector, as well  as industrial emissions requirements under Canada’s  new Air Quality Management System, will produce  further reductions.  Cross-sectoral, Clean Energy Investments and  Other Complementary Measures The Government of Canada has also established  regulations under the Energy Efficiency Act, 1992,  to strengthen the minimum energy performance  requirements for more than 40 consumer products     007  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  to date. These regulations include requirements for  mandatory EnerGuide labels on major electrical  household appliances and room air conditioners. The  labels show how much energy a product uses compared  with the range of products in its category.   The Government of Canada also recognizes the  importance of clean technologies in combatting climate  change. Since 2006, the federal government has invested  over $10 billion in green infrastructure, energy efficiency,  the development of clean energy technologies, and  the production of cleaner energy and fossil fuels. This  includes funds allocated to Sustainable Development  Technology Canada, an arm’s-length, not-for-profit  foundation that finances and supports the development  and demonstration of clean technologies. The federal  government’s investments in clean energy also include  investments through the ecoENERGY Innovation  Initiative to support energy technology innovation, and  investments through a number of programs to support  the research, development and demonstration of carbon  capture and storage technologies.  The federal government’s sector-by-sector approach and  clean technology investments are complemented by a  number of non-regulatory measures. Examples of these  measures include the ecoENERGY for Aboriginal and  Northern Communities program, the ecoTECHNOLOGY  for vehicles program, and measures in the Land Use,  Land-use Change and Forestry Sector.   Provinces and territories are also developing and  implementing measures to address climate change  and are playing roles on a number of international  and regional climate action plans and partnerships.  Table 3 of Canada’s 1st Biennial Report provides details  on major federal, provincial and territorial policies  and measures.  Modifying Long-term Trends in GHG  Emissions and Removals Canada’s GHG regulations and complementary  measures by provinces and territories will reduce  absolute emissions over the longer term. For example,   the Government of Canada’s coal-fired electricity  regulations will implement a permanent shift to lower  or non-emitting types of electricity generation. Along  with action by provinces (e.g., Ontario coal phase- out), the regulations are expected to result in a net  cumulative reduction in GHG emissions of about  214 Mt over the 2015–2035 period. Through regulatory  actions in the transportation sector, GHGs from light- duty vehicles will be reduced by 92 Mt over the lifetime  of 2011 to 2016 model year vehicles, and by 162 Mt over  the lifetime of 2017 to 2025 model year vehicles.  Projections  The Government of Canada has developed projections  of greenhouse gas emissions over the 2012 to 2030 time  period. Projections are presented by greenhouse gas  and by economic sector. For comparison purposes, the  tables also depict historical emissions, including for  2005, which is Canada’s base year for its Copenhagen  target. In addition, Canada’s emissions projections for  selected subsectors provide significantly more detail  than required by the UNFCCC. Projections for the   “with current measures” scenario assume federal,  provincial and territorial policies and measures  announced or in place as of May 2013 and assume no  further government action. Policies that are proposed  or planned but not implemented are not included in  these projections.   Canada associated with the Copenhagen Accord  in January 2010 and committed to reduce its GHG  emissions to 17% below 2005 levels by 2020. In light  of strong economic growth this could be challenging.  Canada’s economy is projected to be approximately  31% larger (in real terms) in 2020 compared with 2005  levels. Figure 1.4 demonstrates Canada’s progress  towards its 2020 target.   The difference between the two scenarios represents  the total effect of policies and measures by both federal  and provincial and territorial Canadian governments  and actions by businesses and consumers to improve  their energy efficiency and emission intensity. Under     008  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  the “with current measures” scenario, Canada’s GHG  emissions in 2020 are projected to be 734 Mt CO2 eq.  This is 128 Mt less than under a scenario where  emissions would be in 2020 if consumers, businesses  and governments had taken no action to reduce  emissions since 2005, highlighting the significant  progress that has been achieved in lowering emissions  from a business-as-usual trajectory.   The LULUCF contribution of 28 Mt of emission  removals has only been estimated up to Canada’s target  year (2020). This is because, although business-as-usual  data is available through 2030, the reference level used  to measure progress in the managed forests was only  constructed and negotiated to 2020. Since estimating  the LULUCF contribution requires this reference  level, the contribution cannot be estimated for years  after 2020. It is anticipated that Canada will develop  a post-2020 reference level as part of its participation  in international negotiations on post-2020 treatment  of the land sector in an international climate change  regime under the UNFCCC.   The Government of Canada’s sector-by-sector plan  will continue to reduce emissions. Reducing GHG  emissions, however, is everyone’s responsibility and  governments, businesses and consumers all have a  role to play. Further actions by businesses, individuals  and governments will allow Canada to address GHG  emissions while keeping the Canadian economy strong.   In 2030, Canada’s emissions are projected to be  815 Mt CO2 eq, or 11% above 2005 levels, with current  measures in place. Additional actions by federal or  provincial/territorial governments would lower this  number. Emissions are decreasing relative to population  and economic growth. Per capita emissions are  projected to improve through 2030, from 22.9 tonnes  CO2 eq in 2005 to 19.6 tonnes per capita in 2030—a 15%  decrease from 2005 levels.   In addition, the link between growth in GDP and GHG  emissions continues to weaken in Canada. There has   been an average annual decline of approximately 1.5%  in Canadian emissions intensity (emissions per dollar  of GDP) since 1990. Emissions intensity is expected  to continue to decrease through 2030, demonstrating  the continued decoupling of economic and emissions  growth in Canada.  GHG emission projections depend on a number  of evolving economic and energy variables and are  subject to significant uncertainty. In addition, future  developments in technologies and resource-extraction  will alter the future emissions pathway. In Canada,  anticipated emissions growth is due in large part  because Canada’s economy is more dependent on  emissions-intensive resource extraction than most  other developed countries. Canada is also a major energy  exporter and its oil and gas sector emissions are projected  to increase significantly between now and 2030.   The Government of Canada has also provided detailed  emission projections by economic sector (and  subsector) as summarized in Table 1.1 below. This table  illustrates how the projected trends in GHG emissions  vary by economic sector.  Table 1.1 Change in GHG emissions by economic sector (Mt CO2 eq)   2005 2010 2011 2020 2030  Transportation 168 167 170 176 179  Oil and Gas 162 164 163 200 241  Electricity 121 99 90 82 59  Buildings 84 79 84 95 110  Emissions-Intensive & Trade-  Exposed Industries  87 75 78 90 101  Agriculture 68 69 68 69 70  Waste and Others 49 48 49 50 55  Subtotal 737 701 702 762 815  Expected LULUCF  Contribution  NA NA NA 228 NE  Total 737 701 702 734 815  Abbreviations: NA = Not applicable, NE = Not estimated.    009  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  Figure 1.4 Scenarios of Canadian Emissions to 2020 (Mt CO2 eq)*  * The “with current measures” line (post-2005) includes the  compliance contribution of the LULUCF Sector towards the  Copenhagen target, and therefore actual emissions trends  (without LULUCF) will be 28 Mt higher in 2020.  Figure 1.5 Canadian Emissions Intensity to 2030    010  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change  Impacts and Adaptation Measures  Canada’s climate is changing and impacts have been  observed across the country. Adaptation is increasingly  acknowledged as an important part of a broader  response to climate change, and it is widely accepted that  adaptation can help Canadians manage risks and take  advantage of opportunities.  Between 1948 and 2012, the annual average surface  air temperature over Canada’s landmass warmed by  about 1.7°C, approximately twice the global average.  While warming trends are observed consistently across  the country, stronger trends are found in the north  and west, particularly during the winter and spring.  Northern Canada (north of 60° latitude) has warmed at  a rate approximately 2.5 times the global average since  the late 1940s.  Although more difficult to assess, given the strong  regional variability in precipitation trends and its  various states (rain, freezing rain, snow, etc.), Canada  has generally become wetter in recent years. Total  annual precipitation in Canada has increased over the  1948–2012 period. In most of southern Canada (south  of 60° latitude), there has been a decrease in snowfall  and an increase in rainfall, a trend consistent with  warmer temperatures.  Increases in temperature and changing precipitation  patterns have led to a wide range of impacts,  including reduced arctic ice cover, changes in timing  and amount of surface water availability, increased  evaporation contributing to lower levels in the Great  Lakes, increased depth and extent of permafrost thaw,  decreased quality and shorter seasons for northern  ice roads, increased loss of forests due to pests and  wildfires, more frequent droughts and flooding, and  increased risks from food-borne diseases.  The Government of Canada renewed and expanded  its focus on adaptation by investing $148.8 million in   10 adaptation programs and adopting the 2011 Federal  Adaptation Policy Framework to help bring climate  change issues into the mainstream of federal  decision making.  Adaptation has been incorporated into more strategies  and plans at the provincial and territorial levels, so that  most jurisdictions now have stand-alone plans that  highlight the importance of adaptation and can help  focus efforts. Since 2010, for example, Quebec, Ontario,  Manitoba, British Columbia and the three territories  (Yukon, Northwest Territories and Nunavut) have  released stand-alone adaptation strategies or action plans.  Other jurisdictions continue to build from previously  announced plans, are in the process of developing  adaptation strategies, or are integrating adaptation  considerations into broader climate change efforts.  Municipalities have taken action to prepare for a  changing climate, including the development of  adaptation strategies, incorporating considerations of  impacts and adaptation into official plans and planning  policies, and adopting measures to reduce climate- related risks.  Progress at all levels has been encouraged by new  mechanisms developed to facilitate collaboration,  shared learning and priority setting on adaptation  research and action. These include the Adaptation  Platform and the Climate Change Adaptation  Community of Practice.  Canada is actively engaged in the international  community to strengthen and disseminate research  and science related to the impacts of climate change to  ensure that adaptation actions are informed by the best  available knowledge.  Building from existing efforts and past successes,  Canada will continue to play a leadership role through  measures such as strategic investments in adaptation  for priority areas. In addition, Canada’s adaptation  efforts will continue to take a risk management     011  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  approach, based on the principles of collaboration and  mainstreaming. To date, this approach has enabled  implementation of adaptation measures across  jurisdictions and economic sectors in Canada.   Finance  Over the last four fiscal years (2009–2010 to 2012–2013),  Canada has provided over $1.53 billion to support  climate change projects through a variety of channels  and programs. This amount includes $1.2 billion in  fast-start financing delivered over the last three fiscal  years (2010–2011 to 2012–2013), as well as $339 million  for other international assistance projects with a direct  or a significant focus on climate change. Canada also  provided over $204 million to support the Global  Environment Facility over the last four years (fiscal  years 2009–2010 to 2012–2013), of which approximately  one quarter came from Canada’s fast-start financing.   Canada’s financial support has been provided to  contribute to efforts that address climate change in  developing countries, and will be delivered through a  wide range of multilateral, bilateral and partnership  channels. Over 60 developing countries are benefiting  directly from funding delivered through Canada’s  bilateral channels and Canadian facilities at multilateral  institutions. This number will continue to grow as  multilateral banks continue to start projects with   available fast-start funds from Canada. A much  larger number of countries will also benefit from  contributions made by Canada to multilateral trust  funds such as the Global Environment Facility and the  Least Developed Countries Fund.  As shown in Figure 1.6, from 2009 to 2013, the largest  share of Canada’s climate finance went to sub-Saharan  Africa, followed by countries in Latin America and the  Caribbean. Approximately 10% of financing went to  global programs, for which it is not possible to estimate  a geographic distribution at this time.   Canada’s climate change finance is also targeting  a range of climate change projects and initiatives.  Canada made a $200 million contribution to the Clean  Technology Fund to support the demonstration,  deployment and transfer of low-carbon technologies  in developing countries. This and other clean energy  projects and initiatives make up 52% of Canada’s  climate finance. About one third of Canada’s finance  supported adaptation measures in vulnerable countries  such as Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Haiti and Ethiopia.  The remaining funding is divided among projects that  are related to forests and agriculture (9%) and cross- cutting programming (7%). These estimates could  change slightly over time as multilateral institutions roll  out Canada’s fast-start financing contributions.  Figure 1.6 Canadian Climate Finance by Region    012  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  Technology and Capacity Building  Canada is committed to supporting the development  and deployment of clean technologies to address  the effects of climate change globally. Canada  provides technology and capacity building support  to developing country partners through bilateral and  multilateral channels.   Canada has led the way in developing some important  tools to advance clean energy globally, including  RETScreen clean energy project analysis software and  the Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian Forest  Sector. The Government of Canada is committed to  sharing knowledge and resources, making tools like  RETScreen and the Carbon Budget Model available to  international partners and providing these partners  with training. Canada is also a global leader in the  research, development and demonstration of carbon  capture and storage technologies.   Canada works with international partners to advance  clean technologies through a number of fora, including  the United States-led Clean Energy Ministerial,  the International Partnership on Energy Efficiency  Cooperation, the Climate and Clean Air Coalition, the  International Energy Agency, and the Generation IV  International Forum. Bilateral cooperation with key  international partners is also central to Canada’s  efforts to advance clean technology. Canada works  with international partners to share knowledge and  undertake joint science and technology activities.   Research and Systematic Observation of  Climate Change  In Canada, climate system research and observation is  a joint effort implemented through core government  programs, academic institutions and collaborative  research networks. Collectively, these efforts improve  Canada’s understanding of the global climate system  and the influence of natural forces and human activities  on climate change and variability. This enables better  recognition of the potential impacts on ecosystems   and society. Climate system research and monitoring  in Canada provides the foundational scientific basis to  guide Canadian decisions on climate change mitigation  and adaptation.  Recognizing the broad and collaborative nature of  climate research and monitoring in Canada, new  integrated research networks involving government  and university research teams were established in 2013  under the Climate Change and Atmospheric Research  initiative. Seven network projects were awarded more  than $32 million over 5 years to understand Earth  system processes; advance weather, climate, and  environmental prediction; and understand recent  changes in the Arctic and cold region environments.  Canada continued its extensive climate monitoring  program, including land, air, oceans and fresh water,  and space-based Earth observations. Monitoring  capacity was enhanced in various areas—for example  atmospheric monitoring in the Arctic—through both  implementation of new sites and enhanced technology.  Through Canada’s involvement in international  organizations, agreements and commitments, climate  data is collected, quality-controlled and disseminated  according to international standards.  Canada is a significant contributor to the Global  Climate Observing System, the Global Ocean  Observing System, and the Global Terrestrial  Observing System. Canada is a member of the Group  on Earth Observations (now the Federal Committee  on Geomatics and Earth Observations), which seeks  to coordinate international efforts to build the Global  Earth Observation System of Systems. Canadian  monitoring priorities encompass all of the major  components of the climate system: land surface,  forests, cryosphere, atmosphere and oceans. The  Global Climate Observing System contributes to the  climate component to the Global Earth Observation  System of Systems. Canada is also a participant  in the international Sustaining Arctic Observing  Networks initiative.     013  1 INTRODUCTION  ]  Within Canada, research on the climate system  and climate change involves different scientific  disciplines from a range of government and academic  institutions. Canadian scientists and research  programs are often linked to larger international  efforts. Canadian researchers play leading roles in  many international climate research bodies under  the World Meteorological Organization and the  Arctic Council. Canadian science and scientists made  significant contributions to the Intergovernmental  Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth Assessment Report,  as well as other internationally coordinated climate  science assessments.   Education and Public Awareness  The Government of Canada recognizes that  addressing the challenge of climate change will  require the collective effort of all levels of government,  non-governmental organizations, businesses  and individual Canadians. In Canada, federal,  provincial and municipal governments, as well as  non-governmental organizations, have undertaken  a range of activities to broaden public awareness of  climate change. This includes supporting training and  education to build broad support for climate change  policies and encourage collective action on the part of  all Canadians.   Education in Canada is under provincial jurisdiction.  Climate change is taught across a range of subjects  and grades, but is traditionally part of senior science  and geography studies. In terms of post-secondary  education, most Canadian universities provide a range  of courses of study in climate science and research  at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. The  Government of Canada provides funding to support  post-secondary research networks on climate change,  including climate science and impacts. Canadian  government scientists also contribute to academia by  holding adjunct professorships at Canadian universities  and co-supervising students.  The Government of Canada communicates  information about climate change and government  programs, reports and initiatives using websites  and social media, including Twitter, Facebook and  Flickr. Canada also participates in conferences and  trade shows that highlight Government of Canada  climate change initiatives and promote national and  international events.   Federal government departments, provincial and  municipal governments, and nongovernmental  organizations act as climate change resource or  information centres for Canadians, governments and  businesses. For example, the Office of Energy Efficiency  at Natural Resources Canada partners with a variety of  stakeholders to promote energy efficiency in Canada.  The Office of Energy Efficiency also offers training for  Canadian consumers and businesses on the skills they  need to increase energy efficiency.  Many provincial and territorial climate change  strategies feature public education and awareness,  ranging from general information on climate change  to specific issues and adaptation activities. Activities  include promoting climate change through the  education system, conducting outreach to businesses  and industries, and providing tools to help Canadians  reduce their carbon footprint.  Canada is an active participant in a number of  collaborative international initiatives and provides  funding to support climate change mitigation, clean  energy technology transfer, sustainable forestry and  agriculture, and adaptation to climate change by the  world’s most vulnerable countries. Many of these  initiatives include an element of capacity building  through the dissemination of information and  knowledge tools.  Reference 1 Greenhouse gases (e.g., methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluoro   carbons) expressed as carbon dioxide equivalent.    014  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  2 Canada’s National Circumstances 2.1 Introduction  This chapter outlines national circumstances within  Canada that give rise to observed trends in greenhouse  gas (GHG) emission levels and removals. For the  purposes of this report, Canada defines a national  circumstance as a relatively inflexible characteristic of a  nation, not easily shaped by government policy, which  significantly influences its GHG emissions. It can also  be a national characteristic, such as economic structure,  that could be altered by government policy but whose  alteration would need to be gradual and orderly to avoid  causing the country’s inhabitants undue economic  harm outweighing the benefits of the corresponding  GHG emissions reduction.   Overall, Canada’s unique geographic, demographic,  and economic circumstances influence its GHG  emissions profile. For instance, Canada has an  extreme, highly variable climate that contributes to  higher energy use for space heating and cooling in  both commercial and residential sectors compared to  other industrialized countries. Canada also has a large  landmass, coupled with a low population density that  contributes to longer travel times and higher demand  for freight transportation than in smaller and/or more  densely populated countries. Canada has a resource- based economy and has seen sustained economic  growth and faster than average population growth  relative to other developed countries. Canada is also  a net exporter of energy and has an energy intensive  industrial sector.   While Canada represented only 1.6% of total global  GHG emissions in 2010, it is one of the highest per  capita emitters due to its size, its extreme climate,  and its energy intensive, resource based economy.1  Although Canada has the second highest GHG  emissions intensity per capita among the G8 countries,  since 1990 the level of emissions per unit of real gross  domestic product (GDP) has fallen 28% reflecting more   efficient industrial processes, a shift to a more service  based economy, and lower emitting energy generation  through fuel switching.2  Information on historical emissions trends by sector  is presented in Chapter 3: Canada’s Greenhouse Gas  Inventory, while emissions projections by sector are  presented in Chapter 5: Projections and the Total  Effects of Policies and Measures.  2.2 Governance Structure  Canada is a geographically large federation composed  of a central federal government, 10 provincial  governments, and 3 territories. Distinct powers are  assigned to the federal government and provinces based  for the most part on the Canadian Constitution.   Protection of the environment is not specifically  addressed under the Constitution. It has become  an area of shared jurisdiction as governments have  taken action according to their respective authorities.  Constitutional jurisprudence continues to evolve in  this area.  Federal environmental laws are based on federal  constitutional powers such as international borders;  international relations; trade and commerce, navigation  and shipping, seacoasts and fisheries, criminal law, and  the power to legislate in the national interest.   Provincial environmental laws are based on  provincial constitutional powers, which include over  municipalities, local works and undertakings, property  and civil rights, provincially owned (public) lands and  natural resources. Territorial governments exercise  delegated powers under the authority of the Parliament  of Canada. The devolution of powers, or the transfer  of province-like responsibilities from the federal  government to territorial governments, is ongoing.     015  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  Every jurisdiction has an environmental ministry or  agency, but environmental responsibilities can be  widely shared within each government. Within the  federal government, for example, several departments  and agencies have mandates that have a significant  environmental component: Environment Canada,  Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Natural Resources  Canada, Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Transport  Canada, Health Canada, Parks Canada Agency, and the  Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency.   Natural resources, including energy, fall mainly under  provincial jurisdiction. Provincial governments own  the resources within their boundaries and have broad  responsibility for managing resource development  activities, except on some federal lands (e.g., National  Parks, north of the 60th parallel, offshore) and some  Aboriginal lands (e.g., lands managed by an Aboriginal  government established through a land claim).  Provincial governments manage resource ownership,  royalties, land-use planning and allocations as well  as exploration, development, conservation and use of  natural resources within their boundaries.   The federal government has responsibility for  interprovincial and international trade, and the National  Energy Board regulates interprovincial/international  pipelines (including the largest pipelines in Canada), and  energy exports and imports. In terms of environmental  assessment, federal environmental assessments are  focused on those major projects with the greatest  potential for significant adverse environmental impacts  to matters of federal jurisdiction. With respect to climate  change, emissions of GHGs are legislated both at the  federal and provincial levels.  2.3 Addressing Climate Change in Canada  Canadian governments are addressing climate change  through both mitigation and adaptation efforts.  The Government of Canada is implementing a sector- by-sector regulatory approach to reduce emissions.   The Government of Canada has already put in place  regulations addressing GHG emissions from coal-fired  electricity and transportation, two of the largest sources  of emissions in Canada, and is working to develop  regulations for other sectors.   Concurrently, provincial and territorial governments  have implemented strategies to address climate change.  For details on provincial and territorial measures to  address GHG emissions, please see Chapter 4: Polices  and Measures.   In order to limit regulatory duplication in the area of  environment, the Canadian Environmental Protection  Act, 1999, enables the federal government to enter  into equivalency agreements with provinces and  territories. An equivalency agreement allows the federal  government to suspend the application of a federal  regulation in a given province or territory, provided  that the jurisdiction has an equivalent enforceable  regulation in place. An equivalency agreement,  therefore, provides the flexibility of allowing a  province to regulate in a manner that best suits its  circumstances, while still delivering GHG reductions  that are at least equivalent to what would have been  realized under the federal regulation. For example, a  draft equivalency agreement has been developed with  the Province of Nova Scotia on regulations for limiting  carbon dioxide (CO2) from coal-fired power plants.   The Government of Canada recognizes that, as  a northern country, Canada will be impacted by  climate change. For that reason, the Government is  taking important steps to help Canadians adapt to  a changing climate by providing funding to support  an improved understanding of climate impacts and  promote adaptation by industry and communities.  For further information, please see Chapter 6:  Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change Impacts and  Adaptation Measures.    016  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  Figure 2.1 Population growth rate (in %) of G8 countries,   2006–2011   Source: Population Growth Rate (in %) of G8 Countries 2006 to 2011.  The Canadian Population in 2011: Population Counts and Growth.  Statistics Canada. 2012.  2.4 Population  In 2011, Canada’s population was 33.5 million.3 This  is a significant growth from 27.8 million in 1990.4  The Canadian population remains the smallest  among G8 countries but the fastest growing with an  annual population growth rate of just over 1%.5 Net  international migration was responsible for two-thirds  of the population increase for the year ending June  2012. It is projected that there will be between 40.1 and  47.7 million people in Canada by 2036 and between  43.0 and 63.8 million by 2061.6  Canada’s low population density contributes to higher  energy demand (and GHG emissions) related to the  transportation of people and goods compared to  smaller, more densely populated countries.  2.5 Geographic Profile  Canada is a country of physical extremes and contrasts.  Its surface area is 9,984,670 square kilometers (km2);  with land accounting for 9,093,507 km² and fresh  water for 891,163 km². The country extends 5,300 km  east to west, the distance between Paris and New York,  and 4,600 km north to south. It is the second largest  country in the world.   2.6 Climate Profile  Canada is a vast country with most of its land  area located in the northern half of the northern  hemisphere. Canada has a wide range of climatic  conditions: Canada’s Pacific coast is relatively mild  year-round, while the Prairie provinces (in the central  western portion of the country) have greater extremes  (cold winters and warm summers).   Average annual temperatures differ considerably from  region to region throughout the country. Toronto,     017  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  Ontario, located in the south of the country, has  an annual average temperature of about 9°C which  contrasts markedly with the 216°C annual average  temperature for Resolute, Nunavut in Canada’s Arctic.  Halifax, Nova Scotia, on Canada’s Atlantic coast,  averages about 7°C, while Vancouver, British Columbia,  on the Pacific coast, averages about 10°C.   Much of the country experiences four distinct seasons.  Winter average temperatures in Canada typically vary  from about 25 to 220°C in the south to about 230  to 235°C in the far north. Summer averages are also  variable; typically 17 to 22°C in the south and 2 to 7°C in  the most northern part of the country.   In most regions in Canada, summer and winter  temperatures dictate both heating and cooling needs,  which impact energy use. For example, Montreal,  Quebec, annually experiences on average 271 cooling  degree–days (when daily mean temperature is greater  than 18°C) and 4,363 heating degree–days (when mean  temperature is less than 18°C). 7  Canada also has considerable regional variation in  precipitation. On Canada’s Pacific coast, some locations  average as much as 2,000 to 3,000 millimetres (mm) a  year, contrasted with the much drier Prairie provinces  where some locations see as little as 200 to 400 mm a  year. In the far north of Canada, precipitation totals  are generally less than 200 mm a year. For example,  Toronto has an average annual total precipitation of  about 830 mm, while Resolute, Halifax, and Vancouver  see averages of 161, 1,422 and 1,189 mm of annual total  precipitation respectively.   In addition to variable temperature and precipitation,  Canada also experiences extreme weather events  including droughts, floods, tornadoes, snow and ice  storms, and severe thunderstorms.   Canada’s climate is warming. The annual average  surface air temperature over the landmass has warmed  by about 1.7°C, over the period 1948–20128; this is   approximately twice the global average. Warming  trends are observed consistently across the country,  although stronger trends are found in the north  and west, particularly during the winter and spring.  Canada’s North has warmed at a rate approximately two  and a half times the global average since the late 1940s.  An increase in warm days, warm nights and summer  days has been observed while fewer cold nights, cold  days and frost days were found across the country.9  Precipitation trends are more difficult to assess than  temperature trends, given its spatially discontinuous  nature and its various states (rain, freezing rain, snow,  etc.); however, Canada has generally become wetter  in recent years. Total annual precipitation in Canada  has increased over the period 1948–2012.10 In most of  southern Canada, there has been a decrease in snowfall  and an increase in rainfall, consistent with warmer  temperatures. The trends in extreme precipitation have  high spatial variability and no consistent changes were  found in most of the extreme precipitation indices  across the country.   Because Canada’s geographic position in the north  increases its vulnerability to rising temperatures at rates  higher than the global average, regions in Canada have  been among the first in the world to observe impacts of  climate change.11  2.7 Economic Profile  As of 2011, Canada was the world’s 11th largest economy  with a GDP of $1.7 trillion Canadian dollars (CAD).12 On  a per capita basis, Canada ranks 10th in the world.13  Between 1990 and 2011, Canadian real GDP grew  by 65%.14 At the same time, the population grew  by 20.5%. This economic and population growth  boosted domestic living standards and consumption  considerably. In recent years, the economy has  recovered steadily despite a slight contraction in 2009  with GDP growing at an average of 2.6% per year  between 2010 and 2012.15    018  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  Canada’s economy is driven by the services sector,  comprising 70% of GDP in 2011.16 Goods-producing  industries, led by manufacturing, mining and oil and  gas, and construction, comprise the remaining 30%.  Many of Canada’s goods are produced for export. In  2011, the value of total exports was $447 billion.  As a natural resource-rich economy, Canada is a net  exporter of agriculture, energy (electricity and oil and  gas) and many resource-based commodities such as  pulp and paper, mined metals and aluminum. Over  the past decade, Canada’s exports of energy, extracted  resources, and agricultural commodities as a share of  GDP have increased by almost 40%.17 However, because  of a significant increase in manufactured imports  coupled with the impact of the economic downturn,  Canada has been in an overall net import position  since 2009.   In the following sections details on Canada’s emissions  profile are presented by energy, transportation,  industry, waste, building stock/urban structure,  agriculture and forests.  2.8 Energy   Canada has an abundant and diversified portfolio of  energy resources. In terms of hydrocarbon resources,  Canada is a major global producer and exporter. Canada  is also a leader in clean electricity, with 77% of its power  generation coming from non-GHG emitting sources.18  Canada’s Position in the World • 3rd in hydroelectricity production • 2nd in uranium production and exports3rd in oil   reserves, 5th in production and 6th in exports • 5th in natural gas production and 4th in exports  Sources: International Energy Agency, World Nuclear Association  In 2012, the energy sector accounted for over 9% of  Canada’s GDP in current prices (nominal GDP), and  directly employed over 300,000 people.19 Canada is also  a major exporter of energy products. In 2012, Canada’s  exports of energy products amounted to $119 billion,   or 26.2% of total domestic merchandise exports,  compared to energy product imports of $54 billion, or  11.7% of Canada’s total imports.20  Table 2.1 Canada’s Energy Exports (2012)  Total (in billions)  %  exported   the United  States  Crude Oil and Natural Gas Liquids $77.1 99%  Petroleum Products $22.8 86%  Natural Gas $8.7 100%  Electricity $1.9 100%  Coal and Coal Products $6.8 10%  Uranium $1.8 12%  Total Energy $119 90%  Energy, excluding uranium and coal $111 96.5%  Energy as % of Domestic Exports 26.2%  Source: Energy Markets Fact Book 2013–2014. Natural Resources  Canada. 2013. Ottawa.  In 2012, annual capital expenditures by the energy  sector totalled $96 billion or 24.6% of total public  and private investments in Canada.21 This amount has  increased substantially over the past decade, especially  in the oil sands and electricity sectors. Investments  in Canada’s oil sands sector has increased from about  $1.2 billion annually before the turn of the millennium  to $25 billion in 2012.22 In the electricity sector, capital  expenditures have almost quadrupled between 2000  and 2012, from just over $6 billion to over $22 billion.23  Canada’s provincial governments are the direct  managers of most of Canada’s natural resources and  have responsibilities for energy resource management  within their borders.   2.8.1  Energy Reserves, Production, and Trade  Three quarters of Canada’s primary energy production  in 2011 was in crude oil and natural gas.24 Western  Canada is a producer of crude oil and natural gas, which  it exports across Canada and to the U.S. Eastern Canada  imports oil and gas and has some refining stations.    019  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  Figure 2.2 Canada’s primary energy production, 2011   Source: Energy Markets Fact Book 2013–2014. Natural Resources  Canada. 2013. Ottawa.  2.8.1.1 Crude Oil  Canada has 11% of the world’s established reserves  of crude oil, or 172 billion barrels.25 The oil sands  constitute 98% of these reserves.26 Crude oil  production in Canada has grown steadily over the  past two decades, up from 1.7 million barrels per day  (bbl p/d) in 199027 to 3.3 million bbl p/d in 2012.28  More than half of Canada’s current production comes  from the oil sands.29  In 2012, Canada exported 72% of its annual crude oil  production, with 99% of exports going to the U.S.30  In 2012, Canadian crude oil represents about 28% of  all U.S. crude oil imports, making Canada its leading  foreign supplier of crude oil.31  2.8.1.2 Natural Gas Canada is the 5th largest producer and 4th largest  exporter of natural gas in the world.32 Canada is part  of a fully-integrated North American market where  natural gas moves from supply basins to demand  centers via an extensive pipeline network. As of 2012,  Canada has 66.4 trillion cubic feet of proven natural  gas reserves.33  In 2012, Canadian natural gas production averaged  13.6 billion cubic feet per day (Bcf/d).34 Unconventional  gas production, including shale and tight gas, now  accounts for over 60% of Canadian production.35 More  than 60% of Canadian production in 2012 was exported  to the U.S.,36 meeting 12% of U.S. natural gas demand.37  In 2012, Canada imported close to 3 Bcf/d38 of natural  gas, mainly from the U.S. Canada’s current production  of natural gas is below its mid–2000s peak of  16.6 Bcf/d39 reflecting very low natural gas prices,  and a reduced U.S. dependence on Canadian natural  gas exports.   2.8.1.3 Coal Canada ranks 11th in the world in proven coal reserves  with about 6,600 million tonnes (Mt),40 and Canada’s  2012 coal production was at 67 Mt in 2012.41 About half  of the 2012 production was exported.42 The majority of  exports were destined for Asian markets, with China,  Japan, and South Korea receiving 74% of total exports.43  Canada is both an importer and an exporter of coal;  however, Canada’s imports of coal have declined by  more than 50% since peaking in 2003.44 In 2012, Canada  imported about 10 Mt of coal, of which 83% came  from the U.S.45    020  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  2.8.1.4 Electricity Between 1990 and 2010, Canada’s electricity production  increased by 24%.46 In 2011, Canada produced  618 terawatt-hours of electricity,47 generated from a  mix of sources. The majority of Canada’s electricity is  produced from non-GHG emitting sources, principally  hydro (60%) and nuclear (14.3%).48 Since 1990, renewable  power production from sources other than hydro   (i.e., wind, tidal, solar and biomass) has been increasing  and now makes up over 3% of total production.49 The  share of electricity supply generated from coal decreased  from almost 17% in 199050 to 11.4% in 2011.51  In 2012, Canada exported 58 terawatt-hours52 of  electricity to the U.S. which represents about 9% of the  electricity generated in Canada in 201253 and about 2%  of total U.S. demand.54 In 2012, Canada imported about  11 terawatt-hours of electricity from the U.S.55  2.8.2  Energy Consumption  Canada’s economy is becoming increasingly less energy  intensive.56 From 1990 to 2011, Canada’s energy use per  dollar of GDP (in constant 2002 dollars) declined 24%.57  In that time period, Canada’s GDP increased by 65%  (about 2.4% per year) while energy use increased by  only 27%.58  Over the 1990 to 2011 period, energy use on a per  capita basis increase by only 2%. Canada’s per capita  consumption of oil products, natural gas, and electricity  is higher than in most other industrialized countries,59  reflecting the energy use of industries such as mining,  pulp and paper and petroleum refining. Other key  factors include long distances between communities,  and a relatively cold climate.   It is worth noting, however, that the share of renewable  energy of Canada’s total primary energy supply is 17.1%  (2010), compared to an Organisation for Economic  Cooperation and Development (OECD) and world  average of 7.8% and 13% respectively.60  2.9 Transportation   Transportation is critical to the Canadian and global  economy. As a trading nation, Canada relies on a  transportation sector that is globally competitive. In  2011, the transportation industry contributed 4.2% to  Canada’s GDP.61  Despite improvements in emissions intensity,  transportation remains the largest source of GHG  emissions in Canada (see Chapter 3: Canada’s GHG  Inventory). Since 1990, Canada has seen a 33% growth  in transportation emissions which is mainly an increase  in cross-border trade, on-road freight transportation  activity and a shift in personal vehicle ownership from  cars to light trucks.62 As a result, addressing emissions  in this sector is a critical part of Canada’s sector-by- sector approach for reducing its GHG emissions.  2.9.1  Road Transportation Road transportation is the largest source of passenger  and freight transportation emissions, and is also  the most important in terms of the value of goods  traded between Canada and the U.S. Canada has  more than 1 million km of 2-lane equivalent roads,  roughly 38,000 km of which make up the National  Highway System.63 Canada’s road network is shared  by different users, including approximately 20 million  light passenger vehicles, 750,000 medium and heavy  trucks, 15,000 public transit buses, motorcoaches and  motorcycles.64 Between 1990 and 2011, the total number  of vehicles in Canada has increased by 50%.65  On-road freight accounts for 31% of the transportation  sector’s share of GDP.66 In 2011, over 45% of Canadian  exports to the U.S. were transported by trucks,  representing $149 billion, while 73.5% of imports from  the U.S. ($162 billion) were similarly transported.67  Between 1990 and 2011, emissions from on-road  heavy-duty vehicles increased by 78%.68 The growth  in the domestic and cross-border freight industry is  the primary driver behind increased emissions. For     021  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  example, during this period, the total number of heavy- duty vehicles on Canadian roads increased by 137%.69  2.9.2  Aviation With 35,000 civil aircrafts, Canada has the second  largest civil aviation aircraft fleet in the world.70 Its  commercial sector ranges from international scheduled  services to small, single aircraft charter companies and  business aircraft operators. In 2011, air transportation  carried over 78 million passengers and 739,000 tonnes  of freight.71 Overall, air transportation represented 12%  of the transportation sector’s share of GDP in 2011.72  2.9.3  Rail The North American rail industry is highly integrated.  The primary freight firms in Canada serve as an  important supply chain link for Canada’s key trade  corridors and gateways. The rail transportation industry  generates approximately $10 billion per year, about 11%  of the transportation sector’s contribution to Canada’s  GDP, 95% of which comes from rail freight operations,  with the remaining 5% coming from passenger  rail services.73  2.9.4  Marine Canada’s marine industry is comprised of domestic  marine service operators who provide both domestic  and international shipping services, as well as  international shipping lines calling at major Canadian  ports. Canadian ports and harbors serve as vital  links and gateways that facilitate domestic and  international economic activities. Canada is home to  more than 540 ports and more than 940 small craft and  fishing harbours.  In 2011, marine transportation services handled  over $205 billion of Canada’s international trade,  and generated 2% of the transportation sector’s  share of GDP.74  2.10 Industry Profile  Canada’s industrial sector is very diverse with facilities  engaged in mining, manufacturing, construction and  forestry. Taken together, these sectors contributed over  20% of Canada’s GDP in 2011,75 with the total value of  exports for the sector representing $327 billion.76  Table 2.2 Emissions over the 1990–2011 period were as follows:  1990 2000 2005 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011  Mt CO2 Equivalent  Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Industries 93 85 86 89 87 73 75 79  Mining 5 6 5 7 8 7 7 8  Smelting and refining (non-ferrous metals) 17 14 12 12 12 10 10 11  Pulp and paper 15 13 9 8 7 7 6 6  Iron and steel 16 18 20 21 19 15 16 17  Cement 9 11 13 12 12 10 10 10  Lime and gypsum 3 3 3 4 3 2 3 3  Chemicals and fertilizers 28 20 24 25 26 22 23 24  Coal Production 4 2 2 3 3 3 4 4  Light manufacturing, construction & forest resources 28 29 25 24 24 21 22 23  Source: National Inventory Report 1990–2011: GHG Sources and Sinks in Canada.   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. 2013.    022  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  2.11 Waste   In 2010, Canadians generated 33 million tonnes of  municipal solid waste.77 Of this total, 25% was diverted  through material recovery facilities or centralized  organics processing operations (i.e., recycling and  composting), and 75% was sent for disposal in  landfills or incineration facilities.78 About 40% of  the waste generated originated from residential  sources and 60% from non-residential sources   (e.g., commercial and light industrial, and  construction and demolition sectors).79  During the period of 2000 to 2010, the quantity of  municipal solid waste diverted through recycling and  composting increased by 33%.80 This increase can  be attributed in part to the federal, provincial, and  territorial governments working collaboratively to  implement extended producer responsibility programs  across Canada, a policy approach in which a producer’s  responsibility, physical and/or financial, for a product  is extended to the post-consumer stage of a product’s  life cycle. To date, over 30 regulated and voluntary  programs exist for a wide range of materials including  beverage containers, automotive products, packaging,  printed materials, and electronics.81  Despite this significant increase in waste being diverted  from landfills, the overall quantity of municipal solid  waste sent for disposal increased by 7% during the 2000  to 2010 period.82 Between 1997 and 2009, the number  of landfill gas capture systems has more than doubled,  increasing from 31 to 68 facilities, resulting in 30%  more landfill gas capture.83  2.12 Building Stock/Urban Structure  2.12.1 Residential Between 1990 and 2011, the number of households in  Canada increased by 37% (3.6 million).84 In addition  to the rise in the number of households, the average  living space and the penetration rate of appliances have  also increased. Despite these trends, residential energy  use increased by just 13.5%85 over the same period as  homeowners switched to cleaner energy sources (such  as natural gas) and energy efficient technologies.86  The main sources of residential energy use included  natural gas, electricity, wood, heating oil, and propane.  Due to Canada’s relatively cold climate, space heating  and water heating are the main residential energy uses  (Figure 2.3).  Figure 2.3 Distribution of residential energy use by end-use, 2011   Source: Natural Resources Canada. 2014. Energy Use Data Handbook,  1990–2011, Ottawa.    023  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  The amount of energy used by the residential sector  to heat each square metre of living space decreased  significantly between 1990 and 2011, mainly driven by  energy efficiency gains. More Canadians shifted from  oil to less emissions intensive natural gas as a source of  home heating fuel.  The number of major appliances operated in Canada  between 1990 and 2011 increased by about 47%.87  However, the total amount of energy that households  used to power major appliances decreased by 25.1% due  to energy efficiency improvements.88 Some of these  improvements can be attributed to federal, provincial,  and territorial government efforts to work with industry  and public stakeholders to implement energy guide  rating systems that help increase consumer awareness  of major appliances’ energy use and associated  operating costs.  One of the most energy intense appliances in the  household is air conditioners. The percentage of  occupied floor space cooled by air conditioners has  increased from 23% in 1990 to 48% in 2011.89  2.12.2 Commercial/Institutional In 2011, this sector was responsible for 12% of the total  energy use in Canada.90 In the commercial/institutional  sector, energy is used for space heating, cooling,  lighting and water heating, as well as for operating  auxiliary equipment (such as computers and servers)  and motors. Space heating accounts for the largest  share of energy use, with about 46%, followed by  auxiliary equipment at 19%.91 Energy usage by auxiliary  equipment has risen steadily due to increasing use of  new electronic technologies.   Energy efficiency efforts have reduced overall building  sector energy intensity by 11% between 1990 and  2011.92 Over the same period, the total floor space has  increased by 43% while total energy consumption rose  by 27%.93 Energy consumption growth can be explained  by economic growth, an increase in computerization of  the work environment and an increase in the number of  devices per employee.  There is a growing trend towards improving energy  performance in the Canadian building stock.  Between 2005 and 2009, approximately 48% of the  building stocks undertook at least one energy-related  renovation.94 Furthermore, about 68% reported the  presense of other energy efficiency measures, such  as energy management plans or the addition of  control technologies.95 The estimated participation  rate in “green”/energy rating programs, such as LEED  (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design)  and BOMA BESt (Building Environmental Standards),  is growing. By 2012, about 12% of the commercial  and institutional building stocks were registered in  these programs.96  2.13 Agriculture  Canada’s primary agriculture sector accounts for  slightly less than 2% of GDP, but it is at the heart of an  agriculture and agri-food system which provides one  in eight jobs, represents 8% of total GDP and places  Canada as a major exporter of agriculture and agri-food  products internationally.97  Only 5% of Canada’s land mass is suitable for  agricultural production. In 2011, total farm area was  65 million hectares (160 million acres). Land for crop  production has been increasing over time and now  represents 55% of total farmland, followed by pastures  which account for slightly more than one-third.98  Crop production and beef farming have long been the  backbone of Canada’s agriculture industry. In 2011,  one in three farms were engaged in grain and oilseed  cropping and one in five were raising beef cattle.   In recent decades, Canadian farmers have increasingly  substituted conventional tillage with no-till or  conservation tillage seeding techniques. No-till  practices are used on 56% of total land prepared for  seeding while conservation tillage is used on 25%.99    024  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  2.14 Forest  Canada has 397.3 million hectares of forest, other  wooded land, and other land with tree cover.100 Forest  land accounts for nearly 348 million hectares, 66% of  which is considered “managed forest”, where human  activities affect forest carbon.101 In 2011, the forest  sector contributed $23.7 billion to national GDP,  approximately 1.9% of Canada’s total, and directly  employed approximately 234,000 Canadians.102  Most of Canada’s forest land, 93%, is publicly owned:  77% is under provincial or territorial jurisdiction, 16%  is under federal jurisdiction, and the remaining 7%  is privately owned.103 By law, all forests harvested on  public land must be successfully regenerated.104 As of  December 2012, Canada had 147.9 million hectares  of forests certified as being sustainably managed  under one or more of three globally recognized  certification systems.105  Canada’s vast forest ecosystems are exposed to  significant natural disturbances such as fire, insects,  disease and weather-related events that affect forest  health and structure. A small portion of Canada’s  forests is also disturbed by harvesting and other  human activities each year, but the area of harvest  (approximately 640,000 hectares in 2011) is relatively  small compared to the area of natural disturbances  caused by fire and insects.106  For the past century, Canada’s vast managed forest has  been a significant carbon sink.107 Since 2002, however,  the forest has become a net source of carbon, in large  part due to increased forest fires and an unprecedented  insect infestation in western Canada. In spite of fire  suppression efforts, the annual total area burned  by wildfire in the managed forest has increased in  recent years, with the area burned totalling 2.3 million  hectares in 2010 and 2011.108 Even with an integrated  pest management approach, mountain pine beetle  killed approximately 675 million cubic metres of pine  in British Columbia between 1998 and 2009, an amount   equal to 50% of the province’s commercial pine.109 It is  expected that climate change (changes in temperature,  precipitation and season length) will further exacerbate  the impacts and increase frequency of natural  disturbances.110 Insect damage can increase the risk  of wildfire and drought can stress trees, making them  more susceptible to attack by insects and disease.111  References  1 National Inventory Report 1990–2011: GHG Sources and Sinks in   Canada. [Report]. 2013. United Nations Framework Convention   on Climate Change. [Revised 2013 April 15; cited 2013 July 25].   Available online at: http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_  ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/   7383.php  2 GHG Emissions per Person and per Unit Gross Domestic   Product. [Webpage]. 2013. Environment Canada. [Revised   2013 April 15; cited 2013 May 10]. Available online at:   http://www.ec.gc.ca/indicateurs-indicators/default.  asp?lang=en&n=79BA5699-1  3 2011 Census of Canada. [Census report]. 2011. Statistics Canada.   [Revised 2012 Dec 10; cited 2013 May 10]. Available online at:   http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/index-eng.cfm   4 CANSIM Table 051-0001: Estimated Population of Canada 1971   to present. [Table]. 2013. Statistics Canada. [Revised 2013 Aug 1;   cited 2013 May 24]. Available online at: http://www.statcan.  gc.ca/pub/98–187-x/4151287-eng.htm#table3  5 Canada’s Total Population Estimates. [Webpage]. 2013. Statistics   Canada [Revised 2013 Sept 26; cited 2013 Nov 4]. Available online   at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130926/dq130926a-  eng.htm  6 Population Projections for Canada, Provinces and Territories.   [Webpage]. 2012. Statistics Canada. [Revised 2012 Dec 19; cited   2013 Nov 4]. Available online at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/  pub/91-520-x/91-520-x2010001-eng.htm  7 Climate Trends and Variations 2012 Annual Summary. [Database   on the internet]. 2012. Environment Canada. [Revised 2013 July 24;   cited 2013 September 6]. Available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/  adsc-cmda/default.asp?lang=En&n=77842065-1  8 Ibid  9 Ibid  10 Ibid  http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/7383.php http://www.ec.gc.ca/indicateurs-indicators/default.asp?lang=en&n=79BA5699-1 http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/98%E2%80%93187-x/4151287-eng.htm#table3 http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/130926/dq130926a-eng.htm http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/91-520-x/91-520-x2010001-eng.htm http://www.ec.gc.ca/adsc-cmda/default.asp?lang=En&n=77842065-1 http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/index-eng.cfm   025  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  11 National Climate Data and Information Archive. [Database on   the internet]. 2013. Government of Canada. [Revised 2013 July 10;   cited 2013 August 1]. Available online at: http://climate.weather.  gc.ca/index_e.html#access  12 World Development Indicators: Growth of Output. [Database   on internet]. 2013. World Bank. [Revised 2013 Jan 1; cited 2013   May 10]. Available online at: http://data.worldbank.org/   indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?display=default  13 Ibid   14 CANSIM Table 380-0064: Gross domestic product, expenditure-   based. [Table]. 2013. Statistics Canada. [Revised 2013 Aug 1; cited   2013 Sept 24]. Available online at: http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/  cansim/a01?lang=eng  15 World Development Indicators: Growth of Output. [Database   on internet]. 2013. World Bank. [Revised 2013 Jan 1; cited 2013   July 8]. Available online at: http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/  NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?display=default  16 Gross Domestic Product at Basic Prices, by Industry. [Table].   2012. Statistics Canada. [Revised on 2013 July 31; cited 2013   August 21]. Available online at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/  tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/econ41-eng.htm  17 De Munnik et al. 2013. Bank of Canada Working Paper 2012–31:   The Evolution of Canada’s Global Export Market Share. [Revised   2013 July 31; cited 2013 May 10]. Available online at: http://www.   bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/wp2012-31.pdf  18 Natural Resources Canada. 2013. Energy Markets Fact Book   2013–2014. Ottawa (ON): Natural Resources Canada, Energy and   Economic Analysis Division. Original Source: TRAGS database.    Available online at: www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts  19 Ibid  20 Ibid  21 Ibid  22 Ibid  23 Ibid  24 Ibid  25 Ibid  26 Statistical Handbook, ‘Expenditures/Revenues’, Table 04-16B.   2012. The Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers.   [Revised 2012 Jan 1; cited 2013 Aug 2] Available online at: http://  www.capp.ca/library/statistics/handbook/Pages/default.aspx  27 Energy Statstics Handbook. 2004. Statistics Canada. [Revised   2013 Nov 13; cited 2013 Nov 13]. Available online at: http://www5.  statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=57-601-X&   chropg=1&lang=eng  28 Natural Resources Canada. 2013. Energy Markets Fact Book   2013–2014. Ottawa (ON): Natural Resources Canada, Energy and   Economic Analysis Division. Original Source: TRAGS database.   Available online at: www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts.  29 Ibid  30 Ibid  31 Ibid  32 Natural Gas information. [Webpage]. 2012. International Energy   Agency. [Revised 2013 Jan 1; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online   at: http://data.iea.org  33 Statistical Handbook. 2012. The Canadian Association of   Petroleum Producers. Available online at: http://www.capp.ca/  library/statistics/handbook/pages/statisticalTables.aspx?section   No=2. Note: NRCan uses a conversion factor of 35.3 (from cubic   meters to cubic feet of natural gas).  34 Short Term Canadian Natural Gas Deliverability 2013–2015,   Table C.3. 2012. The National Energy Board. [Revised 2013 May 9;   cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at: https://www.neb-one.  gc.ca/clf-nsi/rnrgynfmtn/nrgyrprt/ntrlgs/ntrlgsdlvrblty2013   2015/ntrlgsdlvrblty20132015-eng.html  35 Ibid  36 Ibid  37 Natural Resources Canada. 2013. Energy Markets Fact Book   2013–2014. Ottawa (ON): Natural Resources Canada, Energy and   Economic Analysis Division. Original Source: TRAGS database.   Available online at: www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts  38 Ibid  39 Ibid  40 Survey of Energy Resources. Chapter on coal, Table 1: ‘Coal   proved recoverable reserves’. 2010. World Energy Council.   [Revised 2013 Jan 1; cited Aug 2]. Available online at: http://www.   worldenergy.org/publications/  41 Natural Resources Canada. 2013. Energy Markets Fact Book   2013–2014. Ottawa (ON): Natural Resources Canada, Energy and   Economic Analysis Division. Original Source: TRAGS database.   Available online at: www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts  42 Ibid  43 Ibid  44 Energy Statistics Handbook. 2011. Statistics Canada. [Revised   2012 Dec 12; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at: http://www.  statcan.gc.ca/pub/57-601-x/2011001/t111-eng.htm  http://climate.weather.gc.ca/index_e.html#access http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?display=default http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/cansim/a01?lang=eng http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/NY.GDP.MKTP.CD?display=default http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/econ41-eng.htm http://www.bankofcanada.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/10/wp2012-31.pdf http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts http://www.capp.ca/library/statistics/handbook/Pages/default.aspx http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=57-601-X&chropg=1&lang=eng http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts. http://data.iea.org http://www.capp.ca/library/statistics/handbook/pages/statisticalTables.aspx?section https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/clf-nsi/rnrgynfmtn/nrgyrprt/ntrlgs/ntrlgsdlvrblty20132015/ntrlgsdlvrblty20132015-eng.html http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts http://www.worldenergy.org/publications/ http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/57-601-x/2011001/t111-eng.htm   026  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  45 Canadian International Merchandise Trade Database,    Table 990-0027. 2013. Statistics Canada. [Revised 2013 Aug 2;   cited 2013 Aug 2] Available online at: http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/  bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=65f0013x&lang=eng  46 Natural Resources Canada. 2013. Energy Markets Fact Book   2013–2014. Ottawa (ON): Natural Resources Canada, Energy and   Economic Analysis Division. Original Source: TRAGS database.   Available online at: www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts  47 Ibid  48 Ibid  49 Ibid  50 Quarterly Report on Energy Supply and Demand in Canada.   [Report]. 2013. Statistics Canada. [Revised 2013 Aug 2; cited 2013   Aug 2]. Available online at: http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/  olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=57-003-X&lang=eng  51 Report on Energy Supply and Demand in Canada, 2011   Preliminary. [Report]. 2011. Statistics Canada. [Revised 2013   Aug 2; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at: http://www5.   statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=57-003-X&CHROPG   =1&lang=eng  52 Electricity Exports and Imports. 2012. National Energy Board.   [Revised 2012 Dec 1; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at: http://  www.neb-one.gc.ca/clf-nsi/rnrgynfmtn/sttstc/lctrctyxprtmprt/   2012/lctrctyxprtmprt2012_12-eng.pdf   53 Natural Resources Canada. 2013. Energy Markets Fact Book   2013–2014. Ottawa (ON): Natural Resources Canada, Energy and   Economic Analysis Division. Original Source: TRAGS database.   Available online at: www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts  54 Electric Power Monthly, Table 5.1 ‘Retail Sales of Electricity to   Ultimate Customers’. [Table]. 2013. U.S. Energy Information   Administration. [Revised 2013 March 22; cited 2013 Aug 2].   Available online at: http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data.   cfm#sales  55 Natural Resources Canada. 2013. Energy Markets Fact Book   2013–2014. Ottawa (ON): Natural Resources Canada, Energy and   Economic Analysis Division. Original Source: TRAGS database.   Available online at: www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts  56 Natural Resources Canada. 2014. Energy Efficiency Trends in   Canada, 1990–2011. Ottawa (forthcoming).  57 Ibid  58 Ibid  59 Ibid  60 Renewables Information. [Report]. 2012 edition with 2010 data,   The International Energy Association. page 53. [Revised 2013   Jan 1; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at: http://www.iea.  org/w/bookshop/b.aspx  61 Transportation in Canada: 2011. [Report]. 2011. Transport   Canada. [Revised 2012 July 31; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online   at: http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-   index-3010.htm  62 Canada’s Emissions Trends Report 2013. [Report]. 2013.   Environment Canada. [Revised 2013 Oct 24; cited 2013 Nov 1].   Available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.  asp?lang=En&n=985F05FB-1  63 Transportation in Canada: 2011. [Report]. 2011. Transport   Canada. [Revised 2012 July 31; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online   at: http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-   index-3010.htm  64 Ibid  65 National Inventory Report 1990–2011: GHG Sources and Sinks in   Canada. [Report]. 2013. United Nations Framework Convention   on Climate Change. [Revised 2013 April 15; cited 2013 July 25].   Available online at: http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_  ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/   7383.php  66 Transportation in Canada: 2011. [Report]. 2011. Transport   Canada. [Revised 2012 July 31; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online   at: http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-   index-3010.htm  67 Ibid  68 National Inventory Report 1990–2011: GHG Sources and Sinks in   Canada. [Report]. 2013. United Nations Framework Convention   on Climate Change. [Revised 2013 April 15; cited 2013 July 25].   Available online at: http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_  ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/   7383.php  69 Ibid  70 Transportation in Canada: 2011. [Report]. 2011. Transport   Canada. [Revised 2012 July 31; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online   at: http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-   index-3010.htm  71 Ibid  72 Ibid  73 Ibid  74 Ibid  http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=65f0013x&lang=eng http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=57-003-X&lang=eng http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=57-003-X&CHROPG=1&lang=eng http://www.neb-one.gc.ca/clf-nsi/rnrgynfmtn/sttstc/lctrctyxprtmprt/2012/lctrctyxprtmprt2012_12-eng.pdf http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data.cfm#sales http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energymarketsfacts http://www.iea.org/w/bookshop/b.aspx http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-index-3010.htm http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.asp?lang=En&n=985F05FB-1 http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-index-3010.htm http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/7383.php http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-index-3010.htm http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/7383.php http://www.tc.gc.ca/eng/policy/report-aca-anre2011-index-3010.htm   027  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  75 Gross domestic product by industry. [Table]. 2013. Statistics   Canada. [Revised on 2013 July 31; cited 2013 Aug 1]. Available   online at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/  l01/cst01/gdps04a-eng.htm  76 Trade Data Online. [Database on the internet]. 2013. Industry   Canada. [Revised on 2013 June 19; cited 2013 July 17].    Available online at: https://www.ic.gc.ca/app/scr/tdst/tdo/crtr.  Area=9999&currency=CDN&toFromCountry=CDN&search   Type=Top25&countryList=ALL&productType=NAICS&grouped   =GROUPED&reportType=TE&timePeriod=5%7cCompleteYears   &changeCriteria=true  77 Waste Management Industry Reports: Business and Government   Sectors: 2010. [Report]. 2013 Statistics Canada. [Revised on   2013 Aug 2; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at: http://www5.  statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=16F0023X&CHROPG=   1&lang=eng  78 Ibid  79 Ibid  80 Ibid  81 Extended Producer Responsibility and Product Stewardship   Inventory of Programs. [Inventory]. 2012. Environment Canada.   [Revised 2012 July 8; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at:   http://www.ec.gc.ca/gdd-mw/default asp?lang=En&n=   9FB94989-1  82 Waste Management Industry Reports: Business and Government   Sectors: 2008. [Report]. 2013 Statistics Canada. [Revised on   2013 Aug 2; cited 2013 Aug 2]. Available online at:http://www5.  statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=16F0023X&CHROPG=   1&lang=eng  83 Ibid  84 Survey of Household Spending 1997-2010, [Webpage]. 2013.   Statistics Canada. [Revised 2013 May 24; cited 2013 July 31].   Available online at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/start-debut-eng.  html  85 Natural Resources Canada. 2012. National End-Use Database.   2011. ([Revised 2012; cited July 2013)]. 1–180 pp.  86 Ibid  87 Ibid  88 Natural Resources Canada. 2014. Energy Efficiency Trends in   Canada, 1990–2011, Ottawa (forthcoming).  89 Ibid  90 Ibid  91 Ibid  92 Ibid  93 Ibid  94 Survey of Commercial and Institutional Energy Use. 2012.   Natural Resources Canada. [Revised 2012 Dec 1, cited 2013 July   30]. 1–146 pp.   95 Ibid  96 Ibid; Celebrating a Decade of Achievement—2012 Annual   Report. LEED. 2012. [Revised 2013 Jan 1; cited 2013 July 31].   1–20 pp.; Energy and Environmental Report—2011. BOMA BESt.   2011. [Revised 2012; cited 2013 July 31]. 1–107 pp.  97 An Overview of the Canadian Agriculture and Agri-Food System   2013 [Economic publication]. 2013. Agriculture Canada. [Revised   2013 May 22; cited 2013 July 24]. Available online at: http://  www5.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/publications/economic-   publications/alphabetical-listing/an-overview-of-the-canadian-  agriculture-and-agri-food-system-2013/?id=1331319696826  98 2011 Census of Agriculture. [Census report]. 2011. Statistics   Canada. [Revised 2012 Dec 10; cited 2013 July 24]. Available   online at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/ca-ra2011/index-eng.htm  99 2011 Census of Agriculture. [Report]. 2011. Statistics Canada.   [Revised 2012 Dec 10; cited 2013 Nov 8]. Available online at:   http://www.statcan.gc.ca/ca-ra2011/  100 Natural Resources Canada. 2012. The State of Canada’s Forests:   Annual Report 2012. 51 pp.  101 Ibid  102 Ibid  103 Ibid  104 Ibid  105 Certification Status: Canada and the Globe. [Webpage]. 2012.   Certification Canada. [Revised 2013 Jan 1; cited 2013 July 26].   Available online at: www.certificationcanada.org/english/status_   intentions/status.php  106 Area Harvested, [Factsheet]. 2011. National Forest Database.   [Revised 2013 May 30; cited 2013 July 26]. Available online at:   http://nfdp.ccfm.org/silviculture/quick_facts_e.php  107 Natural Resources Canada. [Webpage]. 2013. Climate Change:   Forest Carbon. [Revised 2013 July 10; cited 2013 July 26]. Available   online at: http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pages/36   108 National Inventory Report 1990–2011: GHG Sources and Sinks   in Canada. Table 5V: Sectoral Background Data for Land Use,   Land-use Change and Forestry. [Report]. 2013. United Nations   Framework Convention on Climate Change. [Revised 2013   April 15; cited 2013 July 25]. Available online at: http://unfccc.int/  http://www.statcan.gc.ca/tables-tableaux/sum-som/l01/cst01/gdps04a-eng.htm https://www.ic.gc.ca/app/scr/tdst/tdo/crtr.Area=9999&currency=CDN&toFromCountry=CDN&searchType=Top25&countryList=ALL&productType=NAICS&grouped=GROUPED&reportType=TE&timePeriod=5%7cCompleteYears&changeCriteria=true http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=16F0023X&CHROPG=1&lang=eng http://www.ec.gc.ca/gdd-mw/default asp?lang=En&n=9FB94989-1 http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=16F0023X&CHROPG=1&lang=eng http://www.statcan.gc.ca/start-debut-eng.html http://www5.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/publications/economicpublications/alphabetical-listing/an-overview-of-the-canadianagriculture-and-agri-food-system-2013/?id=1331319696826 http://www.statcan.gc.ca/ca-ra2011/index-eng.htm http://www.statcan.gc.ca/ca-ra2011/ www.certificationcanada.org/english/status_intentions/status.php http://nfdp.ccfm.org/silviculture/quick_facts_e.php http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pages/36 http://unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_submissions/items/7383.php   028  2 CANADA’S NATIONAL CIRCUMSTANCES  ]  national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_   inventories_submissions/items/7383.php  109 Insects and Diseases: Economic Impacts. [Webpage]. 2012.   Natural Resources Canada. [Revised on 2012 Feb 15; cited 2013   July 26]. Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/  insects-diseases/13361  110 Insects and Diseases: Forest Ecosystem Impacts. [Webpage].   2013. Natural Resources Canada. [Revised on 2013 July 24; cited   2013 July 26]. Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/   forests/insects-diseases/13361  111 Ibid  http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/insects-diseases/13361 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/insects-diseases/13361   029  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  3 Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory Canada ratified the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) in  December 1992, and the Convention came into force  in March 1994. The ultimate objective of the UNFCCC  is to stabilize atmospheric greenhouse gas (GHG)  concentrations at a level that would prevent dangerous  interference with the climate system. In its actions to  achieve its objective and to implement its provisions,  the UNFCCC lays out a number of guiding principles  and commitments. Specifically, Articles 4 and 12  of the Convention commit all Parties to develop,  periodically update, publish, and make available  to the Conference of the Parties (COP), national  inventories of anthropogenic emissions by sources and  removals by sinks of all GHGs not controlled by the  Montreal Protocol.  Canada’s National Inventory is prepared and submitted  annually to the UNFCCC by April 15th, in accordance  with the “Guidelines for the preparation of national  communications by Parties included in Annex I to the  Convention, Part I: UNFCCC reporting guidelines on  national inventories” which include the revisions to  the Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Sector  (LULUCF) adopted by the COP at its 11th session in  December 2005. The annual inventory submission  consists of the National Inventory Report (NIR) and the  Common Reporting Format (CRF) Tables.   The GHG emission and removal estimates contained  within Canada’s GHG Inventory are developed  using methodologies consistent with the guidelines  prescribed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC). The Inventory estimates include carbon  dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O),  sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), perfluorocarbons (PFCs)  and hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), in the following six  IPCC sectors: Energy, Industrial Processes, Solvent and  Other Product Use, Agriculture, Waste, and LULUCF.   This chapter summarizes the latest information on  trends in Canada’s net anthropogenic emissions from  1990 to 2011 as reported in Canada’s 2013 NIR and  provides a description of the factors underlying the  emissions trends. The most recent report is entitled  National Inventory Report: Greenhouse Gas Sources and  Sinks in Canada 1990–2011; its Executive Summary is  available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg   3.1  Canada’s 2011 Greenhouse   Gas Emissions  In 2011, the most recent annual dataset in this report,  Canada emitted 702 megatonnes carbon dioxide  equivalent (Mt CO2 eq) of GHGs to the atmosphere,  excluding LULUCF estimates. The Energy Sector  (consisting of stationary combustion, transport and  fugitive emission sources) produced the majority of  Canada’s GHG total emissions in 2011, at 81% or 572 Mt  (Figure 3.1). The remaining 19% of total emissions was  largely generated by sources within the Agriculture  Sector (8% of total emissions) and Industrial  Processes Sector (8%), with minor contributions from  the Waste Sector (3%) and Solvent and Other Product  Use Sector.  On an individual GHG basis in 2011, CO2 contributed  79% of Canada’s total emissions (Figure 3.2). The  majority of these emissions result from the combustion  of fossil fuels. Methane (CH4) accounted for 13% of  Canada’s total emissions, largely from fugitive emissions  from oil and natural gas systems, as well as Agriculture  and Waste Sectors. Nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions  from activities such as agriculture soil management  and transport accounted for 7% of the emissions, while  PFCs, SF6, and HFCs constituted the remainder of the  emissions (slightly more than 1%).  http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg   030  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Figure 3.1 Canada’s Emissions Breakdown by IPCC Sector (2011)   (all sectors are consistent with the definitions provided in the  IPCC 1996 Guidelines for National GHG Inventories)  Figure 3.2 Canada’s Emissions Breakdown by Greenhouse Gas (2011)  3.2 Trends in Greenhouse Gas Emissions  and Removals, 1990–2011  Canada’s emissions in 2011 were 111 Mt (19 %) above  the 1990 total of 591 Mt (Figure 3.3). Steady increases  in annual emissions characterized the first 15 years  of this period, followed by fluctuating emission  levels between 2005 and 2008, a steep drop in 2009  and more stable values thereafter. Between 2005 and  2011 emissions decreased by 36 Mt (4.8%), primarily  due to decreases from electricity generation and  manufacturing industries.   Though GHG emissions have risen by 19% since 1990,  Canada’s economy grew much more rapidly, with Gross  Domestic Product (GDP) rising by 65%. As a result,  the emission intensity for the whole economy (GHG  per GDP) has improved considerably, dropping by 28%  (Figure 3.4).   There have been some variations over time, however  early in the period, emissions rose nearly in step with  economic growth, with their paths beginning to diverge  in 1995 (Figure 3.4). Since 2000, GHG emissions have  started to decouple from economic growth, a shift  that can be attributed to increases in efficiency, the  modernization of industrial processes, and structural  changes in the economy. These long-term trends  have had an increased impact on emissions since the  late 1990s.  Canada represented only about 2% of total global  GHG emissions in 2005, although it is one of the  highest per capita emitters, largely as a result of its size,  climate (i.e., climate-driven energy demands), and  resource-based economy. In 1990, Canadians released  21.3 tonnes (t) of GHGs per capita. In 2005, this had  risen to 22.9 t of GHGs per capita; however, by 2011 it  had dropped to 20.4 t of GHGs per capita (Figure 3.5).    031  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Figure 3.3 Canadian GHG Emission Trend (1990–2011) and  Copenhagen Target  Figure 3.4 Indexed Trend in GHG Emissions and GHG Emission  Intensity (1990–2011)    032  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Figure 3.5 Canadian per Capita Greenhouse Gas Emissions  (1990–2011)  3.3 Greenhouse Gas Trends by IPCC Sector,  1990–2011  Over the period of 1990 to 2011, total emissions in  the Energy Sector grew by 103 Mt CO2 eq (22%),  by 7 Mt CO2 eq (15%) in the Agriculture Sector,   by 3 Mt CO2 eq (16%) in the Waste Sector and by  0.1 Mt CO2 eq (39%) in the Solvent and Other Product  Use (Figure 3.6 and Table 3.1). During the same time  period, emissions decreased by 1.7 Mt CO2 eq (3%) in  the Industrial Process Sector.  Figure 3.6 Trends in Canadian GHG Emissions by IPCC Sector  (1990–2011)    033  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table 3.1 Canada’s GHG Emissions by IPCC Sector (1990–2011)  Greenhouse Gas Categories 1990 2000 2005 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Mt CO 2  equivalent  TOTAL1 591 718 737 749 731 689 701 702 ENERGY 469 589 597 610 592 560 570 572 a. Stationary Combustion Sources 281 346 341 352 336 315 316 313  Electricity and Heat Generation 94 129 123 122 115 100 101 93 Fossil Fuel Production and Refining 51 67 71 72 67 67 65 62  Petroleum Refining and Upgrading 17.0 16.0 20.0 21.0 19.0 19.0 18.0 16.0  Fossil Fuel Production 34.0 51.0 51.0 51.0 47.0 48.0 47.0 45.0  Mining & Oil and Gas Extraction 6.6 12.1 18.9 28.9 30.0 31.7 35.0 36.4 Manufacturing Industries 55.8 55.6 48.6 47.6 45.1 40.3 41.1 42.7  Iron and Steel 5.0 6.1 5.6 6.0 5.8 4.3 4.4 4.4  Non-ferrous Metals 3.3 3.2 3.6 3.8 3.8 2.8 3.0 3.1  Chemical 8.2 9.4 8.3 8.7 8.8 8.8 9.9 10.2  Pulp and Paper 14.5 12.3 8.8 7.9 6.4 6.5 6.1 6.2  Cement 3.9 4.3 5.4 5.0 4.9 4.5 4.0 4.1  Other Manufacturing 21.0 20.3 17.1 16.3 15.5 13.4 13.7 14.7  Construction 1.9 1.1 1.4 1.4 1.4 1.2 1.5 1.3 Commercial & Institutional 25.7 33.3 31.9 30.2 29.6 29.4 28.0 29.9 Residential 43 45 44 47 46 44 41 44 Agriculture & Forestry 2.4 2.5 2.1 2.6 2.6 2.5 2.9 3.6  b. Transport 146 180 193 195 194 186 196 199 Civil Aviation (Domestic Aviation) 7.1 7.4 7.6 7.7 7.3 6.4 6.4 6.0 Road Transportation 97 118 130 133 132 132 134 135  Light-duty Gasoline Vehicles 45.5 42.1 40.2 40.0 39.5 39.7 40.0 39.5  Light-duty Gasoline Trucks 20.3 36.4 42.7 42.7 42.3 42.5 42.9 42.7  Heavy-duty Gasoline Vehicles 7.4 5.5 6.5 6.8 6.8 6.9 7.0 7.1  Motorcycles 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3 0.3  Light-duty Diesel Vehicles 0.5 0.5 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 0.8  Light-duty Diesel Trucks 0.7 1.7 1.9 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2  Heavy-duty Diesel Vehicles 20.0 30.9 37.6 39.5 39.2 39.0 40.2 41.8  Propane & Natural Gas Vehicles 2.2 1.1 0.7 0.8 0.9 0.8 0.8 0.8  Railways 7.0 7.0 7.0 7.0 8.0 5.0 7.0 7.0 Navigation (Domestic Marine) 5.0 5.1 6.7 6.8 6.5 6.7 7.0 6.0 Other Transportation 30 43 41 41 41 36 42 45  Off-road Gasoline 8 9 8 8 7 7 8 9  Off-road Diesel 16 23 23 24 26 23 28 30  Pipelines 7 11 10 8 7 6 6 6  c. Fugitive Sources 42 63 63 63 62 59 59 60 Coal Mining 2.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.9 0.9 1.0 1.0 Oil and Natural Gas 40.2 62.1 62.4 62.0 61.0 57.9 57.6 58.7  Oil 4 5 6 6 6 6 6 6  Natural Gas 11 18 19 20 20 19 19 19  Venting 20 34 32 31 31 29 28 29  Flaring 4 5 6 5 5 4 4 5  INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES 56.0 52.1 60.5 59.8 58.5 50.8 53.3 54.3 a. Mineral Products 8.4 9.8 9.9 9.8 9.0 7.0 7.6 7.7  Cement Production 5.4 6.7 7.2 7.3 6.6 5.1 5.7 5.7  Lime Production 1.8 1.9 1.7 1.6 1.5 1.2 1.4 1.4  Mineral Product Use 1.2 1.2 1.0 0.9 0.9 0.7 0.5 0.6  b. Chemical Industry 16.0 8.0 9.3 7.9 9.4 7.1 6.5 7.0 Ammonia Production 4.5 5.7 5.3 5.2 5.6 5.2 5.3 5.7  Nitric Acid Production 1.0 1.2 1.3 1.1 1.3 1.2 1.1 1.2  Adipic Acid Production 11.0 0.9 2.6 1.5 2.4 0.7 0.0 0.0  Petrochemical Production 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1  c. Metal Production 22.6 22.5 19.7 18.9 18.5 15.4 15.8 16.6 Iron and Steel Production 10.2 11.5 10.2 11.1 10.7 8.0 9.0 9.9  Aluminum Production 9.3 8.2 8.2 7.3 7.4 7.2 6.6 6.6  SF6 Used in Magnesium Smelters and Casters 3.1 2.8 1.3 0.5 0.5 0.2 0.2 0.2  d. Production and Consumption of Halocarbons and SF6 1.0 3.2 5.5 5.7 5.8 6.5 7.3 7.7 e. Other & Undifferentiated Production 7.6 8.6 16.0 17.0 16.0 15.0 16.0 15.0 SOLVENT & OTHER PRODUCT USE 0.18 0.45 0.38 0.33 0.34 0.26 0.24 0.25 AGRICULTURE 47 56 58 58 59 56 56 54 a. Enteric Fermentation 16 20 22 21 20 19 19 18 b. Manure Management 5.7 7.0 7.5 7.2 6.9 6.7 6.5 6.4 c. Agriculture Soils 25 29 29 30 31 30 30 30  Direct Sources 14.00 15.00 15.00 16.00 17.00 16.00 16.00 16.00 Pasture, Range and Paddock Manure 2.20 3.10 3.40 3.30 3.20 3.00 2.90 2.70  Indirect Sources 9.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00 10.00  d. Field Burning of Agricultural Residues 0.21 0.12 0.04 0.04 0.05 0.04 0.03 0.03 WASTE 19 20 21 21 21 21 22 22 a. Solid Waste Disposal on Land 17 18 20 20 20 20 20 20 b. Wastewater Handling 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 c. Waste Incineration 0.7 0.8 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 LAND USE, LAND-USE CHANGE AND FORESTRY -62 -52 63 52 -11 -10 100 87 a. Forest Land -88 -64 54 45 -18 -15 99 83 b. Cropland 12 0 -4 -6 -7 -7 -8 -8 c. Grassland - - - - - - - - d. Wetlands 5 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 e. Settlements 9 8 9 10 10 9 9 9 1.  National totals exclude all GHGs from the Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Sector.     034  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Almost all of the emission changes over the long  term are attributable to six major areas: the fossil fuel  (coal, oil and gas) industries1, transport2, electricity  generation, manufacturing3, energy consumption in  commercial/institutional buildings and agriculture.  The relative contribution of each of these has varied  somewhat, depending on the time period. The fossil  fuel industries and transport are the major drivers of  the long-term trend of emissions growth. Between 1990  and 2011, these two sectors were each responsible for  about one-half of the total 111 Mt growth in emissions.  Major increases in oil and gas production (much of it  for export), as well as a large increase in the number  of motor vehicles, especially light-duty gasoline trucks  (vans, sport-utility vehicles and pick-up trucks) and  heavy-duty diesel vehicles (commercial transport  trucks), have contributed to the significant rise in  GHG emissions. In contrast, the observed emission  decline in the short-term (2005–2011) has been driven  by electricity generation and manufacturing. Emissions  from both the commercial/institutional buildings and  agriculture sectors have increased over the long-term  (1990–2011) by 4.2 Mt and 7.2 Mt, respectively; however,   recent trends show a decline in emissions over   the short-term (2005–2011) by 2.0 Mt and   4.2 Mt, respectively.  Greenhouse gases in the LULUCF sector are not  included in the inventory totals. In 2011, total emissions  for the LULUCF sector are estimated at about 87 Mt.  The detailed Common Reporting Format (CRF) Tables  containing Canada’s GHG emissions and removals  estimates between 1990 and 2011 are presented  in Canada’s 1st Biennial Report in Annex 1 of this  document; a summary of Canada’s GHG emissions  and removals by IPCC Sector between 1990 and 2011 is  presented in Table 3.1.   3.3.1  Energy—2011 GHG Emissions, 572 Mt Overall, this Sector accounted for 81% of total Canadian  GHG emissions in 2011. Figure 3.7 shows emissions  from key components of the Energy Sector in Canada:  Energy Industries4, Manufacturing Industries and  Construction, Transport, Other,5 and Fugitive.  Figure 3.7 GHG Emissions from Energy by Sub-Category (1990–2011)    035  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  3.3.1.1  Energy Industries—2011 GHG Emissions,  155 Mt  The Energy Industries (which includes Electricity and  Heat Generation, Petroleum Refining and Upgrading,  and Fossil Fuel Production) account for the second  largest portion of Canada’s fuel combustion emissions  after transportation (22% of Canada’s total). In 2011,  combustion emissions from this category totaled  155 Mt, an increase of 7% from the 1990 level of 145 Mt.  Public Electricity and Heat Generation—2011 GHG  Emissions, 93 Mt Public Electricity and Heat Generation, the main  constituent of the Energy Industries, accounted  for 13.3% (93 Mt) of Canada’s 2011 GHG emissions  (Table 3.1). Overall emissions from this category  decreased 0.3% (<1 Mt) since 1990. The estimated GHG  emissions from this sector do not include emissions  from industrial generation; rather, these emissions have  been allocated to the specific industrial sectors.  During the period from 1990 to 2011, electricity  generation rose significantly. However, the amount of  coal-based electricity within the generation mix grew  rapidly at first and then fell (most significantly after  2004), resulting in virtually zero emissions growth.  Petroleum Refining and Upgrading—2011 GHG  Emissions, 16 Mt The Petroleum Refining and Upgrading category mainly  includes emissions from the combustion of fossil fuels  during the production of refined petroleum products.  In 2011, GHG emissions from this category totaled  approximately 16 Mt.  Fossil Fuel Production—2011 GHG Emissions, 45 Mt The Fossil Fuel Production category encompasses  emissions from stationary fuel combustion associated  with the upstream oil and gas industry. In 2011, GHG  emissions totaled about 45 Mt from this subsector.  Between 1990 and 2011, emissions from these two  categories increased by about 11 Mt, or 32%. This growth   is due to increases in natural gas and oil production,  particularly crude bitumen and heavy crude oil.  3.3.1.2  Manufacturing Industries and  Construction—2011 GHG   Emissions, 44 Mt  Emissions from the Manufacturing Industries and  Construction group, not including Mining and Oil  and Gas Extraction, were responsible for 6.2% of  Canada’s total GHG emissions in 2011, down 24% from  1990. The largest decrease was 257% in the Pulp,  Paper and Print category, which can be attributed to  decreased demand, fuel switching, and changes in  manufacturing operations.  3.3.1.3 Transport—2011 GHG Emissions, 199 Mt Transport is a large and diverse subsector; with 199 Mt,  this sector accounted for 28% of Canada’s GHG  emissions in 2011. This subsector includes emissions  from fuel combustion for the transport of passengers  and freight in five distinct subcategories: Road  Transportation, Civil Aviation (Domestic Aviation),  Navigation (Domestic Marine), Railways, and Other  Transportation (Off-Road and Pipelines).  From 1990 to 2011, GHG emissions from Transport— driven primarily by energy used for personal  transportation—rose 36% (53 Mt), accounting for  almost one half of Canada’s emission growth from  1990 to 2011.  As shown in Table 3.1, the growth in Road Transport  emissions is due not only to the 50% increase in the  total vehicle fleet since 1990 (12% since 2005), but also  to a shift in light-duty vehicle purchases from cars  to trucks, which, on average, emit 44% more GHGs  per kilometer. Between 1990 and 2011, the increase of  22 Mt in emissions from light-duty gasoline trucks and  heavy-duty diesel vehicles reflects the trend towards  the increasing use of SUVs, minivans and pickups for  personal transportation and heavy-duty trucks for  freight transport.    036  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  3.3.1.4  Other Energy Sectors—2011 GHG  Emissions, 77 Mt  Other Energy Sectors comprise fuel combustion  emissions from Commercial and Institutional  buildings, Residential buildings, and Agriculture and  Forestry. Overall, this subsector exhibited increases  in GHG emissions of 9% from 1990 to 2011, while  individual subcategories within it demonstrated a  variety of changes.  GHG emissions in Commercial and Institutional  buildings and facilities and Residential buildings arise  primarily from the combustion of fuel to heat buildings.  Fuel combustion in these two categories accounted  for 10% of all GHG emissions in 2011. Emission  patterns are influenced by factors such as weather,  changes in energy efficiency, new home construction  volumes, and increases in commercial floor space.  These factors impact space heating requirements and  therefore demand for natural gas, home heating oil and  biomass fuels.  Trends in emissions from the Commercial and  Institutional category largely accounted for the 4.2 Mt  (or 6%) increase since 1990. Residential emissions  fluctuate on an annual basis and overall have remained  largely unchanged between 1990 and 2011.  Emissions from stationary fuel combustion in  Agriculture and Forestry amounted to 3.6 Mt in 2011  (0.5 % of the total), an increase of 49% from 1990.   3.3.1.5  Fugitive Emissions from Fuels—2011 GHG  Emissions, 60 Mt  Fugitive emissions from fossil fuels are the intentional  or unintentional releases of GHGs from the production,  processing, transmission, storage, and delivery of  fossil fuels. Released gases that are combusted (flared)  at oil and gas production and processing facilities  are included in these fugitive emissions. In total,  fugitive emissions constitute 8.5% of Canada’s total  GHG emissions for 2011, with Oil and Natural Gas  contributing almost all the total fugitive emissions.   Fugitive emissions contributed 16% to the growth in  emissions between 1990 and 2011, with a 41% increase  between 1990 and 2011, from 42 to 60 Mt. Over this  period fugitive emissions from Oil and Natural Gas  increased by 46%, while those released in the Solid  Fuels category (i.e., coal mining) decreased by 1 Mt  (50%) as a result of the closing of many mines in  eastern Canada.  3.3.2   Industrial Processes—2011 GHG  Emissions, 54 Mt  The Industrial Processes Sector includes GHG  emissions that are direct by-products of processes,  including Mineral Products, Chemical Industry,  Metal Production, Production and Consumption of  Halocarbons and SF6, and Other and Undifferentiated  Production. The 54 Mt emitted from the Industrial  Processes Sector contributed 8% to the 2011 national  GHG inventory, compared with 56 Mt (9%) in 1990, a  decrease of approximately 2 Mt or 3% (Figure 3.8).   This decrease in emissions is explained by significant  emission reductions in adipic acid production (which  generates N2O), aluminium production (PFCs), and  magnesium production (SF6); these reductions were  partly offset by growths in hydrofluorocarbon (HFC)  emissions (i.e., emission from refrigeration and air  conditioning), and in CO2 emissions from the use  of natural gas liquids and feedstock in the Chemical  Industry and the use of lubricants (captured under the  category of Other and Undifferentiated Production).   Some chemical and metal industries have made  significant progress in controlling emissions over the  years. For example, while increasing its production by  90% (1.4 Mt) between 1990 and 2011, the aluminium  industry has succeeded in reducing its PFC emissions  by 78% or 5.1 Mt CO2 eq, largely due to technological  improvements. The magnesium production industry  also showed a decrease in emissions because of  replacement of SF6 with alternatives and the closure of  plants over the years.    037  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Figure 3.8 GHG Emissions from Industrial Process Sector by   Sub-Category (1990–2011)  Emissions from refrigeration and air conditioning  have grown by 672% (6.7 Mt CO2 eq) since 1990; this  is largely due to the displacement of ozone-depleting  substances by HFCs since the Montreal Protocol came  into effect in 1989. The non-energy (feedstock) use of  fuels in the petrochemical industry has considerably  increased over the years, justifying by and large the  emission growth of 100% (7.6 Mt CO2 eq) seen in the  category of Other and Undifferentiated Production  since 1990. A slight increase in emissions trends in  Cement Production are largely driven by domestic and  international (mainly U.S.) construction activities.  3.3.3   Solvent and Other Product Use—2011  GHG Emissions, 0.25 Mt  The Solvent and Other Product Use Sector accounts for  emissions related to the use of N2O as an anaesthetic  in medical applications and as a propellant in aerosol  products. The emission trends were primarily driven  by the domestic demand for N2O for anaesthetic or  propellant purposes.  3.3.4  Agriculture—2011 GHG Emissions, 54 Mt In 2011, emissions from agriculture (excluding energy  use) accounted for 54 Mt or 8% of total Canadian   GHG emissions, an increase of 7 Mt since 1990.  N2O accounts for about 62% of sectoral emissions  and CH4 for 38%. The two principal activities in the  agricultural industry are livestock and crop production.  Livestock contributed 32 Mt CO2 eq; 18 Mt CO2 eq from  enteric fermentation and 14 Mt CO2 eq from manure  management, storage and application (56% and 44%  of livestock emissions, respectively). Crop production  contributed N2O emissions during the application  of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers (14 Mt CO2 eq) and  from crop residue decomposition (7.3 Mt CO2 eq),  representing 66% and 34% of crop production  emissions, respectively (Table 3.2).  The main drivers of the emission trend in the  Agriculture Sector are the expansion of the beef  cattle and swine populations, and increases in the  application of synthetic nitrogen fertilizers in the  Prairies of western Canada. Beef, swine and poultry  populations in Canada are 16%, 17% and 39% higher,  respectively, than in 1990 and largely account for the  12% increase (from 29 to 32 Mt CO2 eq) in emissions  associated with animal production over the 1990–2011  period (Table 3.2).    038  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table 3.2 GHG Emissions from Agriculture by Production Systems (1990–2011)  Production System GHG Emissions (Mt CO2 eq) 1  1990 2000 2005 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Livestock 29 36 39 37 36 34 33 32  Dairy Cows 5.8 5.0 4.7 4.5 4.5 4.5 4.6 4.6 Beef Cattle 19 25 28 27 26 25 24 23 Swine 2.4 3.1 3.5 3.3 2.9 2.8 2.7 2.8 Other  Livestock2 1.5 2.1 2.3 2.3 2.3 2.2 2.2 2.2  Crop 18 20 19 21 23 22 22 22 Synthetic  Nitrogen  Fertilizers 9.2 12 11 13 13 13 14 14 Crop Residue  Decomposition 7.5 7.2 7.7 7.7 9.1 8.2 8.5 7.3 Other  Management  Practices3 1.3 0.9 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.2 0.1 0.1  Agriculture (Total) 47 56 58 58 59 56 56 54 1Totals may not add up due to rounding. 2Other livestock includes sheep, lamb, goat, horse, bison, poultry, llamas and alpacas. 3Other management practices includes summerfallow, conservation tillage practices, irrigation, cultivation of organic soils and field burning of crop residues.  Emission factors for beef cattle increased from 1990 to  2011 due to herd improvements that increased average  live weight; an average animal now consumes more  feed and also emits more GHGs. As a result, emissions  from beef cattle increased at greater rates than  cattle populations.   The increases in emissions from beef production  were partially offset by a 28% reduction in the dairy  population. Due to improved genetics and changes in  feeding and/or management practices, average milk  productivity per head increased by 32% and dairy  quotas were attained with fewer animals, increasing  industry profitability. Subsequently, emissions  associated with dairy cows decreased by approximately  20% since 1990. Even though the decrease in dairy  population is driving the emission decline in this  category, an average cow produces more milk today   than in 1990, and also emits more GHGs, as was the  case with non-dairy cattle.  Emissions attributed to crop production are due mainly  to either the application of synthetic nitrogen (N)  fertilizers or to crop residue decomposition, which is  directly proportional to crop yields. The use of synthetic  nitrogen fertilizer has increased from 1.2 Mt N to  2.0 Mt N from 1990 to 2011 due mainly to a reduction  in summerfallow and an intensification of cropping  systems in western Canada. Major crops grown in  Canada, including corn, wheat, barley, and canola,  require high rates of fertilization to achieve and sustain  high levels of production. As a consequence, emissions  from synthetic nitrogen fertilizer consumption have  increased substantially, from 9.2 Mt CO2 eq in 1990  to 14 Mt CO2 eq in 2011. Emission trends for the  Agriculture subsectors are presented in Figure 3.9.    039  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Figure 3.9 GHG Emissions Trend for Agriculture by Sub-Category  (1990–2011)  3.3.5  Waste—2011 GHG Emissions, 22 Mt From 1990 to 2011, GHG emissions from the Waste  Sector increased 14%. In 2011, these emissions  represented 3.1% (22 Mt) of the total national GHG  emissions, close to its 1990 value (3.2% or 19 Mt). Of  the 22 Mt total emissions from this sector in 2011, solid  waste disposal on land, which includes municipal  solid waste (MSW) landfills and wood waste landfills,  accounted for 20 Mt. Methane emissions produced by  the decomposition of biomass in MSW landfills were  responsible for 92% of the emissions from this sector.  Emissions from municipal wastewater treatment   and incineration of waste (excluding emissions  from incineration of biomass material) contributed  1.0 Mt and 0.69 Mt, respectively, to the total from the  Waste Sector (Figure 3.10).  Methane emissions from MSW landfills increased  by 18% between 1990 and 2011 (Figure 3.10) despite  an increase of 81% in landfill gas capture and  combustion over the same period. Approximately  349 kilotonnes (kt) CH4 (or 7 334 kt CO2 eq) were  captured by the 68 landfill gas collection systems  operating in Canada.  Figure 3.10 GHG Emissions from Waste (1990–2011)    040  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Of the total amount of CH4 collected in 2011, 51%  (179 kt) was utilized for various energy purposes  and the remainder was flared. From 1990 to 2011, the  population growth trend (24%) exceeded that of the  sector emissions (14%). The decline in the growth of  emissions per capita from waste observed in the mid- 1990s is directly attributable to CH4 capture at landfills  and waste diversion programs.  3.3.6   Land Use, Land-use Change and  Forestry—2011 Net GHG Emissions,   87 Mt (not included in national totals)  The LULUCF Sector reports GHG fluxes between the  atmosphere and Canada’s managed lands, as well as  those associated with land-use changes. The LULUCF  UNFCCC categories include Forest Land, Cropland,  Grassland, Wetlands, Settlements, and Other Land.  The net LULUCF flux, calculated as the sum of CO2  emissions and removals and non-CO2 emissions,  displayed high interannual variability over the reporting  period. In 2011, this net flux amounted to emissions of  87 Mt (Figure 3.11).  In accordance with UNFCCC accounting rules, all  emissions and removals in the LULUCF Sector are  excluded from the national totals. GHG emissions  from sources and removals by sinks are estimated and  reported for four categories of managed lands: Forest  Land, Cropland, Wetlands, and Settlements.   The Forest Land category includes GHG emissions  from and removals by Canada’s managed forests.  Managed forests display the highest interannual  variability of all categories and exert an overriding  influence on the net sectoral GHG balance and trend  (Table 3.3). The net GHG flux reflects the difference  between carbon uptake by tree growth and emissions  due to anthropogenic and natural disturbances,  specifically forest management activities, wildfires  and insect infestations. The high variability in the  net flux from managed forests is associated with the  immediate impact of wildfires, which alone accounted  for annual emissions of between 11 Mt and 264 Mt over  the period from 1990 to 2011.  Figure 3.11 GHG Emissions from LULUCF Relative to Total Canadian  Emissions (1990–2011)    041  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table 3.3 LULUCF Sector Net GHG Flux Estimates (1990–2011)   Sectoral Category Net GHG Flux (kt CO2 eq) 4  1990 2000 2005 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011  Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry TOTAL1 -62 000 -52 000 63 000 52 000 -11 000 -10 000 103 000 87 000  a. Forest Land -88 000 -64 000 54 000 45 000 -18 000 -15 000 99 000 83 000 Forest Land Remaining Forest Land -87 000 -63 000 55 000 46 000 -17 000 -14 000 99 000 84 000 Land Converted to Forest Land -1 000 -1 000 - 900 - 900 - 800 - 800 - 700 - 700  b. Cropland 12 000  40 -4 100 -5 700 -6 500 -6 900 -7 600 -8 000 Cropland Remaining Cropland -2 000 -7 000 -10 000 -11 000 -12 000 -12 000 -13 000 -13 000 Land Converted to Cropland 13 000 7 000 6 000 5 700 5 300 5 500 5 300 5 300  c. Grassland NE, NO NE, NO NE, NO NE, NO NE, NO NE, NO NE, NO NE, NO Grassland Remaining Grassland NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE Land Converted to Grassland NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO  d. Wetlands 5 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 3 000 Wetlands Remaining Wetlands 1 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 2 000 Land Converted to Wetlands 4 000 800 1 000 700 800 800 700 700  e. Settlements 9 000 8 000 9 000 10 000 10 000 9 000 9 000 9 000 Settlements Remaining Settlements - 100 - 200 - 200 - 200 - 200 - 200 - 200 - 200 Land Converted to Settlements 9 000 9 000 10 000 10 000 10 000 10 000 10 000 10 000  Forest conversion (memo item)2 26 000 20 000 20 000 20 000 20 000 19 000 19 000 19 000  Grassland conversion (memo item)2,3 300 200 200 200 200 200 200 200  Notes:  1. Totals may not add up due to rounding. Annex 9 describes the rounding protocol.  2. Already included in land converted to cropland, land converted to wetlands, and land converted to settlements; and in cropland remaining cropland and  wetlands remaining wetlands (for residual emissions post-20 years, 10 years for reservoirs).  3. Includes conversion of agricultural grassland to cropland and of tundra to settlement.  4. Negative sign indicates net removals of CO2 from the atmosphere.  NE = Not estimated, NO=Not Occuring  Important trends associated with human activities  in managed forests include a 28% increase in the  carbon removed in harvested wood biomass between  1990 and the peak harvest year, 2004. Since then,  significant reductions in forest management activities  have occurred, with a 33% decline in harvest levels  in 2011, which in 2009 reached their lowest point  for the 22 year period (30 Mt of carbon). This trend  reflects a deep restructuring of the Canadian forest  economic sector, aggravated by the consequences of the  economic recession in the United States, Canada’s main  export market.  Note that the Forest Land estimates reflect the  assumption that all carbon transferred out of forests  in the form of wood products is deemed an immediate  emission, i.e., the estimates do not incorporate the  long-term carbon storage in Harvested Wood Products  (HWP). In general, incorporating the delay in emissions   due to carbon storage in commodities more accurately  reflects when emissions occur. The difference in  Forest Land estimates due to a more realistic HWP  estimation approach is not constant over time.6 The  impact is larger at the beginning of the time series and  decreases over time, which is expected since the HWP  pool starts in 1990 and at that time contains no carbon  from historically produced commodities. Over time,  carbon accumulates in the pool of HWP in use, and so  emissions from the pool increase (from 58 Mt CO2 in  1990 to about 100 Mt CO2 in 2011).  The Cropland subcategory includes the effect of  agricultural practices on CO2 emissions from, and  removals by, arable soils and the immediate and  long-term impacts of Forest and Grassland conversion  to Cropland. The steady decline in emissions from  Cropland is noteworthy, from 12 Mt CO2 eq in 1990 to a  net removal of 8 Mt CO2 eq in 2011. This pattern largely     042  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  results from changing agricultural land management  practices in western Canada, such as the extensive  adoption of conservation tillage practices (over  13 million hectares of cropland since 1990), reduction  in summerfallow by more than 68% and an increase in  perennial forage crops. The net CO2 removals due to  the management of mineral soils increased from about  2.1 Mt in 1990 to 14 Mt in 2011. A decline in Forest Land  conversion to Cropland has also contributed to this  trend in emissions/removals.  3.4 Uncertainties  National GHG inventories strive for accuracy,  completeness, comparability, transparency, and  consistency. In spite of constant efforts towards these  objectives, estimates will always inherently carry some  uncertainty. Uncertainties in the inventory estimates  may be caused by systematic model uncertainty or  by random uncertainties present within the input  parameters and activity data. While reducing model  uncertainty requires in-depth reviews of the estimation  models, random uncertainties may be reduced by  improvements to the activity data, emission factors  and other model parameters. The primary purpose of  quantitative uncertainty information is to set priorities  to improve the accuracy of future inventories and to  guide decisions about which methods to use. Typically,  the uncertainties associated with the trends and the  national totals are much lower than those associated  with individual gases and sectors.  The overall level of uncertainty of Canada’s national  inventory (without LULUCF), as reported in the most  recent NIR submission (2013) lie within an uncertainty  range of 674 Mt CO2 eq to 730 Mt CO2 eq (±4). These  results are consistent with those published in previous  submissions, which ranged from 3% to +6%. The  Energy Sector had the lowest uncertainty, at ±3%, while  the Agriculture Sector had the highest uncertainty, at  ±39%. The Industrial Processes, the Solvent and Other  Product Use, and the Waste Sectors had uncertainties  of ±8.2, ±19 and ±34%, respectively. The emission   source categories that made the largest contributions to  uncertainty at the national level when LULUCF is not  included were:  • Agriculture—indirect N2O emissions from   agricultural soils;  • Energy—fuel combustion—public electricity and heat   combustion, CO2; • Energy—fuel combustion—other (off-road)   transportation, N2O; • Waste—solid waste disposal on land, CH4; and • Agriculture—direct N2O emissions from   agricultural soils.   The national emission estimate including LULUCF  emissions and removals of 789 Mt CO2 eq lies  within an uncertainty range of 673 Mt CO2 eq to  905 Mt CO2 eq (±15%). Uncertainty is high for LULUCF  estimates because emissions are primarily driven by  highly variable natural disturbance factors. The top five  contributors influencing the national uncertainty when  LULUCF is included were:  • LULUCF—forest land, CO2;  • Agriculture—indirect agricultural soils, N2O;  • Energy—fuel combustion—public electricity and heat   combustion, CO2;  • Energy—fuel combustion—other (off-road)   transportation, N2O; and • Waste—solid waste disposal on land, CH4.   3.5 National Inventory Arrangements  Canada has established a national system to ensure  the integrity of its annual inventory. Canada’s  national system for the estimation of anthropogenic  emissions from sources and removals by sinks of  all GHGs not controlled by the Montreal Protocol  encompasses the institutional, legal, and procedural  arrangements necessary to ensure that Canada meets  its reporting obligations.   The national system consists of institutional  arrangements for the preparation of the inventory,  including: formal agreements supporting data collection     043  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  and estimate development; a quality assurance/quality  control plan; the ability to identify key categories and  generate quantitative uncertainty analysis; a process  for performing recalculations for improvement of  the inventory; procedures for official approval; and, a  working archives system to facilitate third-party review.   The national entity responsible for Canada’s national  inventory system is the Pollutant Inventories and  Reporting Division of Environment Canada. The  National Inventory Focal Point is:  Director Pollutant Inventories and Reporting Division Science and Risk Assessment Directorate Science and Technology Branch Environment Canada 10th Floor, 200 Sacré-Coeur Boulevard Gatineau QC K1A 0H3  3.5.1   Institutional, Legal, and Procedural  Arrangements  The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999  (CEPA 1999) provides the legislative authority for  Environment Canada to implement a national  inventory system; CEPA 1999 also provides the   authority under which Environment Canada’s Pollutant  Inventories and Reporting Division is responsible for  preparing and submitting the national inventory to  the UNFCCC.7  Numerous organizations contribute to the development  of Canada’s national inventory (Figure 3.12) and  the Pollutant Inventories and Reporting Division is  involved in many partnerships with data providers  and expert contributors in a variety of ways, ranging  from informal to formal arrangements. Currently,  partnerships exist between Environment Canada  and other government departments such as Statistics  Canada, Natural Resources Canada, Transport  Canada and Agriculture & Agri-Food Canada.  Environment Canada also has arrangements with  industry associations and universities, collaborates  with provincial and territorial governments on a  bilateral basis, and will often commission specific  studies to consultants or university researchers. Groups  at Environment Canada other than the Pollutant  Inventories and Reporting Division also contribute  data on waste and waste management, residential  fuel use of biomass, and emissions of SF6, ozone and  aerosol precursors.  Figure 3.12 Partners of the National System    044  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Figure 3.13 Inventory Preparation Process  3.5.2  Process for Inventory Preparation Recognizing the need to draw on the best available  technical and scientific expertise and information in  accordance with good practice and international quality  standards, Environment Canada has defined roles and  responsibilities for the preparation of the inventory,  both internally and externally, and has formalized the  GHG inventory preparation process (Figure 3.13).  Canada’s inventory is developed, compiled, and  reported annually by Environment Canada’s Pollutant  Inventories and Reporting Division, with input from  numerous experts and scientists across Canada.  Inventory experts in the Division develop, analyze, and  verify activity data, methods, emission factors, and the  emission and removal estimates. Once the emission  and removal estimates are complete, the Division  develops, reports, and publishes the NIR and the CRF  tables. The Division also manages the quality and the  archiving systems, performs trend analysis, and acts  as a clearinghouse for greenhouse gas information and  technical guidance on greenhouse gas quantification.  Moreover, the Pollutant Inventories and Reporting   Division manages the Greenhouse Gas Emissions  Reporting Program which requires annual reporting  from facilities whose emissions exceed the reporting  threshold of 50 kt CO2 eq. The facility data collected  under this program serve as an important component  of the overall inventory development process in  comparing and verifying the inventory estimates.  The inventory is built around a continuous process  of methodological improvements, refinements, and  review, according to the quality management and  improvement plans. The Inventory Coordinator  within the Quality Management and Verification  section is responsible for preparing the inventory  development schedule based on the results of the  lessons-learned review of the previous inventory  cycle, quality assurance/quality control follow-up,  the UNFCCC review report, and collaboration with  provincial and territorial governments. These feedbacks  are incorporated in the inventory preparation process  and the planning of methodological improvements;  in any given year a number of improvements are  implemented in both the preparation process and     045  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  estimation methodologies. Based on these outcomes,  methodologies and emission factors are reviewed,  developed, and/or refined (as appropriate).  For any given inventory reporting cycle, all  methodological improvements must be implemented  by the end of October. At this time, data are collected  from the source agencies and are entered into  spreadsheet-based emission estimation systems,  databases, and/or models. Between November  and January, draft estimates are calculated by the  inventory experts and subsequently internally  reviewed. During February, the NIR text and CRF  tables are prepared according to UNFCCC guidelines.  Quality control checks and estimates are signed off  by sectoral managers before the report and national  totals are prepared. The inventory preparation  process also involves key category assessment,  recalculations, uncertainty calculation, and  documentation preparation.  Over the months of February and March, the compiled  inventory is reviewed internally. Some components are  externally reviewed by experts, government agencies,  and provincial and territorial governments, after which  the NIR is fully edited. Comments from the reviews are  documented and, where appropriate, incorporated in  the NIR and CRF, which are normally submitted to the  UNFCCC electronically prior to April 15 of each year.  Once finalized, the NIR is then translated and made  available in French.  3.5.3  Quality Assurance and Quality Control Quality Assurance (QA) and Quality Control (QC)  and verification procedures are an integral part of  the preparation of the inventory and are planned and  implemented on a continuous basis to improve the  transparency, completeness, accuracy, consistency and  comparability of inventory estimates.   QC involves a system of routine technical activities  to assess and maintain the quality of the inventory  as it is being developed. QC activities are completed   during each annual inventory preparation cycle and  include accuracy checks on data acquisition and  calculations, the use of standardized procedures for  emission and removal calculations, measurements,  estimating uncertainties, archiving information,  and reporting. QC activities also include technical  reviews of categories, activity data, emission factors,  other estimation parameters, and methods. QA is a  planned system of review procedures conducted by  independent experts and is performed independently  from QC procedures. QA reviews help to ensure that  the inventory represents the best possible estimates  of emissions and removals given the current state of  scientific knowledge and data availability, and supports  the effectiveness of the QC program.  The documentation of QA/QC procedures is at the core  of the national system. Standard checklists are used for  the consistent, systematic documentation of all   QA/QC activities in the annual inventory preparation  and submission and the checklists are archived  along with other procedural and methodological  documentation, by inventory category and by  submission year. The Pollutant Inventories and  Reporting Division also coordinates QA/QC activities  with outside agencies and organizations providing  activity data and/or developing GHG emission and  removal estimates for Environment Canada.  In addition to QA/QC procedures performed by the  Division, the inventory is also reviewed on an annual  basis. Initial checks of the April submission are  performed by the UNFCCC in May and June and a more  in-depth review by an Expert Review Team comprised  of international experts and coordinated by the  UNFCCC, takes place in September.   3.5.4  Key Categories A key category is one that is prioritized within the  national inventory system because its estimate has  a significant influence on a country’s total inventory  of direct GHG emissions in terms of the absolute  level of emissions (level assessment), the trend in     046  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  emissions from the base year to the current year  (trend assessment), or both. As much as possible, two  important inventory aspects of key categories should  receive special consideration: • Preferential use of detailed, higher-tier methods; and • Additional attention with respect to QA/QC.  For the 2013 GHG inventory, level and trend key  category assessments were performed according to the  Tier 1 approach, as presented in the IPCC Good Practice  Guidance.8,9 The emission and removal categories used  for the key category assessment generally follow those  in the CRF and the LULUCF CRF; however, they have  been aggregated in some cases and are specific to the  Canadian inventory.  Major key categories based on the level and trend  assessments (including LULUCF) are the fuel  combustion categories (Stationary Combustion— Gaseous, Liquid and Solid Fuels, Road Transportation,  and Off-road Transport), and the LULUCF category  Forest Land Remaining Forest Land.   3.5.5  Process for Recalculations of Estimates The UNFCCC requires all Annex I Parties to continually  improve their national greenhouse gas inventories.  Environment Canada consults and works jointly  with key federal and provincial partners along with  industry stakeholders, research centres and consultants  on a continuous basis to improve the quality of the  underlying variables and scientific information used   in the compilation of the national inventory. As new  information and data become available and more  accurate methods are developed, previous estimates are  updated to provide a consistent and comparable trend  in emissions and removals. As such, recalculations are  expected to occur annually, reflecting the principle of  continuous improvement. The nature, rationale and  impact of these recalculations are documented in the  NIR and associated CRF tables. Recalculations occur for  any number of reasons, including: • Correction of errors detected by quality   control procedures; • Incorporation of updates to activity data, including   changes in data sources; • Reallocation of estimates to different categories   (although this will only affect sub-totals); • Refinements of methodologies and emission factors; • Inclusion of categories previously not estimated   (which improves inventory completeness); and  • Implementation of recommendations from   UNFCCC reviews.  As appropriate, Environment Canada revises and  recalculates the emission and removal estimates for all  years in the inventory, as good inventory preparation  practice requires that methodological improvements  and updates be applied to the entire time series of  annual estimates (i.e., from 1990 to the most recent year  reported). A consistent time series is required to avoid  confounding a methodological change with an actual  change in GHG emissions or removals.     047  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Annex I  Summary GHG Estimates from Common  Reporting Format (CRF) Tables  For purposes of consistency, the CRF tables (Tables 10s1  to 10s5) have been adapted such that emissions/ removals of all gases are treated in a similar manner  when comparing totals with and without LULUCF. Due   to rounding, values presented in Chapter 3: Canada’s  GHG Inventory may differ slightly from the values  presented below:    048  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table A.1 Emissions Trends (CO2) 1990–2011 G  R l:  E l'>  "H O  U S  E  G  A S   S O  U R  C E   A N  D  S  lll i"  K  C  A T  E G  O R  IE S    1  99 0    1  9 9  5    2 0  0 0    2  0 0  5    2 0  0 6    2  0 0  7    2 0  0 8    2  0 0  9    2 0  1 0    2  0 1  1    (G g)     1.  E  n er  gy    42 5,  36 3.  31    4 5  3 ,2  5 2  .0 1    5  2 4,  5 81  .1 4    5  3 2  ,0 80  .6 4    5  2 2  ,0 5  1 .3  6    5 4  5, 5  0 9.  5 0    5  2 9,  7 2  6. 0  1    5 0  1 ,5  0 1  .9 6    5  1 0  ,5 7  4 .3  7    5 1  1 ,4  6 6  .8 6     A . F  ue l C  om bu  st io  n  (S  ec to  ra l A  pp ro  ac h)    4  13 ,9  01 .8  4  4  38 ,5  34 .7  3    5 08  ,5 75  .8 5   5 16  ,5 10  .2 5   50 5  ,6 96  .4 1   52 9,  89 9.  56    51 3,  82 8  .5 1   4 8  6, 76  1. 84    49  6, 0  29 .1  2  4  9 6,  44 7.  85    1.  E  ne rg  y  In  du st  ri es    14  2, 31  1. 0  3  14  8, 97  4. 80    19  3, 04  6. 66    19  0, 44  2. 71    18  4 ,0  26 .1  0  19  0, 83  1. 4  8    17 8,  33 3.  38    16 3,  02 0.  73    16 2,  90 8.  3 1   15 1,  83 4  .1 0   2.  M  an uf  ac tu  ri ng   I nd  us tr  ie s   an d   C on  st ru  ct io  n  63  ,6 04  .1 8   64 ,5  13 .9  4  6  7. 95  0. 44    6  8 ,0  56 .6  7  68  ,7 88  .3 9   76 ,8  70 .0  3  75  ,4 62  .0 4   72 ,2  85 .2  0  76  ,7 75  .6 2   79 ,5  80 .8  1   3.  T  ra ns  po rt    13  9, 05  8. 13    15  1, 48  2. 44    16  9, 73  2 .8  0  18  2, 49  0. 40    18  2, 18  4 .9  3  18  5, 67  0 .0  9    18 4,  76 5.  38    17 8,  37 8.  84    18 7,  02 2.  2 5    19  0, 08  3. 66     4.    O th  er  S  e< :to  rs    68 ,7  60 .5  8  73  .4 29  .2 7   77 ,7  1 5 .8  7  75  .4 31  .3 4   7 0,  58 9.  91    76 ,4  00 .0  4  75  ,1 52  .1 3   72 ,9  93 .1  1  69  ,2 44  .2 5   74 ,8  80 .8  7   5.  O  th er    16  7. 92    13  4. 28    13  0. 08    8  9 .1  4  1 0  7. 08    12  7. 9  3    11 5.  59    83 .9  7  78  .6 9   6 8  .4 1   B . F  ug iti  ve  E  m is  si on  s f ro  m  F  ue ls    11  ,4 61  .4 7    14  ,7 17  .2 8   16 ,0  05 .2  8  15  ,5 7  0. 38    16  ,3 54  .9 4   15 ,6  0 9.  93    15 ,8  97 .5  0  14  ,7 4  0. 12    14  ,5 4  5. 2  5    15 ,0  19 .0  1   I.  S  ol id  fu el  s  K  A .N  E    N A  ,J \T    K  A ,J  \T    N A  ,J \c    K  A .N  T    K A  ,J \T    K  A .N  e    N A  ,J \T    K  A ,J  \T    2.  O  il  an  d  N  at ur  al  G  as    11 ,4  6 1.  4 7    14  ,7 17  .2 8   16 ,0  05 .2  8  15  ,5 7  0. 38    16  ,3 54  .9 4   15 ,6  09 .9  3  15  ,8 97  .5 0    14  ,7 40  .1 2   14 ,5  45 .2  5  15  ,0 19  .0 1   2 .   In du  st ri  al  P  ro ce  ss es    3  3 ,4  4 2  .4 6    3  7 ,2  8 8.  62    3 9  ,5 2  8 .1  6    46 ,3  76 .3  9  4  9 ,2  1 0  .3 8    4  8 ,6  3 0  .9 9    4  6 ,2  9 6.  2 1    4  0 ,0  6 0.  6 2    4  2 ,9  5 3  .3 4    4  3 ,6  5 1  .4 5     A .   M in  er al   P ro  du ct  s  8,  39 2.  68    8, 83  0. 32    9,  80 7.  95    9 ,8  96 .1  7  9  ,9 17  .9 7   9, 75  9. 19    9,  04 7.  2 0    J,  01 8.  4 1   J, 61  3. 50    J,  73 8.  58    B .   C ho  m ka  ! I nd  us tr  y  4,  51 0.  0 1   5. 29  1. 39    5,  73 1.  80    5. 34  5. 25    5.  54 1.  57    5, 18  6. 22    5.  59 6.  81    5, 22  6. JO    5.  30 3.  37    5, 74  9. 8  1   C .   M et  al  P  ro du  ct io  n  12  ,9 07  .6 1   14 ,9  74 .7  5  15  ,3 49  .0 5   15 ,0  53 .4  0  16  ,2 98  .1 8   16 ,1  95 .9  2  15  ,8 38  .2 2   13 ,0  5 1.  65    13 ,9  74 .4  6  14  ,9 27  .0 3   D .   O th  er  P  ro du  ct io  n  K  A    K A    K  A    K A    K  A    K A    K  A    N A    K  A    N A     E .   P ro  du ct  io n   o f H  al oc  ar bo  ns  a  nd  S  F  6   F .   C on  su m  pt io  n  of  H al  oc ar  bo ns   a nd   S F 6     G .   O th  er    7, 63  2. 16    8,  19 2.  16    8, 63  9. 35    16  ,0 8  1. 58    17  ,4 52  .6 7   1 J ,4  89 .6  5  15  ,8 13  .9 8   14 ,7  63 .8  6  16  ,0 62  .0 2   15 ,2  36 .0  2   3 .   S ol  ve n  t  an  d  O  th er   P ro  d u  ct  U  se    IE .K  A    IE .K  A    IE .K  A    IE ,J  \A    IE .K  A    IE ,J  \A    IE .K  A    IE .K  A    IE .K  A    IE .N  A    4 .   A gr  ic u  lt u  re    A .   E nt  er ic   F er  m en  ta tio  n  B  .  M  an ur  e  M  an ag  em en  t   C .   R ic  e  C  ul tiv  at io  n  D  .  A  gr ic  ul tu  ra l S  oi ls     E .   P re  sc nb  ed  B  ur ni  ng  o  f S av  an na  s  F.   F ie  ld  B  ur ni  ng  o  f A gr  ic ul  tu ra  l R es  id ue  s   G _   O th  er    5 .   L an  d  U  se , L  an d  -U se   C b  an ae   a n  d  F  o re  st nP  >  -6  7, 01  7. 60    1  63 ,1  8 7.  33    -5 4,  62 6.  85    53 ,4  93 .7  7  6  1 ,8  2 2  .4 4    4  1 ,3  3 2  .7 0    -1  7, 88  5. 65    -1  9, 9  0 0.  5 5    8  4, 0  3 1  .0 9    6  8 ,6  9 4  .3 8     A . F  or  es  t L an  d  -9  2, 39  0. 82    14  7, 58  9 .4  9    -6 5,  90 4.   JS    45 ,5  48 .7  3  54  ,4 33  .6 9   34 ,7  36 .J  l  -2  4, 08  0. 5  1  -2  4, 84  6. 80    79  ,7 90  . 7 2   65 ,0  22 .7  0   B . C  ro pl  an d   11 ,3  72 .6  8  4.  33 6.  84    -1 58  .5 1   -4 ,2  83 .2  9  -5  ,2 48  .9 7   -5 ,8  37 .2  5    -6 ,7  15 .8  4  -7  ,1 23  .4 9   -7 ,7  60 .1  6  -8  -1 49  .3 2   C . G  ra ss  la nd    IE  ,K A  ,N T  ,K O    IE  ,K "'  J \c  ,K O    I E, K. ~ T . K O    IE ,N  ." 'N  T ,K  O    IE ,K  ."' N  c ,K  O    IE ,K  "' J \c  ,K O    IE  .K ."  'J \'E  ,K O    IE  ,K "'  J \c  ,K O    IE  ,K ." 'N  T ,K  O    IE ,K  "' J \c  ,K O     D . W  et la  nd s   5, 27  2. 94    3,  22 0  .3 2   3 , 1  74 .6  3  3,  06 6.  00    3, 0  12 .9  8  2_  8 16  .4 1   2, 86  5. 38    2)  95 .2  5  2,  69 2.  26    2, 66  8. 72     E . S  et tle  m en  ts    8, 72  7. 59    8,  04 0.  67    8, 26  1. 80    9  ,1 62  .3 2   9, 62  4. 74    9  ,6 16  .8 3    10  ,0 45  .3 1   9, 27  4. 48    9,  30 8.  2 7    9,  15 2  .2 7     F .   O th  er  L  an d    J\T  ,K O    N  e .K  O    J\c .K  O    N e  .K O    J\T  ,K O    J\c  .K O    N  T .K  O    1\' E  J \O    J\c  .K O    J\T  K O     G .   O th  er    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    6 .   W as  te    5 0  7. 2  6    57 5.  52    5 3  3 .1  7    4 9  7 .9  8    4 8  5 .6  6    4 6  9 .0  2    50 5.  82    4 8  7 .3  4    4 9  1 .4  5    4 9  5 .6  6    A .   So lid   W as  te  D  is po  sa l o  n  L  an d   B .   W as  te -w  at er   H an  dl in  g   C .   W as  te  I  nc in  er at  io n   50 7.  2 6    57  5. 52    53  3. 1 J    49  7. 98    48  5. 66    46  9. 02    50  5. 82    48  7. 34    4  9 1.  4 5    49  5. 66     D .   O th  er    K A    K  A    N A    K  A    N A    K  A    K A    N  A    N A    K  A    7.    O th  er  (  as  s  pe ci  fi ed   in  S  u m  m ar  y  1.  A )   N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    T ot  al  C  0 2   em is  si on  s  in  cl ud  in g   n et   C 0 2   f ro  m  L  U L  U C  F    39 2,  29 5.  43    6 5  4 ,3  0 3  .4 8    5  10 ,0  1 5  .6 1    6  3 2  ,4 4  8 .7  8    6 3  3 ,5  6 9  .8 4    63  5, 94  2. 22    5  5 8,  64 2.  3 9    5  2 2  ,1 4  9 .3  6    6 3  8 ,0  5 0  .2 6    6  2 4,  3 08  .3 4   T ot  al  C  0 2   em is  si on  s  ex  cl u  d in  g  n  et  C  0 1   fr om   L U  L U  C F    45  9. 31  3. 03    4  9 1  ,1 1  6 .1  5    5 6  4, 64  2 .4  6  57  8 .9  55 .0  1  5  7 1  ,7 4  7 .4  0    5 9  4, 6  0 9.  51    5 7  6 ,5  28 .0  4    54 2,  04 9.  92    5 5  4, 01  9 .1  6  5  5 5  ,6 1  3 .9  7    IE -=  In ch  .id ed   e ls  ew he  re ,.1  '\A =l  '\o t   ap pl  ic ab  le , 1  \L =l  '\o t e  st im  at ed  , 1 '\0  =1 '\o  t o cc  ur ri  ng    ~ a te :   A .ll   fo ot  no te  s  fo  r  th  is  ta  bl e   ar e   gi ve  n  at   th e   en d   of  T  ab le   A .S       049  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table A.2 Emissions Trends (CH4) 1990–2011  G  R E  E N  H O  U S  E  G  A S   S O  U R  C E   A N  D  S  IN K   C A  T E  G O  R IE  S    1 9  9 0    1  9 9  5    2 0  0 0    2  0 0  5    2 0  0 6    2  0 07    2  0 0  8    2 0  0 9    2  0 1  0    2 0  1 1     (G g  )   l.  E  n er  gy    1, 68  1. 83    2.  15 4.  27    2, 49  6. 83    2.  52 5.  37    2. 53  4. 45    2,  50 1.  75    2, 43  1. 68    2.  32 3.  32    2. 32  2. 4  6    2, 35  3. 07     A . F  ue l C  om bu  st io  n  (S  ec to  ra l A  pp ro  ac h)    2  11 .7  9  21  5. 20    25  8. 9  3    25 0.  29    24 5.  94    24 6.  81    23 8.  90    22 7.  06    22 8.  0 1   22 7.  06    1.    E n  er gy   In du  st ri  es    76 .4  1  81  .2 5   11 7.  58    11 1.  41    10 7.  91    10 9.  55    10 1.  84    94 .5  4  92  .4 1   89 .4  1   2.  M  an uf  ac tu  ri ng   I nd  us tr  ie s   an d   C on  st ru  ct io  n  2  .5 1   2 .7  7  3.  10    3. 60    3.  59    3. 68    3.  49    3. 26    3.  27    3. 28     3.  T  ra ns  po n   32 .0  2  35  .3 7   35 .4  0  32  .8 0   31 .2  0  30  .9 9   29 .0  9  27  .4 5   28 .0  4  29  .7 5   4.    O th  er  S  ec to  rs    10 0.  84    95 .8  0  10  2. 85    10  2. 47    10  3. 23    10  2 .5  8  10  4. 47    10  1. 79    10  4. 30    10  4. 62     5.  O  th er    0  .0 1   0. 00    0  .0 0    0  .0 0    0.  0 0    0.  0 0    0  .0 0   0 .0  0    0. 0  0    0. 0  0    B . F  ug iti  ve  E  m iss  io ns   fr om   F ue  ls    1, 47  0. 04    1,  93 9.  07    2. 23  7. 89    2.  27 5.  08    2. 28  8. 51    2,  25 4.  95    2, 19  2. 78    2,  09 6.  26    2. 09  4. 44    2.  12 6.  00    L    So lid   F u  el s   10 4.  69    74 .2  2  46  .1 6   47 .7  1  41  .9 8   46 .1  2  44   6 9   4 1.  02    48 .2  5  47  .3 3   2.    O il   an d   N ar  ur al   G as    1,  36 5.  34    1, 86  4. 85    2,  19 1.  74    2, 22  7. 3  7  2,  24 6.  53    2, 20  8. 82    2,  14 8.  09    2. 05  5. 24    2,  04 6.  19    2, 07  8. 67     2.  I  nd us  tr ia  l P ro  ce ss  es    4 .7  2    3 .8  6    4 .2  2    3 .3  9    3 .3  6    3 .3  8    3 .0  6    2. 6  3    2. 6  5    2 .6  5    A    M in  er al   P ro  du ct  s  J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    N A    J\  A    N A    J\  A    N A    J\  A    N A    B  .  C  he nt  ic al   In du  st ry    4.  72    3. 86    4.  22    3. 39    3.  36    3. 38    3.  06    2. 63    2.  65    2. 65     C .   M et  al  P  ro du  ct io  n  IE  ,J \A  ,N E    IE  ,N A  ,J \E     D .   O th  er  P  ro du  ct io  n  E  .  P  ro du  ct io  n  of  H al  oc ar  b on  s  an  d  S  F  6   F .   C on  su m  pt io  n  of  H al  oc ar  bo ns   a nd   S F 6     G .   O th  er    N E    J\  E    .N E    N  E    N E    l'{  E    N E    N  E    J\ E     3.    S ol  ve n  t  an  d  O  th er   P ro  d u  ct  U  se    4.  A  gr ic  u lt  u re    8  9 6  .3 0    1  ,0 4  7. 8  0    1 ,0  91 .6  6    1 ,1  9 9  .0 4   1 ,1  6 5  .4 4    1  ,1 3  3 .4  4    1 ,1  0 0  .7 4    1  ,0 5  0 .5  4    1 ,0  1 6  .3 0    98  6. 82     A    E nt  er ic   F er  m en  ta tio  n  76  7. 20    90  9. 96    94  7. 19    1,  04 4.  82    1, 01  3. 67    98  7. 58    96  3. 13    91  8. 42    88  5. 87    85  6. 34     B .   M an  ur e   M an  ag em  en t   12 2.  05    13 2.  08    14 0.  41    15 2.  82    15 0.  26    14 4.  66    13 6.  07    13 0.  59    12 9.  43    12 9.  54    C .   R ic  e  C  ul tiv  at io  n  J\  A ,J  \0    N A  ,N O    J\  A ,J  \0    D .   A gr  ic ul  ru ra  l S oi  ls    J\ A  ,N E    J\  A ..N  E    J\ A  ,J \E     E .   P re  sc n  b ed   B ur  ni ng   o f S  av an  n as    J\  O    N O    J\  O    N O    K  O    J\ O    J\  O    J\ O    K  O    J\ O     F .   Fi el  d  B  ur ni  ng  o  f A gr  ic ul  ru ra  l R es  id ue  s  7.  06    5. 77    4.  0 7    l.  40    l.5 1   1. 20    l.  5 4    1.  52    l. 0  1  0.  93    G .   O th  er    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    N A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    5.  L  an d   U se  . L an  d- U  se  C  h an  ge  a  nd  F  or es  tr y   1 5  8 .4  9    8 9  9 .6  8    71 .5  ()    2 7  0. 0  0    3 2  0 .2  7    3 04  .2 4    2  0 0.  4 8    2  9 5  .4 5    5  6 2  .9 4    54  5. 54     A . F  or  es  t L an  d  14  0 .6  5  88  8. 83    6  0. 59    25  7. 40    30  8. 40    29  2. 65    18  8. 34    28  4. 16    55  1. 83    53  5. 12     B . C  ro pl  an d   13 .0  9  6.  34    5. 6  8    5. 07    4.  89    4. 99    4.  55    4 .9  2  4.  86    4. 83     C . G  ra ss  la nd    J\"  E, J\  O    J\" E,  J\ O    J\"  E, J\  O    J\" E,  J\ O    J\"  E, J\  O    J\" E,  J\ O    J\"  E, J\  O    J\" E  ,J \O     D . W  et la  nd s   0. 3  1  0.  01    J\ O    1.  50    0. 15    J\  O    0. 47    0.  51    0. 46    J\  O    E . S  et tle  m en  ts    4. 44    4  .5 0   5 .2  3    6. 03    6.  82    6 .5  9  7.  12    5. 85    5  .8 0   5 .5  9    F .   O th  er  L  an d   G . O  th er    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE    IE     6.    \V .a  st e   84 5.  85    8 8  4 .9  9    8 8  4 .7  1    9 4  3. 0  5    9 6  5 .2  5    9 5  2 .2  5    9 4  5 .4  0    9 5  4. 1  4    9 6  3 .3  9    9 6  9 .9  6    A .   So lid   \ V  as te   D is  po sa  l o n   L an  d  83  0. 36    86  8. 86    8  70 .7  7  92  8. 85    95  0. 86    93  7. 72    93  0. 71    93  9. 35    94  8. 44    95  4. 87     B .   W as  te -w  at er   H an  dl in  g  15  .0 4    15  .7 6   13 .8  7  14  .l l   14 .3  0  14  .4 3   14 .5  8  14  .6 8   14 .8  4  14  .9 8   C .   W as  te  I  nc in  er at  io n   0. 46    0.  3 7   0 0  7  0  09    0 0  9  0.  10    01 1    0  11    0 1  1  01  2   D .   O th  er    N A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    !\ A    N  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    7 .   O th  er  (a  s  sp  ec if  ie d   in  S  u m  m ar  y  1.  A )   N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    T ot  al  C  H ..   em is  si on  s  io  d u  d io  g  C  B , f  ro m   L U  L U  C F    3  ,5 8  7 .2  1    4 ,9  9 0  .6 1    4  ,5 4  8 .9  2    4, 94  0 .8  5    4 ,9  8 8.  7 8    4  ,8 9  5 .0  6    4, 6  8 1  .3 7    4  ,6 2  6. 0  8  4  ,8 6  7 .7  4    4 ,8  5 8  .0 4     T ot  .a l C  H .,   em is  si on  s  ex  cl u  d in  g  C  H .,   fr om   L U  L U  C F    3  ,4 2  8 .7  1    4 ,0  9 0 .  9 3    4  ,4 7  7 .4  2  4,  6 7  0. 8  5  4  ,6 6  8 .5  1    4 ,5  9 0  .8 2    4  ,4 8  0 .8  8    4 ,3  3 0  .6 3    4  ,3 0  4 .8  0    4 ,3  1 2  .5 0     IE =I  nd ud  ed  e  ls ew  he re  , N A  :::;  N  ot  a  pp lic  ab le  , N "E  =l \-o  t  es  tim at  ed , 1  \'Q :==  !\ ot   o cc  ur ri  ng    :\ o  te :   A ..ll   fo ot  no te  s  fo  r  th  is  t  ab le   a re   g ii.  -e n   at  th  e  en  d  of   T ab  le  A  .5      050  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table A.3 Emissions Trends (N2O) 1990–2011 G  R E  E N  H O  U S  E  G  A S   S O  U R  C E   k '<  "D  S  T h"  K  C  A T  E G  O R  IE S    1  9 90    19  9 5    2  0 0  0    2 0  0 5    2  0 0  6    2 0  0 7    2  0 0  8    2 0  0 9    2  01 0    2  01 1     (G g  )   I.  E  n er  gy    2 7  ,4 3    3  3 .2  2    4 0  .1 9    3  9 ,4  3  3  7 ,4  8    3 7.  7 9    3  6 .7  9    3 2  ,7 4    3  4 .8  1    3 4.  58    A .   F u  el  C  om bu  :? .ti  on  (  S ec  to ra  l  A  p p  ro ac  h)    27 .3  3  33  .1 0   4 0.  0 7    3  9 .3  1  37  .3 5   37 .6  7  3  6. 6  6    32 .6  0  3  4. 6  7  3  4. 4  5    1.  E  n er  gy  In  du st  ri es    2.  81    2. 98    3.  90    3 .9  7  3.  87    3. 97    3.  91    3 .6  5  3.  84    3. 6  9   2_  M  an uf  ac tu  ri ng   I nd  us tr  ie s   an d   C on  st ru  ct io  n  2  0 0    2 2  2    2. 48    2  .8 6   2 83    2  9 3   2. 80    2  6 4    2  7 1   2. 76     3.    T ra  ns po  rt    20 .2  6  25  .4 8   31 .1  4  29  .9 7   28 .2  1  28  .2 1   27 .3  7  23  .8 2   2 5.  6 4    25  .3 9   4.    O th  er  S  ec to  rs    2 .2  6    2. 42    2.  56    2. 5  0  2  .4 4    2.  55    2 .5  8  2.  5 0   2 .4  8  2.  61    5.    O th  er    0 .0  0  0  .0 0    0.  0 0    0  .0 0   0 .0  0  0  .0 0    0.  0 0    0  .0 0   0 .0  0  0  .0 0     B . F  ug it  iv e E  m is  si on  s  fr  om  F  ue ls    0  .1 0   0 .1  1  0.  12    0 .1  2  0  .1 2   0 .1  2  0.  13    0 .1  4  0  .1 4   0 .1  3   L  S  ol id  F ue  ls    N A  ,J \c  ,J \O    N  A ,J  \c ,J  \O    N A  ,l '<c  ,J \O    N  A ,J  \c ,J  \O    J\ A  ,J \c  ,J \O    N  A ,J  \c ,J  \O    2.  O  il  an  d  N  at ur  al  G  as    0 .1  0  0.  1 1   0. 1  2  0  .1 2   0 .1  2  0  1 2   0. 1  3  0  .1 4   0 .1  4  0.  13    2.  I  n d  u st  ri al   P ro  ce ss  es    3 7,  87    3 7.  87    6 .9  0    1 2  .6 1    7  ,9 1   8 .5  0  1  1 .9  3    5 .8  7  3  ,5 8    3  .7 8   A .   M in  er al   P ro  d u  ct s   N A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    N A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    B .   C he  rn ka  l I nd  us tr  y  3  7. 8  7  37  .8 7   6. 90    12  .6 1   7. 91    8.  50    11 .9  3  5.  8 7   3. 58    3.  78    C .   M et  al  P  ro du  ct io  n  J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A     D _   O th  er  P  ro du  ct io  n  E  .  Pr  od uc  tio n   o fH  a lo  ca rb  on s   an d   S F   6  f  _  C  on su  m pt  io n   o fH  al oc  ar b  on s   an d   S F 6     G .   O th  er    3.  S  ol ve  n t   an d   O th  er  P  ro d  u ct   U se    0  .5 8   0 .6  9  L  45    1. 22    1.  06    1. 0  5  1.  1 0   0 .8  4  0  .7 8   0. 80     4.  A  gr ic  u lt  u re    9  0 ,0  2    9 8.  92    1 0  5 .5  7  1  06 ,2  7  1  0 6  ,0 4    1  0 9  .1 6    1  1 4  .4 7    1  0 9,  9 1   1 10  ,5 5    1  0 7.  1 0     A    E nt  er ic   F er  m en  ta tio  n  B  .  M  an ur  e  M  an ag  em en  t  10  .1 9   12 .0  7    12 .9  2  13  .9 9   13 .6  8  13  .4 4   13 .1  7  12  .6 4   12 .3  1  11  .8 5   C .   R ic  e  C  ul tiv  at io  n  D  .  A  gr ic  ul tu  ra l S  oi ls    79  .6 5   86 .7  0  92  .5 4   92 .2  4  92  .3 2   95 .6  9  10  1. 27    9  7. 23    98  .2 1   95 .2  2   E .   P re  sc nb  ed  B  ur ni  ng  o  f S av  an na  s  1  \0    1 \0    1  \0    1 \0    1  \0    1 \0    1  \0    1 \0    1  \0    1 \0    F  .  Fi  el d   B ur  ni ng   o f A  gr ic  ul tu  ra l R  es id  ue s   0 .1  8  0  .1 5   0. 11    0  .0 4   0 .0  4  O  .o J   0. 04    0  .0 4   0 .0  3  0.  02    G .   O th  er    N A    J\  A    N A    N  A    N A    J\  A    N A    N  A    J\ A    J\  A    5.  L  an d  U s e ~  L a o d ~ U s e  C  ha ng  e  an  d  F  or es  tr y   6 .6  5    3 7.  8 3    3  .0 1    1  1 .3  6    13 .4  8    12 .8  0    8 .4  3    12 .4  3    2 3 .6  8  2  2 .9  6    A . F  or es  t L an  d  5.  89    37 .3  7  2.  55    10 .8  3  12  .9 7   12 .3  0  7.  91    11 .9  5  2  3. 21    22  .5 0   B    C ro  pl an  d  0  5 9   0 30    0  2 7    0  .2 5   0 2  4    0 2  4    0 2  3    0 .2  4  0  2 4    0  2 4     C . G  ra ss  la n  d    J\ c ,J  \O    J\ c  ,J \O    Nc  ,J \O    J\  c, J\  O    J\ c  ,J \O    Nc  ,J \O    J\  c, J\  O    N c,  J\ O     D .   W et  la nd  s  0  .0 1   0 .0  0    1 \0    0  .0 6   0 .0  1  1  \0    0. 02    0  .0 2   0 .0  2  1  \0    E . S  et tle  m en  ts    0 .1  6  0  .1 6   0. 19    0  .2 2   0 .2  6  0  .2 5   0. 27    0  .2 2   0 .2  2  0  .2 1   F . O  th er   L an  d  J\  c    G .   O th  er    6 .   'V as  te    2 .3  8    2 .7  0    2. 71    2  .7 6    2  ,7 5   2 .7  6    2 .8  1    2 .7  8    2 ,8  1  2.  8 4    A  .  So  lid  \  V as  te  D  is po  sa l o  n  L  an d   B .   W as  te -w  at er   H an  dl in  g  1.  66    1. 84    2.  03    2 .1  0  2.  12    2. 1  7  2.  15    2 .1  6  2.  19    2. 21    C  .  \V  as te   I nc  in er  at io  n  0.  72    0 .8  5  0.  6 9    0  .6 6   0. 63    0  .5 9   0. 66    0  .6 2   0. 63    0.  63    D .   O th  er    J\ A    K  A    J\ A    J\  A    J\ A    K  A    J\ A    N  A    J\ A    K  A    7.    O th  er  (  as  s  pe ci  fi ed   in  S  u m  m ar  y  1.  A )   N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    1 6  4 ,9  2    2 1  1 .2  1    1 5  9 .8  3    1 73  .6 4    1  6 8  .7 2    1  7 2.  0 7    17  5 .5  3    1 6  4 .5  8    1 7  6 .2  2    17 2  .0 6     T ot  al  N  1 0   em is  si on  s  ex  cl ud  in g   N 10   f ro  m  L  U L  U C  F    15 8.  27    1 7  3. 3  9  1  56 .8  2    1 62  ,2 8   1 5  5 ,2  4    1 5  9 .2  7  16  7. 1  0    1 5  2 ,1  5  1  5 2  ,5 4    1  49 .1  0   IE =I  nd ud  ed  e  ls ew  he re  , K A  = K ot   a pp  lic ab  le , h  'E =1  '.- ot   e st  im at  ed , K  O =  N ot   o cc  ur ri  ng    :' \o  te : .  <\. ll   fo ot  no te  s  fo  r  th  is  ta  bl e   ar e   gi ve  n  at   th e   en d   of  T  ab le   A .5       051  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table A.4 Emissions Trends (HFCs, PFCs and SF6) 1990–2011  G R  E E  N H  O U  S E   G A  S  S  O U  R C  E  A  N D   S IN  K  C  A T  E G  O R  IE S    19  90    19 95    20  00    20 05    20  06    20 07    20  08    20 09    20  10    20 11     (G g)     E m  is si  on s   o!  H  F C  s< Jl   - (G  g  C  0 1   eq ui  va le  nt )   76 7.  25    47 9.  41    2, 93  6. 12    5,  29 6.  47    5, 10  5. 86    5,  48 3.  71    5, 55  0. 65    6,  30 6.  34    7, 07  2. 55    7,  52 6.  83    H FC  -2 3   0. 07    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    H FC  - 3 2   K A  .K O    0.  00    0. 00    0.  01    0. 04    0.  06    0. 07    0.  09    0. 11    0.  12    H FC  -4 1   K A  .K O    K  A .1  '"E ,K  O    IE ,N  A ,K  O    IE .N  A .K  O    IE ,K  A ,K  O    IE ,K  A ,K  O    IE ,N  A ,K  O    II .K  A .K  O    IE ,N  A ,N  O    IE ,K  A ,K  O    H FC  -4 3-  IO tn  ee    N A  .K O    N  A ,J\  "E ,K  O    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    H FC  -1 25    K  A .K  O    0. 02    0.  18    0. 36    0.  33    0. 34    0.  39    0. 46    0.  52    0. 57     H FC  -1 34    K  A , l \0    K  A ,1  '"E ,l\  O    IE ,K  A ,l  \0    IE ,l  \A ,l\  O    IE ,K  A ,l  \0    IE .N  A .K  O    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    H FC  -1 34  a  N  A ,K  O    0. 28    1.  42    2. 26    2.  32    2. 62    2.  44    2. 64    2.  96    3. 06     H FC  -1 52  a  N  A ,l\  O    0. 00    0.  26    0. 64    0.  30    0. 18    0.  13    0. 32    0.  66    0. 83    H  FC -1  43    K A  ,l \0    l\  A ,J  \"E ,l \O    IE  ,l \A  ,l \O    IE  ,l \A  .l \O    IE  ,N A  ,l \0    IE  ,N A  ,l \0    IE  ,K A  ,l \O    IE  ,l\ A  ,N O    IE  ,N A  ,l\ O    IE  ,l \A  ,l \0     H FC  -1 43  a  N  A .K  O    0. 01    0.  14    0. 33    0.  28    0. 28    0.  32    0. 38    0.  42    0. 46     H FC  -2 27  ea    K A  .N O    0.  01    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    H FC  -2 36  fa    l\ A  ,l\ O    l\  A ,J  \"E ,l \O    IE  ,l \A  ,l\ O    IE  ,l\ A  ,l \O    IE  ,l\ A  ,l \O    IE  ,l\ A  ,l\ O    IE  ,l\ A  ,l\ O    IE  ,l \A  ,l \O    IE  ,l\ A  ,l \O    IE  ,l\ A  ,l\ O    H  FC -2  45 ca    K  A ,l \0    l\A  ,1 '"E  ,l\ O    IE  ,K A  ,J \"E  ,l \O    IE  ,N A  ,J \"E  ,N O    IE  ,l\ A  ,J\ "E  ,l\ O    IE  ,K A  ,l \0    IE  ,l \A  ,J \"E  ,l\ O    IE  ,N A  ,J\ "E  ,N O    IE  ,l\ A  ,J\ "E  ,l \O    IE  ,l \A  ,J \"E  ,N O     U ns  oe ci  lie d   m ix   o f l  ist ed   H F  cs «>   - IG  • C O   e cu  iv a!  en t)    N  A , K  O    K A  ,J\ "E  ,K O    K  A ,N  O    K A  ,K O    N  A ,K  O    K A  .K O    N  A .K  O    K A  .K O    K  A ,K  O    K A  .K O     E m  is si  oD S   of  P  F C  s( J)   - (G  g:  C  0 1   eq ui  va le  nt )   6, 53  8. 83    5,  48 9.  59    4, 31  1. 08    3,  31 7.  26    2, 58  3. 90    2  ,1 93  .7 0   2, 25  2. 32    !,  17 1.  97    1, 60  7. 49    1,  45 0.  89    C F 4    0.  91    0. 76    0.  59    0. 46    0.  36    0. 30    0.  31    0. 30    0.  22    Q .2  0   C ,F  ,  0.  07    0. 06    0.  05    0. 04    0.  03    0. 02    0.  02    0. 02    0.  02    0. 02     c ,F  ,  K  A ,J  \"E ,l  \O    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00     C. -F  10    N A  ,J \"E  ,l\ O    l\  A ,J\  "E ,l\  O    N A  ,J\ "E  ,l\ O    l\  A ,J\  "E ,l\  O    l\ A  ,1 '"E  ,l\ O    l\  A ,J  \"E ,l\  O    K A  ,J\ "E  ,l\ O    N  A ,J\  "E ,l\  O    l\ A  ,1 '"E  ,l \O    l\  A ,1  '"E ,l\  O    c- C  ,F 1   l\ A  ,J \"E  ,l \O    K  A ,J  \"E ,l\  O    l\ A  ,1 '"E  ,l\ O    N  A ,J\  "E ,l  \O    l\ A  ,1 '"E  ,l\ O    l\  A ,N  "E ,l \O    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00     Cs F1  2  K  A ,J  \"E ,K  O    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00     C .,f  14    N A  ,N E,  l\ O    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    0. 00    0.  00    U ns  pe ci  fi' d   m ix   o fl  is te  d  P  F cs  «>  -  (G g  co  , e qu  iv al  en t)   l\ A  ,J \"E  ,l\ O    N  A ,J  \"E ,l\  O    l\ A  ,1 '"E  ,J\ O    N  A ,J\  "E ,l  \O    l\ A  ,J \"E  ,l\ O    l\  A ,N  "E ,l\  O    l\ A  ,J\ "E  ,l\ O    N  A ,N  "E ,l\  O    l\ A  ,J \"E  ,l \O    l\  A ,1  '"E ,l\  O    E m  is si  on s   of  S  F l)   - (G  g  C  0 1   eq u  iv al  en t)    3,  39 2.  20    2, 39  5. 56    3,  05 1.  86    1, 49  2. 14    1,  59 5.  90    77 1.  98    68 3.  95    39 3.  06    46 2.  2 4    41  5. 29     SF ,   0. 14    0.  10    0. 13    0.  06    0. 07    O  .o J   0. 03    0.  02    0. 02    0.  02    IE =l  nc lu  de d   el se  w he  re , N  A =  N ot   a pp  lic ab  le , N  E =N  ot  e  st im  at ed  , N O  = N  ot  o  cc ur  rin g   :'\ ot  e:  A  ll  fo  ot no  te s   fo r   th is   ta bl  e  ar  e  lri  ve n   at  th  e  en  d  of   T ab  le  A  .5      052  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  Table A.5 Emissions Trends Summary (CO2 equivalent) 1990–2011 G  R ID  'II O  U SE   G A  S  EM  IS SI  O N  S  1 9  90    19 95    20  00    20 05    20  06    20 07    20  08    20 09    20  10    20 11     C 0 1   eq ui  va le  nt  (G  g)    C 0 2   em iss  io ns   in clu  <l ing   n et   C 0 2   fr om   L U  LU CF    39  2,2 95  .43    65 4,  30 3.  48    51 0,0  15 .61    63  2,4 48  .78    63 3,5  69 .84    63  5,9 42  .22    55 8,6  42 .3  9  52  2, 14  9. 36    63  8,0 50  .26    62 4,  30 8.  34    C 0 2   em iss  io ns   ex clu  <l ing   n et   C 0 2   fr om   L U  LU CF    45  9, 31  3.0 3   49 1,  11 6.1  5  56  4,6 42  .46    57 8,9  55 .0  1  57  1,7 47  .40    59 4,6  09 .5  1  57  6,5 28  .04    54 2,0  49 .92    55  4,0 19  .1 6   55 5,6  13 .97     C H  , e m  iss io  ns  in  clu <l  ing  C  H , f  ro m   L  U  L U CF    75  ,33 13  4  10  4,8 02  .7 7   95 ,5  27 .37    10  3,7 57  .79    10 4,7  64 .3  5  10  2, 79  6. 18    98  ,3 08  .7 6   97 ,14  7. 64    10  2,2 22  .51    10 2,0  18 .82     C H  , e m  iss io  ns  ex  clu <l  ing  C  H , f  ro m   L U  L U CF    72  ,0 02  .9 6   85 ,90  9.4 7   94 ,02  5.8 4   98 ,08  7.8 1   98 ,03  8.6 5   96 ,4  07 .1  9  94  ,09 8.  57    90 ,94  3. 19    90  ,4 00  .7 8   90 ,5  62 .5  4   N zO   e m  iss io  ns  in  clu di  ng  N  zO  fr  om  L  U LU  CF    51 ,1  26 .25    65  ,4 75  .9 2   49 ,54  6. 19    53  ,8 2 9. ~    52 ,30  2. 00    53  ,34 0.7  8  54  ,4 15  .48    51 ,0  19 .4  6  54  ,62 9.  21    53 ,33  8. 12     N 20   e m  iss io  ns  e  xc lu<  lin g N  20  fr  om  L  U LU  CF    49 ,06  5. 08    53  ,74 9.5  5  48  ,61 3.  73    50 ,30  8.1 5   48 ,12  4.3 3   49 ,37  3.8 8   51 ,80  2. 20    47  ,16 5.  70    47 ,28  7. 06    46  ,2 21  .7 0   H F C  s  76  7.2 5   47 9.  41    2,9 36  .12    5,2 96  .4 7   5,1 05  .86    5,4 83  .7 1   5,5 50  .65    6, 30  6. 34    7,0  72 .5  5  7,5  26 .8  3   PF  C  s  6,5  38 .8  3  5,4  89 .59    4,3  11 .0  8  3,3  17 .2  6  2,  58 3.  90    2,1 93  .70    2,2 52  .32    2, 17  1. 97    1,6  07 .4  9  1,4  50 .8  9   SF 6   3,3 92  .2 0   2, 39  5. 56    3,0  51 .8  6  1,4  92 .1  4  1,5  95 .9  0  77  1.9 8   68 3.  95    39 3.  06    46 2.  24    41 5.  29    To ta  l ( in  cl ud  in g   LU LU  C F)    52  9, 45  1. 29    83  2, 94  6. 73    66  5, 38  8. 23    80  0, 14  2.3 3   79 9,  92 1.  85    80 0,  52 8.  58    71 9,  85 3.  55    67 9,  18 7.  83    80 4,  04 4.  25    78 9,  05 8.  29    To ta  l ( ex  cl ud  in g   LU LU  C F)    59  1, 07  9. 35    63  9, 13  9. 72    71  7, 58  1. 11    73  7, 45  6. 83    72  7, 19  6. 04    74  8, 83  9. 98    73  0, 91  5. 73    68  9, 03  0. 17    70  0, 84  9. 29    70  1, 79  1. 22     G R  EE N  H O  U SE   G A  S  SO  lJ" RC  E  A.  t~ l>   S IN  K  C  A TE  G O  R IE  S  19  90    19 95    20  00    20 05    20  06    20 07    20  08    20 09    20  10    20 11     C 0 1   e qu  iv al  en t (  G g)     1.  E  ne rg  y  46  9, 18  6. 20    50  8,7 88  .47    58 9,4  73 .78    59  7,3 36  .6 1   58 6,8  92 .94    60  9, 76  1. 78    59  2,1 95  .74    56 0,4  41 .65    57  0,1 37  .0 9   57 1,6  01 .4  1   2.  I  nd us  tri al   Pr oc  es se  s  55  ,9 78  .4 9   57 ,47  2.5 4   52 ,05  4.2 6   60 ,46  1.4 1   61 ,01  8. 70    59  ,78 7.2  0  58  ,5 45  .8 0   50 ,80  5.7 8   53 ,26  2. 13    54  ,27 1.2  9  3.   S ol  ve nt   an d   O th  er  P  ro du  ct  U  se    17 8.7  1  21  2. 58    44  9. 60    37  8. 00    32  9. 36    32  6. 32    34  1.6 2   26 0.  49    24 1.  97    24 7.4  0   4.  A  gr ic  ul tu  re    46 ,7  28 .5  0  52  ,66 9.6  9  55  ,65 0.  44    58 ,12  2. 92    57  ,34 5.  56    57 ,64  1. 84    58  ,6 02  .62    56 ,1  34 .7  1  55  ,61 2.8  5  53  ,92 4.  99    5.  L  an d U  se , L  an d-  U se   C ha  nE e a  nd  F or es w~  -6 1,6  28 .0  6  19  3,8 07  .01    -5 2,  19 2.  87    62 ,68  5.5 0   72 ,72  5. 80    51  ,6 88  .6 0   -1 1,0  62 .1  9  -9  ,8 42  .3 4   10 3,  19 4.  97    87 ,26  7. 07     6.  W  as te    19  ,00 7.4  5  19  ,9 96  .4 4   19 ,95  3.0 2   21 ,1 57  .~    21 ,60  9.4 8   21 ,3  22 .8  4  21  ,2 29  .9 4   21 ,3  87 .55    21  ,59 5.  25    21 ,74  6. 13     7.  O  th er    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A    N  A    N A     To ta  l ( in  cl ud  in 2  L lJ l. UC F)  <~    52 9,  45 1.  29    83 2,  94 6.  73    66 5,  38 8.  23    80 0,  14 2.  33    79 9,  92 1.  85    80 0,  52 8.  58    71 9,  85 3.  55    67 9,  18 7.  83    80 4,  04 4.  25    78 9,  05 8.  29    IE =l  nc lu  de d   el se  w he  re , N  A =   N ot   a pp  lic ab  le,  N  E= N  ot  e  sti m  ate d,   N O  =N ot   o cc  ur rin  g   (l )   Th e   co lu  m n   "B as  e  ye  ar "   sh ou  ld  b  e  fil  led  in   o nl  y b y   th os  e  Pa  rti es   w ith   ec on  om ies   in  tr  an sit  io n   th at   us e   a b as  e y ea  r d iff  er en  t f ro  m  1  99 0i  n  ac  co rd  an ce   w ith   th e r  el ev  an t d  ec isi  on s o  f t he   C O  P.  F  or  th  es e   Pa rti  es , th  is  di  ffe re  nt  b  as e y  ea r is   us ed   to  c  al cu  la te    th  e p er  ce nt  ag e   ch an  ge  in   th e   fin al   co lu  m n   of  th  is  ta  bl e.     (2 )   Fil l i  n n et   e m  iss io  ns /re  m ov  als  a  s r ep  or te  d i n t  ab le   S un  un ar  y  1.  A . F  or  th  e p ur  po se  s o f r  ep or  tin g,   th e   sig ns   fo r r  em ov  als  a  re  a  lw ay  s n eg  ati ve  (·)  an  d  fo  r e m  iss io  ns  p  os iti  ve (+  }.    (J )   En te  r a ct  ua l e  m iss  io ns   e sti  m at  es . I  f o nly   po te  nt ial   e m  iss io  ns  e  sti m  at es   a re   a va  ila bl  e,  th  es e   sh ou  ld  be   re po  rte d   in  th  is  tab  le  an  d  an   in di  ca tio  n  fo  r t his   b e p  m id  ed  in   th e   do cu  m en  tat io  n b ox  . O nl  y i n t  he se   ro w  s a re   th e   em iss  io ns   ex pr  es se  d  as   C 0 2     eq ui  va len  t e m  iss io  ns .   (4 )   In  a  cc or  da nc  e  wi  th  th  e  U  N FC  CC  re  po rti  ng  g  ui de  lin es  , H FC   a nd   P FC   e m  iss io  ns  sh  ou ld   be  re  po rte  d  fo  r e ac  h  re  lev an  t c he  m ica  l.  H  ow ev  er,  if   it i s n  ot  p  os sib  le  to   re po  rt  va  lu es   fo r e  ac h   ch em  ica l (  i.e . m  ix tu  re s,   co nf  id en  tia l d  ata , l  ac k   of  di  sa gg  re ga  tio n}  ,   th is   ro w   c ou  ld  be   u se  d  fo  r r ep  or tin  g  ag  gr eg  at e   fig ur  es  fo  r H FC  s a nd   P F C  s,  re  sp ec  tiv el  y.  N  ot e t  ha t t  he  un  it  us  ed  fo  r t hi  s r ow   is  G  g  of   C 0 2   eq ui  va len  t a nd   th at   a pp  ro pr  iat e   no tat  io n   ke ys   sh ou  ld  b  e  en  te re  d  in   th e c  el ls   fo r t  he  in  div idu  al  ch  em ic  al s.   (l J   In clu  de s n  et  C  Ol > C  H , a  nd  N  zO  fr  om  L  U LU  CF .     053  3 CANADA’S GREENHOUSE GAS INVENTORy  ]  References 1 “Fossil fuel industries” comprise the sum of the subsectors of   Mining and Oil and Gas Extraction, Fossil Fuel Production and   Refining, Pipelines (Transportation) and Fugitive Releases.  2 The “Transport” subsector refers to Transportation minus   Pipelines.  3 “Manufacturing” includes the Manufacturing Industries subsec-  tor (in the Energy Sector) and the Industrial Processes Sector.  4 The “Energy Industries” is a Common Reporting Format   subsector, required to be reported on by the UNFCCC. “Energy   Industries” includes Electricity and Heat Generation, Petroleum   Refining and Upgrading, and Fossil Fuel Production. This is the   “fossil fuel industries” (referred to in section 3.3), plus Electricity   and Heat Generation, minus Fugitive releases.   5 “Other” includes Residential, Commercial and Institutional   buildings, and Agriculture and Forestry.  6 Environment Canada. 2013. National Inventory Report:   Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks in Canada, 1990–2011. Part 1,   Chapter 7 (Table 7–5), p. 178. Available online at: http://www.  ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg  7 Canada. 1999. Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999.   S.C., 1999, c. 33. Canada Gazette. Part III, vol. 22, no. 3. Available   online at http://www.gazette.gc.ca/archives/p3/1999/index-eng.  html  8 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2000. Good   Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National   Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Available online at www.ipccnggip.  iges.or.jp/public/gp/english/  9 Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2003. Good   Practice Guidance for Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry.   Available online at www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/gpglulucf/  gpglulucf.htm  http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg http://www.gazette.gc.ca/archives/p3/1999/index-eng.html www.ipccnggip.iges.or.jp/public/gp/english/ www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/gpglulucf/gpglulucf.htm   054  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  4 Policies and Measures 4.1 Overall Policy Context  The Policies and Measures chapter outlines climate  change mitigation actions taken by the Government  of Canada, as well as key actions by provincial and  territorial governments.   In the context of the Copenhagen Accord of 2009, and  the subsequent Cancun Agreements of 2010, Canada  committed to reduce its national greenhouse gas (GHG)  emissions by 17% from 2005 levels by 2020.  As its contribution to meeting this target, the  Government of Canada’s climate change plan involves  regulating GHG emissions on a sector-by-sector  basis. The Government of Canada has already begun  to implement this climate change plan starting with  two of the largest sources of GHG emissions in this  country—the transportation and electricity sectors.  Building on this record, the Government of Canada is  working with provinces to reduce emissions from the  oil and gas sectors while ensuring Canadian companies  remain competitive.  Provincial and territorial governments are also taking  meaningful action on climate change according to their  own circumstances (see section 4.5).  4.2 Policy Making Process  Within the Government of Canada, the Minister of  the Environment is the lead minister for domestic  and international climate change policies. Natural  Resources Canada, Transport Canada and other federal  departments are also involved in the development  and implementation of climate change policies  and measures.   As previously described in Chapter 2: National  Circumstances, the environment is an area of  concurrent jurisdiction in Canada and governments   have taken action according to their respective  authorities. Aside from a few exceptions,  natural resources, including energy, are under  provincial jurisdiction.  It is within this context that Canadian federal,  provincial and territorial governments have adopted  action plans to address climate change. These plans  include legislative and regulatory measures, tax  measures, fiscal mechanisms, incentives to reduce  GHG emissions, as well as measures to address climate  change impacts and adaptation.   The Government of Canada uses both bilateral  and multilateral fora to develop its sector-by- sector regulatory approach. Working groups with  provinces and territories have been established for  several sectors (e.g., iron and steel, and chemical and  fertilizers sectors).   4.2.1   Description of Inter-Jurisdictional  Decision-Making Bodies  Most federal departments have direct links with  their counterparts in provinces or with provincial  departments with related interests. Federal-provincial  meetings happen throughout the year at all levels, from  the working level through to Ministerial level.   Federal/Provincial/Territorial Ministers with  common interests or portfolios are often organized  in councils such as the Canadian Council of Fisheries  and Aquaculture Ministers and the Canadian Parks  Ministers’ Council. These councils meet on a regular  basis, ensuring sharing of information and   best-practices.   Federal/Provincial/Territorial discussions related  to climate change could take place under the  following councils:  • The Canadian Council of Ministers of the   Environment;     055  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  • The Canadian Council of Forest Ministers; and • The Energy and Mines Ministers’ Conference.  Detailed descriptions of these councils can be found in  Canada’s 5th National Communication.  4.2.2  Federal Legislative Instruments 4.2.2.1  The Canadian Environmental Protection   Act, 1999 The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999  (CEPA 1999) allows the Government of Canada to take  action to protect the environment and human health  in order to contribute to sustainable development. The  Act includes authorities to regulate various aspects  related to releases of greenhouse gases, including  setting the quantity or concentration of a greenhouse  gas that may be released from various types of facilities,  or from vehicles, engines and equipment. Under these  authorities, regulatees may be required to maintain  records and conduct sampling or monitoring, and then  report these results and compliance information to the  Minister of the Environment.   While regulations made under CEPA 1999 apply across  the country, there are provisions in CEPA 1999 that  allow for avoidance of overlap and duplication between  the federal and provincial, territorial or Aboriginal  governments (as defined under CEPA 1999). If a  province, territory or Aboriginal government has a  regulation in place that is equivalent to one made under  certain authorities in CEPA 1999, an agreement with  that jurisdiction and the federal government can be  concluded. The Governor-in-Council can then choose  to make an order declaring that the federal regulation  will not apply in that jurisdiction. A draft equivalency  agreement has been developed with the Province of  Nova Scotia on regulations for limiting carbon dioxide  (CO2) from coal-fired power plants.   4.2.2.2 The Energy Efficiency Act, 1992 The Energy Efficiency Act, 1992 gives the Government of  Canada the authority to promote energy efficiency; to  make and enforce regulations that prescribe standards   and labelling requirements for energy-using products  and products that affect energy use that are imported to  Canada or shipped across provincial borders for lease or  sale; and to collect data on energy use. Pursuant to the  Energy Efficiency Act, 1992, Canada’s Energy Efficiency  Regulations came into effect in 1995. Since then, the  Regulations have been amended a number of times to  introduce new performance standards on products used  in homes and businesses in Canada.   Stringency levels and other aspects of the energy  efficiency standards are reported annually in Natural  Resources Canada’s Improving Energy Performance  in Canada: Report to Parliament under the Energy  Efficiency Act. To monitor compliance with the  Regulations, Natural Resources Canada captures  information from energy efficiency reports and  import documents. The department confirms that all  products entering Canada meet the required energy  performance levels and can take action in the event of  non-compliance.   4.2.2.3 Canada Shipping Act, 2001 Given the global nature of the marine transportation  sector, standards for shipping are generally made at  the international level. The International Maritime  Organization is the United Nations’ specialized agency  that sets global standards for safety and security of  shipping and to prevent pollution by vessels. Transport  Canada leads the Government of Canada’s participation  at the International Maritime Organization, which is  active in developing standards and approaches to limit  or reduce air pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions  from international shipping.  Transport Canada administers the Canada Shipping  Act, 2001, which includes provisions that promote the  protection of the marine environment from navigation  and shipping activities. The Canada Shipping Act, 2001  and its regulations are the instruments that implement  the International Maritime Organization’s energy  efficiency and emissions standards in Canada.    056  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  4.2.2.4 Aeronautics Act Similar to the shipping sector, standards for air  transportation are generally made at the international  level. The International Civil Aviation Organization is  the United Nations’ agency that sets global standards  for safety and security of aviation and to prevent  pollution by aircraft. The International Civil Aviation  Organization is active in developing standards  and approaches to limit or reduce air pollutant  and greenhouse gas emissions from international  aviation. Transport Canada leads the Government  of Canada’s participation in the International Civil  Aviation Organization.  The Aeronautics Act and its regulations are Canada’s  primary instruments for implementing International  Civil Aviation Organization environmental standards  and practices in Canada.   4.2.2.5 Railway Safety Act The Railway Safety Act ensures the safe operation  of railways and provides the legislative basis for  developing regulations governing rail safety, security  and some aspects of the environmental impacts of  rail operations in Canada. The Railway Safety Act  provides the authority for Transport Canada to develop  regulations, rules and standards that apply to federally  regulated railroads.  4.3  Federal Monitoring and Reporting  Mechanisms  The Government of Canada’s 2013–2016 Federal  Sustainable Development Strategy provides an  integrated picture of federal actions to achieve  environmental sustainability, including Canada’s  economy-wide target to reduce its total GHG emissions  by 17% from 2005 levels by 2020.   Meeting Canada’s 2020 target for GHG emissions is also  supported through the federal Strategic Environmental  Assessment process, which requires Government of  Canada departments and agencies to consider the   potential environmental impacts of their proposed  policies, plans, and programs, and to assess these  impacts on the Federal Sustainable Development  Strategy goals and targets, including Canada’s GHG  emission reduction target.  Progress towards meeting Canada’s 2020 target is  monitored and reported on through a number of  fora. As mentioned in the previous chapter, Canada’s  National Inventory Report (NIR) is submitted annually  to the United Nations Framework Convention  on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and is a source of  information on total historical GHG emissions levels for  the country.   Canada’s annual Emissions Trends Report presents  projections of greenhouse gas emissions in Canada  to the year 2020 and explains how efforts of federal,  provincial and territorial governments, consumers and  businesses are having an impact on greenhouse gas  emissions. Progress towards meeting Canada’s 2020  target is also reported through Canadian Environmental  Sustainability Indicators website, and is one of over  30 environmental indicators reported on in Canada’s  2012 Federal Sustainable Development Strategy Progress  Report. As well, additional GHG emissions data is  collected through the Facility GHG Reporting Program,  which provides a more precise picture of the sources  and amounts of GHG emissions from Canada’s largest  emitters. This GHG tracking program applies to all  facilities that emit the equivalent of 50,000 tonnes or  more of GHGs in carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eq)  units per year.  4.4  Federal Policies and Measures and  their Effects  Per the UNFCCC guidelines, the Policies and Measures  chapter generally focuses on actions implemented since  Canada’s 5th National Communication in 2010. Priority  has been given to those policies and measures that have  the most significant impact in affecting Canada’s GHG  emissions. To provide additional context, information     057  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  is also included on key supporting and complementary  Government of Canada measures such as investments  in clean energy technologies and initiatives that may be  of interest to international audiences. Given the shared  jurisdiction for climate change in Canada, the chapter  also includes information on the most important  provincial and territorial policies and measures.   Table 3 in Canada’s 1st Biennial Report (see Annex I  of this report) provides more detailed information on  the most significant federal, provincial, and territorial  policies and measures, including emissions reductions  estimates where available.  4.4.1   Regulations under the Sector-By-Sector  Approach  The Government of Canada is implementing a sector- by-sector regulatory approach as its contribution to  reduce GHG emissions towards Canada’s Copenhagen  Accord target. The sector-by-sector approach makes  it possible to tailor regulations to accommodate  sector circumstances, integrating environmental  and economic considerations. Regulations are being  designed to drive real reductions over the long-term,  provide regulatory certainty, drive innovation, and  leverage capital stock turnover to avoid lock-in of long- lived high-emitting infrastructure. This approach allows  Canada to maximize progress on reducing emissions  while maintaining economic competitiveness.  4.4.1.1 Transportation Sector Light-Duty Vehicle Regulations On October 13, 2010, the Government of Canada  published the Passenger Automobile and Light  Truck Greenhouse Gas Emission Regulations under  CEPA 1999. These Regulations impose increasingly  stringent annual GHG emission standards to passenger  automobiles and light trucks for the 2011 to 2016  model years. The Regulations provide allowances  for improvements not captured during conventional  emission testing such as improvements to air- conditioning systems and innovative technologies that  have a measurable CO2 reduction. They also provide   flexibility for alternative energy vehicles such as electric  and plug-in hybrid electric vehicles.   In 2012, proposed amendments were published to  include new increasingly stringent standards for  passenger automobiles and light trucks of model years  2017 and beyond. Once the amendments are finalized in  2014, they will build on the Regulations already in place  by continuing to establish stringent GHG emission  standards for these vehicles. Passenger automobiles and  light trucks make up about 13% of Canada’s total GHG  emissions and it is expected that the cumulative actions  will see GHG emissions from 2025 model vehicles fall  by up to 50% compared to 2008 model year vehicles.  Canada worked closely with the U.S. to develop the  Regulations which are aligned with U.S. Environment  Protection Agency (EPA) standards.  Heavy-Duty Vehicle Regulations On March 13, 2013, the Heavy-Duty Vehicle and Engine  Greenhouse Gas Emission Regulations were published  under CEPA 1999. They will apply increasingly  stringent emissions standards to new on-road heavy- duty vehicles and engines in Canada for 2014 to 2018  model years that are either imported or manufactured  in Canada. These Regulations will reduce emissions  from the full range of new on-road heavy-duty vehicles  such as full-size pickup trucks, semi-trucks, buses  and vocational vehicles such as garbage trucks. These  Regulations also provide flexibility to comply with  the progressively more stringent emission standards  on the basis of “averaging” under the CO2 emission  credit system requirements. To conform to annual  requirements, manufacturers can choose the most  cost-effective technologies, most of which are readily  available. These include aerodynamic devices, high  efficiency engines, low rolling resistance tires, weight  reductions, and other technology options.   These Regulations will complement the Passenger  Automobile and Light Truck Greenhouse Gas Emission  Regulations. Canada worked closely with the U.S.  to develop the Regulations which are aligned with     058  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  U.S. EPA standards. It is expected that by 2018, GHG  emissions from 2018 model year heavy-duty vehicles  will be reduced by up to 23%.   Renewable Fuels Regulations Canada’s national Renewable Fuels Regulations require  petroleum fuels producers and importers to have an  average 5% renewable fuel content for gasoline (as of  December 15, 2010), and 2% renewable fuel content in  diesel fuel (as of July 1, 2011).   Marine Vessel Fuel Efficiency Regulations On May 8, 2013, the Government of Canada amended  its Vessel Pollution and Dangerous Chemicals  Regulations to set standards for increased fuel  efficiency of marine vessels. These Regulations  implement the energy efficiency requirements  negotiated under the International Maritime  Organization’s International Convention for the  Prevention of Pollution from Ships. The Regulations  apply to all ships above 400 gross tonnes. All  ships are required to maintain a Ship Energy  Efficiency Management Plan that details plans for  optimizing fuel efficiency. Additionally, new ships  on international trade routes must meet Energy  Efficiency Design Index requirements that phase in  increasing efficiency targets from 2015 to 2025.   New Canadian ships that serve domestic trade within  Canada are currently exempt from the Energy Efficiency  Design Index requirements. A technical review found  that when the international Energy Efficiency Design  Index standard is applied to Canadian ships on  domestic service, which are smaller and use shorter  routes, the results would reduce the energy efficiency  of Canadian ships and increase their CO2 emissions.  The technical review recommended ways to apply the  Energy Efficiency Design Index to yield the intended  results; Transport Canada plans to implement adjusted  domestic Energy Efficiency Design Index standards  in the future. Nevertheless, both existing and new  Canadian ships must still maintain a Ship Energy  Efficiency Management Plan.  Aviation Regulations The Government of Canada is participating in the  development of a new global CO2 standard for airplanes  at the International Civil Aviation Organization.  Canada plans to adopt the standard once it has been  finalized and approved by the International Civil  Aviation Organization.   4.4.1.2 Electricity Sector Canada’s electricity sector is already one of the cleanest  in the world, and the Government of Canada has taken  steps to make it even cleaner by introducing a tough  new regulatory performance standard for coal-fired  electricity generation. On September 12, 2012, the  Government of Canada published in final form the  Reduction of Carbon Dioxide Emissions from Coal-fired  Generation of Electricity Regulations. The Regulations  apply a stringent emissions intensity limit (performance  standard) to new coal-fired electricity generation units  and to old units that have reached the end of their  useful life. The Regulations will ensure that coal-fired  electricity generation in Canada operates as cleanly as  high efficiency natural gas-fired electricity generation  and that no new high-emitting coal-fired electricity  units will be built in Canada.  Under the Regulations, the performance standard is   set at the emissions intensity level of 420 tonnes   CO2/gigawatt hours (GWh). The standard will address  emissions of CO2 from the combustion of coal, coal  derivatives (e.g., syngas) and petroleum coke (petcoke),  and from all fuels burned in conjunction with any of  the preceding fuel, except for biomass. The Regulations  also contain flexibilities to maintain the integrity  of the electricity system while still achieving the  environmental objective of emission reductions.  The performance standard provisions of the  Regulations come into force on July 1, 2015. Any new  units commissioned after that date will need to meet  the performance standard. In 2020, the first old units  will be subject to the performance standard, resulting,  in that year, in an estimated emissions reduction     059  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  of 3 megatonnes (Mt) CO2 eq. The Regulations, in  addition to other measures and commitments made  by industry and provinces, particularly Ontario’s  mandated cessation of coal-fired electricity generation  by the end of 2014, are projected to reduce emissions  of carbon dioxide from this sector by 41 Mt below  2005 levels by 2020. This constitutes a 33% reduction  in GHG emissions from electricity generation for  the year 2020. Significant further reductions will  occur in subsequent years. Over the first 21 years, the  Regulations are expected to result in a cumulative  reduction of about 214 Mt of GHGs, equivalent to  removing some 2.6 million personal vehicles from  the road per year over this period. In addition to  contributing to Canada’s climate change objectives,  this measure will help improve air quality for  Canadians.  4.4.1.3 Oil and Gas Sector The Government of Canada is working with provinces  to reduce emissions from the oil and gas sectors while  ensuring Canadian companies remain competitive.  4.4.1.4  Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed  Sectors  Environment Canada is developing sector-specific  regulatory approaches for other major-emitting  industrial sectors.   Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Industries  are broadly characterized as having relatively  high emissions per unit produced and exporting a  significant portion of their production. These sectors  face global competition for market share and have  limited ability to pass on costs. As a result, approaches  for these sectors must be carefully calibrated to  maintain economic competitiveness. Canada classifies  the following sectors as Emissions-Intensive and  Trade-Exposed Industries: fertilizers (including  potash) and chemicals, aluminum/alumina, iron and  steel, pulp and paper, cement, base metals smelting,  iron ore pelletizing, and lime.  4.4.1.5 Cross-Sectoral Measures Regulations under the Energy Efficiency Act Regulations under the Energy Efficiency Act have  now been established for more than forty products,  including major household appliances, water heaters,  heating and air-conditioning equipment, automatic  icemakers, dehumidifiers, dry-type transformers,  electric motors, commercial refrigeration and some  lighting products.   Natural Resources Canada regularly amends the  Regulations to strengthen the minimum energy  performance requirements for prescribed products  when the market has achieved a higher level of  efficiency. The Regulations are also amended to  add new products, harmonize minimum energy  performance requirements with those of other  jurisdictions (e.g., provinces, territories and the  U.S.), and update testing methodologies and  labelling requirements.  With the introduction of Canada’s Energy Efficiency  Regulations, placing an EnerGuide label on major  electrical household appliances and room air  conditioners became mandatory. The label on a  product shows how much energy a product uses within  the range of products within its category, allowing  customers to consider the most energy-efficient choice.  4.4.2    Federal Investments in Clean Energy  Technology  The Government of Canada also recognizes the  importance of clean technologies for achieving  sustainable economic prosperity, while creating a  healthier environment. The Government is committed  to supporting clean technologies and has made  significant investments to transition Canada to a  clean energy economy and advance Canada’s climate  change objectives. Since 2006, the Government has  invested over $10 billion in green infrastructure,  energy efficiency, the development of clean energy  technologies, and the production of cleaner energy  and cleaner fuels. Some of these programs include the     060  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  ecoENERGY Technology Initiative, ecoENERGY for  Renewable Power, the Clean Energy Fund, and the Pulp  and Paper Green Transformation Program. A complete  list of all relevant measures is provided in Table 3 of  Canada’s 1st Biennial Report in Annex I of this report.   The Government is also supporting investments in  clean energy technologies through tax measures  (e.g., the accelerated capital cost allowance for clean  energy generation and conservation equipment)  and through reforms to its approach to supporting  business innovation, including taking a more whole- of-government approach to innovation support,  improving coordination and focus for its programs, and  strengthening research and development partnerships  between academia and industry.   4.4.2.1  Sustainable Development Technology  Canada  Sustainable Development Technology Canada (SDTC)  is an arm’s-length, not-for-profit foundation established  through the Canada Foundation for Sustainable  Development Technology Act (2001) that finances and  supports the development and demonstration of clean  technologies. The organization reports to Parliament  on an annual basis through the Minister of Natural  Resources. SDTC manages funds endowed by the  Government of Canada and provided under authority  of the Minister of Natural Resources and the Minister  of the Environment, the most notable being the  Sustainable Development Tech Fund.  The Sustainable Development Tech Fund was  established in 2001 to support the development and  demonstration of new sustainable development  technologies with a focus on addressing issues related  to climate change, clean air, clean water and clean  soil. The Government of Canada has allocated a total  of $915 million to this fund, including an injection of  $325 million in Budget 2013. To date, the Sustainable  Development Tech Fund has allocated $592 million  to support 245 projects across Canada, leveraging an  additional $1.5 billion, mostly from industry. It has   a strong presence in the Canadian clean technology  sector and has served as an important catalyst to foster  innovative collaborations. One example of a project  under this fund is N-Solv Corporation’ Bitumen  Extraction Solvent Technology. Funding for this project  is being used to demonstrate a low-temperature in-situ  production technology for bitumen reserves using  a pure, condensing solvent. The N-Solv technology  is targeted to produce 85% fewer greenhouse gas  emissions than current in-situ processes and will reduce  the consumption of process water to zero.   SDTC is partnering with Export Development  Canada, Canada’s export credit agency, to further  develop Canada’s international capabilities in the  clean technology sector by addressing barriers to  success for Canadian clean technology firms. Export  Development Canada supports projects or transactions  involving later-stage SDTC companies by deploying  its range of products, including bonding, guarantees,  financing and political risk insurance. SDTC in  turn shares with Export Development Canada its  assessment of technology risks and its assessment  of the capacity of portfolio companies to perform in  international markets.  While environmental outcomes are an indirect,  long-term objective of the organization (the primary  objective being to build the capacity of Canadian  clean technology entrepreneurs), SDTC-supported  projects have yielded environmental benefits, including  greenhouse gas emissions reductions. It is projected  that SDTC’s efforts will have resulted in a total  cumulative GHG reduction of 135.8 Mt CO2 eq (global)  by 2020. As of 2012, completed projects are estimated to  have yielded a total of 2.1 Mt CO2 eq.   4.4.2.2 ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative The ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative is investing up  to $268 million over five years (2011–2016) in renewable  energy and clean energy technologies. The initiative’s  objective is to support energy technology innovation  to produce and use energy more cleanly and efficiently.     061  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  The program will help in the search for long-term  solutions to reducing and eliminating GHGs and air  pollutants from energy production and use.  The initiative consists of two separate funding streams:  one for research and development projects and one  for demonstration projects. A portion of the funding  from the ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative program  is provided to federal researchers and laboratories to  continue research and development work.  Activities funded under the program are in five strategic  priority areas: • Energy Efficiency • Clean Electricity and Renewables • Bioenergy • Electrification of Transportation • Unconventional Oil and Gas  4.4.2.3 Carbon Capture and Storage Canada has invested heavily in the research,  development, and demonstration of carbon capture and  storage technologies. Canada’s federal and provincial  governments have invested over $1.8 billion in funding  for carbon capture and storage. Federal funding is  provided through a number of programs such as  the Clean Energy Fund, the ecoENERGY Innovation  Initiative, and the ecoENERGY Technology Initiative.  With four large-scale demonstration projects either  operational or proceeding with construction, Canada  remains a global leader in advancing carbon capture  and storage. Canada is also an active member in a  number of multilateral initiatives which include a  focus on the further development of improved, cost- effective carbon capture and storage technologies such  as the Carbon Sequestration Leadership Forum, the  Carbon Capture Use and Storage Action Group of the  Clean Energy Ministerial, the Global Carbon Capture  and Storage Institute, and the Canada–U.S. Clean  Energy Dialogue.   The Government of Canada provided, in 2008,  $240 million for SaskPower’s Boundary Dam carbon  capture and storage project, which is set to begin   commercial operations in 2014. Once operational, the  project will capture up to 1 Mt CO2 annually from a coal- fired power plant in southern Saskatchewan.  4.4.3   Other Federal Complementary  Measures  To complement the regulations under the sector- by-sector approach, and in addition to investments  in clean energy technologies mentioned above,  the Government of Canada has also put in place a  number of non-regulatory measures such as programs  targeting energy efficiency and the transportation  sector. Moreover, the Government has also introduced  measures to enhance the neutrality of the tax system  across sectors by phasing out certain tax preferences  for the oil and gas and mining sectors (including coal  mining). The Government of Canada’s conservation  efforts also support Canada’s climate change objectives  by protecting natural heritage features that perform  an important carbon-storage function. An example is  the six-fold expansion of the Nahanni National Park  Reserve which will protect key boreal forest ecosystems.   A cross-section of measures is outlined below for the  purposes of illustration. A complete list of relevant  measures is provided in Table 3 of Canada’s 1st Biennial  Report in Annex I of this report.   4.4.3.1  ecoENERGY for Aboriginal and Northern  Communities Program  The ecoENERGY for Aboriginal and Northern  Communities Program is investing $20 million over five  years (2011–2016) to support Aboriginal and northern  communities, including off-grid communities, to  reduce GHG emissions through the integration of  proven renewable energy technologies such as residual  heat recovery, biomass, geothermal, wind, solar and  small hydro. The program provides funding support  for the design and construction of renewable energy  projects integrated with community buildings, and  for the feasibility stages of larger renewable energy  projects, thereby displacing natural gas, coal, and diesel  generation of electricity and heat.     062  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  The program works collaboratively with communities,  federal departments, provincial/territorial  governments, utilities and other stakeholders to  improve project development opportunities and to  increase the uptake of renewable energy technologies in  Aboriginal communities and in the North.  4.4.3.2 ecoENERGY Efficiency program The ecoENERGY Efficiency program is investing  $195 million between 2011 and 2016 to improve energy  efficiency in Canada—at home, at work, and on the  road. Operating in the residential, commercial and  institutional, industrial, and transportation sectors,  these efforts will: make the housing, building, and  equipment stock more energy-efficient through  regulations, codes, and standards; make energy  performance more visible in all sectors through  labelling, benchmarking, training, and information  sharing to affect behaviour change; and make industry  and vehicle operations more efficient though energy  management standards, practices, and training.  Improving energy efficiency will contribute to a cleaner  environment, reducing GHG emissions while saving  Canadians money and making the most of Canada’s  natural resources.   An example of Natural Resources Canada activity under  this program is the National Energy Code for Buildings  (Code) 2011, which placed Canada on a comparable  footing with other countries in energy-efficient building  construction. Code 2011 is 25% more stringent than  the previous code. Twelve Canadian provinces and  territories are adopting Code 2011, or adapting it to their  circumstances, and one territory published guidelines  that exceed it.  4.4.3.3 Clean Transportation Initiatives The Government of Canada undertakes research and  provides economic incentives to support the adoption  of low-emission technologies and practices in the  transportation sector. For example, Transport Canada’s  Shore Power Technology for Ports Program and Truck  Reservation System Program provide funding for the   deployment of Marine Shore Power technologies and  intelligent transportation systems, respectively, at ports.   Transport Canada also tests, evaluates, and provides  expert technical information on the environmental  and safety performance of advanced light-duty vehicle  and heavy-duty vehicle technologies through its  ecoTECHNOLOGY for Vehicles Program. The program  shares technical findings to inform the development  of vehicle emissions regulations; to guide the proactive  development of new or revised safety regulations,  standards, codes, and guidelines; and to support the  development of non-regulatory industry codes and  standards to help integrate new vehicle technologies  in Canada.   Transport Canada also supports the reduction of GHGs  from the transportation sector through agreements  with industry. For example, Canada’s Action Plan to  Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions from Aviation is  a comprehensive voluntary approach that includes  all segments of the Canadian aviation sector, from  airlines and airports to air traffic navigation and aircraft  manufacturers. The Action Plan sets an aspirational  goal to improve fuel efficiency from a 2005 baseline by  an average annual rate of at least 2% per year until 2020.  The Action Plan forms the basis for the Government  of Canada’s response to the International Civil  Aviation Organization’s Assembly Resolution A37-19,  which encouraged Member States to submit national  action plans by June 2012, setting out measures each  state is taking or will take to address international  aviation emissions.   With respect to the rail sector, Transport Canada is  working under the framework of the Canada–U.S.  Regulatory Cooperation Council on a joint voluntary  approach with the U.S. Environmental Protection  Agency on the development of potential strategies to  reduce greenhouse gas emissions from locomotives.    063  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  4.4.4  Land Use, Land-use Change and  Forestry (LULUCF) Sector  LULUCF is an important sector given Canada’s  significant share of global forest cover and the central  role of agriculture in different regions of the country.  Over the last two decades, important changes have  occurred in land management practices in Canada  that have reduced CO2 emissions or enhanced their  removals from the atmosphere. For example, farmers  have increasingly adopted no-till practices and reduced  summer fallow practices, thereby increasing the rate of  soil carbon sequestration. Improved practices have also  been adopted by the forestry sector, primarily as a result  of provincial policies and/or regulations. Although  these policies and regulations are aimed broadly at  improving sustainability in the sector, they can also  reduce carbon emissions and increase sequestration.  Improved practices include: relatively more reliance on  tree planting as opposed to natural regeneration; more  use of improved seed stock for tree planting; more and  faster rehabilitation of harvest roads and landings; and  adjustment in management practices to reduce soil  compaction. Additional information and data on the  LULUCF sector can be found in Chapter 3: Canada’s  Greenhouse Gas Inventory.  4.4.5   Addressing Short-Lived Climate  Pollutants  A key element of Canada’s approach to climate change  includes addressing short-lived climate pollutants such  as black carbon, methane and hydrofluorocarbons.  Due to their short life span, reducing short-lived  climate pollutants can achieve more immediate climate  benefits, particularly in the North, as well as important  health benefits. To this end, Canada is taking action  domestically and internationally to reduce short-lived  climate pollutants. For example, Canada is a founding  member of, and active participant in the Climate  and Clean Air Coalition, a voluntary international  framework for concrete action to accelerate efforts  to reduce short-lived climate pollutants. Since its  launch in February 2012, the Coalition has grown  to include over 70 member countries and non- government partners.  In addition, Canada is the current Chair of the Arctic  Council (2013–15). During Canada’s Chairmanship, a  new Task Force, co-chaired by Canada and Sweden,  will work towards actions to reduce emissions of black  carbon and methane.  Within Canada, measures in place already contribute to  reducing short-lived climate pollutants. These include  regulations concerning on-road vehicle and engine  air pollutants, off-road diesel engine emission air  pollutants, sulphur in gasoline and diesel regulations,  and regulations to limit air pollution from marine  shipping in Canadian coastal waters. Additional  regulatory measures (e.g., GHG regulations for  coal-fired electricity generation) will further reduce  these emissions.  4.5  Provincial and Territorial Polices and  Measures and their Effects   4.5.1  Provinces Recognizing that Canada’s Copenhagen target is a  national target that is meant to be achieved through  the actions of all levels of government, businesses,  and individual Canadians, actions are being taken by  more than just the federal government. Provinces and  territories are playing a role in several international  and regional climate action plans and partnerships. For  example: • British Columbia, Manitoba, Ontario, and Quebec   are, along with California, members of the Western  Climate Initiative, a collaboration of jurisdictions  working together to identify, evaluate, and implement  emissions trading policies to tackle climate change  at a regional level. Members have set a regional  greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of 15%  below 2005 levels by 2020.  • British Columbia, Ontario, and Quebec are members  of the International Carbon Action Partnership. The  Partnership is comprised of public authorities and  governments that have established or are actively  pursuing carbon markets through mandatory cap  and trade systems with absolute caps. At this time,     064  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  however, British Columbia and Ontario have not  established cap and trade systems.   • All Canadian provinces and territories now  participate in the Climate Registry, a continental- wide, sub-national effort to develop a common  reporting system.  • New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island,  and Newfoundland and Labrador are all signatories  to the New England Governors/Eastern Canadian  Premiers Climate Change Action Plan. This plan  includes a voluntary commitment to reduce regional  greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2010,  10% below 1990 levels by 2020, and recognizes a long  term 2050 target for reductions of 75–85% below  2001 levels. The plan has identified energy demand,  electricity, and transportation as key sectors for  emissions reduction.   • New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island,  and Newfoundland and Labrador, have signed the  Atlantic Energy Framework for Collaboration. This  agreement is designed to increase cooperation on  energy development to achieve a more sustainable,  reliable, and secure energy supply. This cooperation  aims to enable the region to more fully develop its  renewable energy resources.  • Ontario, New Brunswick, and Quebec are observers  of the Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative, a  cooperative effort by ten Northeast and Mid- Atlantic States to limit greenhouse gas emissions.  The Regional Greenhouse Gas Initiative is the first  mandatory, market-based CO2 emissions reduction  program in the United States.   4.5.1.1 Newfoundland and Labrador  In August 2011, Newfoundland and Labrador released  an updated Climate Change Plan called Charting Our  Course, which built on the province’s 2005 Action Plan.  The 2011 Action Plan sets out 75 commitments for  action across the economy and reaffirms a commitment  to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to 10% below  1990 levels by 2020, and 75–85% below 2001 levels by  2050. Data released in 2013 indicated that the province  came close to its 2010 target. This data also showed   that significant progress has been made over the past  decade: GHG emissions in 2010 were 18% below peak  GHG emissions in 2002.   The 3,000 megawatts (MW) Lower Churchill Project  is one of the largest renewable energy projects in  North America. Phase One of the project (the 824 MW  Muskrat Falls development) was formally sanctioned  in 2012. Once this development becomes operational  in 2017, 98% of Newfoundland and Labrador’s energy  will come from renewable clean sources, ensuring  a reliable, competitively-priced supply of power for  development in the province, with the surplus exported  to markets in North America. Muskrat Falls will enable  Newfoundland and Labrador to displace an estimated  1.2 Mt of GHG emissions annually from its oil-fired  thermal generating station in Holyrood which accounts  for over 10% of the province’s current greenhouse  gas emissions.   Since 2007, the provincial government has set out a  number of energy efficiency initiatives. These include  residential energy audit and rebate programs, a number  of which were cost shared with the federal government.  Commercial and industrial rebate programs and  energy audits are being implemented through the two  electrical utilities. This will be complemented by new  actions in the province’s 2011 Energy Efficiency Action  Plan, Moving Forward. These include a requirement  that new buildings constructed with provincial  funding be built sustainably and strive to attain  Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design silver  status, and energy audits be conducted on existing  government buildings.   Newfoundland and Labrador is taking action in  its energy intensive sectors. For example, through  the regulatory agency responsible for overseeing the  offshore oil sector, the province has adopted the World  Bank’s voluntary standard for gas flaring.   Newfoundland and Labrador is also providing support  to business, non-governmental organizations, and     065  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  municipalities to reduce GHGs emissions in the  province. The Newfoundland and Labrador Green Fund  is a three year $25 million program that is cost-shared  with the federal government to support a wide range of  climate change and energy efficiency-related initiatives  ($23 million is funded by the federal government and  $2 million by the provincial). Investments through  the Green Fund are expected to result in an annual  reduction of approximately 200,000 tonnes CO2 eq.  Projects include energy efficiency projects, small  scale wind turbines, biofuels, and waste methane  capture at the Robin Hood Bay Regional Waste  Management Facility in St. John’s.    4.5.1.2 Prince Edward Island  Prince Edward Island (P.E.I.) released a Strategy for  Reducing the Impacts of Global Warming in 2008.  Goals include reducing GHG emissions, enhancing  carbon sinks, improving adaptation to climate change,  and increasing public awareness. P.E.I. seeks to reach a  target of reducing GHG emissions to at least 10% below  1990 levels by 2020.The Strategy outlined 47 action  items focused on energy efficiency and conservation,  renewable energy, transportation, agriculture,  adaptation, public education and awareness, and  government leadership.  Achievements under the Strategy include: • P.E.I. has reduced by over 20%, since 2001, the amount   of CO2 eq emitted per MW hour of electricity use. • Biomass heating facilities are now operational in   seven large government facilities (schools, hospitals,  etc.) across the province. Recent contracts will see  similar heating systems established in another  13 facilities.  • Work continues on the drafting of a provincial  building code and associated energy standards under  the National Energy Code for Buildings to create  energy-efficient construction. An implementation  date of early-to-mid 2014 is anticipated.   • Since 2009, the Province has contributed $7.5 million  toward a series of programs designed to improve  energy efficiency in private homes and businesses.  P.E.I’s Energy Accord was released in November 2010  and took effect in March 2011. The Accord is a five-year  energy strategy developed by P.E.I. in partnership with  the Maritime Electric Company Limited. Its goals are to  lower and stabilize electricity rates and increase P.E.I.’s  reliance on locally owned wind power. The Accord  contains a number of initiatives, including support  for an additional 40 MW in wind generation (once  installed, 33% of the province’s electricity supply will  come from wind generation) and the establishment of a  provincial Commission on the Future of Electricity.   4.5.1.3 Nova Scotia  Nova Scotia has an economy-wide GHG emission  target of at least 10% below 1990 levels by 2020. Nova  Scotia’s key initiatives to meet its emission reduction  targets include: • A mandatory declining cap on greenhouse gas   emissions for Nova Scotia Power, starting from  10.2 Mt in 2009 and declining to 4.5 Mt in 2030. This  cap is regulated under the Environmental Act and the  Greenhouse Gas Emissions Regulations.  • Under the Environmental Goals and Sustainable  Prosperity Act 2007, Green Economy Act 2012, and  Renewable Electricity Regulations, Nova Scotia  committed to a target of meeting 25% of electricity  needs from renewable sources by 2015 and 40%  by 2020.   • A Community Feed-in Tariff Program to support the  local development of renewable energy projects.  • A Sustainable Transportation Strategy launched  in April 2013 with funding of $6 million to  support a range of activities including public  transit fleet efficiency, land use planning, and  active transportation.  • Increasing overall provincial energy efficiency by 20%  over current levels by 2020.   • Support for the development of biomass/biofuels.  In September 2012, the Nova Scotia government  and the Government of Canada published the draft  Agreement on Equivalency of Federal and Nova  Scotia Regulations for the Control of Greenhouse Gas     066  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Emissions from Electricity Producers. This agreement  establishes that Nova Scotia regulations on GHG  emissions from electricity producers are equivalent in  effect to regulations from the federal government and,  therefore, the latter does not apply in Nova Scotia.  Nova Scotia amended its GHG regulations to require  additional reductions for the period from 2021 to 2030  in September 2013.   4.5.1.4 New Brunswick New Brunswick 2007–2012 Climate Change Action  Plan was completed in 2012. The province is currently  renewing its Climate Change Action Plan and remains  committed to the 2020 target of 10% below 1990 levels.  In its 2011–2012 Progress Report, New Brunswick  projected that it was on track to meet its 2012 target of  returning to 1990 GHG emissions levels.   New Brunswick’s Air Quality Regulations set the  context for all industrial sectors operating in the  province and include an industrial approvals program  which generally incorporates facility level emission  caps, mitigation requirements, as well as monitoring  and reporting programs, and compliance enforcement.  New Brunswick’s new Oil and Gas Rules address air  emissions and require the reporting and management  of greenhouse gas emissions. The Government of New  Brunswick plans to extend this requirement to other  large industrial sectors such as pulp and paper and  electricity generation.  In 2011, New Brunswick adopted the New Brunswick  Energy Blueprint energy policy. Key policies that  encourage continued reductions in GHG emissions  include support for: biomass, an electricity efficiency  plan, energy efficiency building code standards,  and minimum efficiency levels for appliances and  equipment. Total GHG reductions resulting from  the Blueprint are projected to reach 1.3 Mt when fully  implemented in 2020. New Brunswick also adopted the  Renewable Portfolio Standard in 2006 and expanded it,   requiring that by 2020, 40% of in-province electricity  sales come from renewable energy.  After a refurbishment project started in 2008, the Point  Lepreau Nuclear Generating Station re-entered into  service in November 2012. With the re-introduction  of nuclear power into the grid, approximately 65% of  the province’s electricity production comes from non- emitting energy sources. Point Lepreau itself supplies  30% of the province’s electricity.  In 2005, New Brunswick established Efficiency New  Brunswick as a Crown Corporation. Since 2005,  Efficiency New Brunswick programs have invested  $58.6 million to help make homes and businesses more  energy efficient, and leveraged $307 million in private  sector efficiency investments. This has reduced GHG  emissions by 326,000 tonnes per year and generates  over $50 million per year in energy cost savings.  4.5.1.5 Quebec  Quebec’s approach with respect to climate change  is based on four complementary policies: an energy  strategy, a climate change action plan, a mass transit  strategy, and a strategy aimed at developing Quebec  industry and green technologies.   Quebec’s energy strategy for 2006–2015 (May 2006)  Quebec’s energy strategy for 2006–2015 is mainly  centered on the development of renewable energy  (hydroelectric power, wind energy, and biomass  energy), along with more efficient use of all types of  energy. The energy strategy lists energy savings targets  for the main types of energy for 2015:  • 2 million tonnes of oil equivalent for petroleum   products; • 350 million cubic meters for natural gas; and • 11 terawatts per hour for electricity.1  The strategy also includes:  • Developing a portfolio of hydroelectric projects   totalling 4,500 MW by 2015.    067  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  • Successfully completing, over five years, new wind  energy projects totalling 3,000 MW in order to attain  the 4,000 MW target for 2015.   A new energy strategy is under development and should  be made public by 2015.   The 2013–2020 Climate Change Action Plan Quebec’s 2013–2020 Climate Change Action Plan was  adopted in June 2012, following the 2006–2012 Climate  Change Action Plan.   Under the plan, the government has allocated close to  $3 billion over 8 years to contribute to Quebec’s goal  to reduce GHG emissions by 25% below 1990 levels  by 2020. The plan includes 30 priorities and measures  pertaining to various sectors such as energy, freight and  passenger transportation, manufacturing, buildings,  technological innovation, and adaptation to the  impacts of climate change.   One of the key elements of the action plan is a GHG  emission cap-and-trade system that came into force  in January 2012, and for which the first compliance  period began in January 2013. The sectors implicated  are electricity generation and distribution along with  major industrial facilities. In 2015, the system will be  expanded to include fuel and fossil fuels used notably  in the transportation, buildings, and small and medium  sized business sectors. Quebec and California are  scheduled to formally link their cap-and-trade systems  in January 2014. The Quebec government will hold its  first cap-and-trade auction on December 3rd, 2013, and  a joint auction with California in the spring of 2014.   The 2013–2020 Climate Change Action Plan also  includes measures aimed at:  • Promoting mass and alternative transit by improving   services, developing infrastructure, and facilitating  sustainable choices.   • Greening vehicles in Quebec through the use of  vehicles that are more energy-efficient (electric and  plug-in hybrid electric) and better maintained.  • Optimizing the logistics of passenger and freight  transportation and improving the efficiency of land,  marine, rail, and air transport.  • Improving the carbon footprint and energy efficiency  of Quebec companies.  • Promoting the use of renewable energy and  energy efficiency in residential, commercial, and  institutional buildings.  • Supporting innovation and research, and the  development, demonstration, and marketing of  technologies aimed at reducing GHG emissions.  In 2007, Quebec adopted a carbon levy that affects  about 50 large emitters such as producers, distributors,  and refiners of energy derived from fossil fuels. The  carbon levy generates revenues of $200 million per  year, which are used to fund various government  measures related to climate change. The carbon levy  will be gradually replaced by the Quebec cap-and- trade system.   2006–2012 Quebec Public Transit Policy Launched in 2006, the Quebec Public Transit Policy  aimed to increase public transit services by 16% and  ridership by 8% by 2012. The policy exceeded the  target objectives in 2012, with services and ridership  increasing by 21% and 11% respectively in Quebec.   Public consultation on a future sustainable mobility  policy took place in May–June 2013. The policy is  expected to be implemented in 2014 and will cover the  following areas: • Land-use planning and transportation  • Public transit governance and funding  • Electrification of transportation and environment  • Regional, rural and interurban transportation  • Specialized transit for handicapped transit users or   those with reduced mobility   4.5.1.6 Ontario  Ontario’s policies and measures to address climate  change mitigation are outlined in the Climate Change  Action Plan. Released in 2007, the plan set province-    068  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  wide emission reduction targets and outlined a range  of initiatives to reduce GHG emissions and support a  sustainable, clean, low-carbon economy. Specifically,  the Climate Change Action Plan includes a set of  short-term (6% below 1990 levels by 2014), medium- term (15% below 1990 levels by 2020), and long-term  (80% below 1990 levels by 2050) targets for reducing  Ontario’s GHG emissions. The Climate Change  Action Plan is updated through regular reports  describing the province’s progress on existing and  new initiatives.   Green Energy, Conservation and Efficiency Most of Ontario’s progress in emissions reductions  has been achieved through the phase-out of coal-fired  electricity generation. Since 2003, Ontario has shut  down 11 of 19 coal units across five generating stations.  With six more units to be shut down at the end of 2013,  one year ahead of schedule, the province is on track to  end coal-fired electricity generation by the end of 2014.  The Ontario government estimates that this policy  will reduce GHG emissions from the electricity sector  by approximately 30 Mt from 2003 levels. Ontario  is replacing coal-fired generation with increased  conservation and cleaner energy sources like natural  gas, nuclear, solar and wind.   Other actions include:  • Investments of $2 billion in conservation programs   between 2006 and 2011 resulting in 216 MW of demand  savings and 605 GW per hour energy savings in 2011.   • New regulation passed in 2011 that will require  Ontario’s broader public sector (e.g., municipalities,  universities, colleges, schools, and hospitals) to  demonstrate leadership in energy conservation by  reporting annually on energy use and greenhouse gas  emissions starting in 2013.  • Installing over 4.7 million smart meters which track  electricity use of homes or businesses and help  Ontarians make more informed decisions about their  electricity consumption.   Transportation The 25-year Big Move Regional Transportation  Plan adopted in 2008 aims to improve regional  transportation, bolster global competitiveness, protect  the environment, and enhance the quality of life in the  Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area. To date, $16 billion  has been committed and projects with committed  funding are underway.   Ontario’s electric vehicle program provides incentives  or plug-in electric vehicles, including grants of $5,000– $8,500, supporting a vision of 1 in 20 vehicles driven in  Ontario to be electric by 2020.   Land Use and Stewardship  Ontario’s Provincial Policy Statement is the provincial  framework for land use planning and development  policies, and guides municipalities when creating their  planning policies and in their decision-making related  to planning. The Provincial Policy Statement addresses  the need to reduce GHG emissions through policies  that promote efficient use and management of land  and infrastructure, protection of the environment, and  wise use of resources. This includes the promotion of  compact development, increased use of public transit  and other non-motorized methods of transport, and  encouraging land use patterns and forms of settlement  based on higher densities and on mixed uses.   Ontario’s Greenbelt, established in 2005, is composed  of 1.8 million acres of protected prime agricultural  land and environmentally sensitive areas in southern  Ontario. Implemented through municipal official  plan policies, this plan plays a role in greenhouse  gas emissions reductions by curbing urban sprawl,  preserving agricultural land, protecting agricultural  soils, forests, wetlands and watersheds, and promoting  trails, parklands and open spaces by protecting natural  features (trees, plants, and grass) that perform an  important carbon-storage function.    069  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Agriculture and Waste The Environmental Farm Plan is a voluntary program  that enables farmers to learn and implement best  management practices that can provide economic and  environmental benefits. Practices under the plan that  support the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions  include manure management, feed efficiency and  livestock management, nutrient management planning,  precision agriculture, farm energy audits, and farm  energy and water conservation measures.  The Ontario Ethanol Growth Fund has helped create  an industry with domestic production that is currently  at 885 million litres per year, projected to grow to over  one billion litres per year. This initiative has created  over 300 skilled jobs in rural Ontario, generated over  $635 million in capital investment, and continues to  contribute to improved air quality in Ontario. Ontario  has seven ethanol facilities in place.  4.5.1.7 Manitoba In June 2012, Manitoba released Tomorrow Now, a  new eight-year strategic plan, for public comment. The  plan foresees the modernization of the Sustainable  Development Act and the release of an updated climate  change action plan, as well as a comprehensive energy  strategy, including a 43% increase in hydro power  output from 2012 levels in the next 15 years.   The Manitoba Climate Change and Emissions  Reductions Act received Royal Assent in July 2008 with  an initial target to reduce emissions to an amount that  is at least 6% less than Manitoba’s total 1990 emissions  by 2012. Between 2000 and 2011, Manitoba’s emissions  decreased by seven percent amidst a 9.6% increase in  its population and 78% growth in its economy during  the same period.  As legislated under the Manitoba Climate Change  and Emissions Reductions Act, Manitoba achieved its  interim GHG emissions reduction target to stabilize  emissions at 2000 levels by 2010. Manitoba has fully  implemented its 2008–2012 climate change plan,   with over 60 actions carried out across multiple  sectors. Sectors covered by the plan include energy,  transportation, agriculture, municipalities, businesses,  and public sector operations.  Manitoba GHG emissions reduction programs include: • Setting a provincial energy savings target of   842 MW of electricity by 2017. In addition, the  government has committed to developing 1000 MW  of wind power over the next decade, as well as  expanding renewable power production through  hydroelectric, geothermal, solar, and biomass  power production.   • Introducing a coal-reduction strategy including a tax  on coal emissions that came into effect in January  2012 that provides capital support for coal-reliant  industries to convert to cleaner energy and support  for developing biomass.   • Committing $3 billion over 10 years for  the Clean Energy Transfer Initiative to promote  enhancements to the east-west power grid to  sell hydro power to other jurisdictions.  • Expanding energy efficiency through new  building codes and standards; programs for  homeowners, low-income housing, businesses and  farms; and promoting energy efficient appliances.  • Implementing a provincial biofuels mandate. • Phasing down the Brandon coal-fired generating   station for use in emergency circumstances. • Requiring large landfills to capture methane gas.  In November 2012, Manitoba released the Clean Energy  Strategy which outlines actions to harness water, wind,  solar, and biomass resources within the province.  Priorities include:  • Expanding development of hydroelectricity   generation and transmission. • Expanding energy efficiency programs and standards. • Ensuring affordable utility rates. • Expanding alternative renewable energy sources   (wind, geothermal, biomass, biofuels, electric  vehicles).  • Reducing reliance on fossil fuels.    070  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  4.5.1.8 Saskatchewan  Saskatchewan is taking action to reduce its level of  GHG emissions. The Management and Reduction of  Greenhouse Gases Act—a key piece of legislation in  Saskatchewan’s approach to climate change—received  Royal Assent in 2010 and was amended in April 2013.  The Act provides for:  • Creation of an Office of Climate Change in   the Ministry of Environment.  • Regulation of major GHG emitters. • Provincial carbon price for regulated emitters. • The Saskatchewan Technology Fund to collect   carbon compliance payments from large emitters  to invest in low-emitting technologies to reduce  GHG emissions.   • A Climate Change Foundation to promote  research and development of low carbon  technologies, adaptation, and public education  and awareness.  • Performance agreements with large emitters to reduce  GHG emissions outside of regulated activities and  with non-regulated emitters in the agriculture,  transportation, commercial, and residential  building sectors.    Green Initiatives The Government of Saskatchewan committed  $70 million to the Go Green Fund over four years,  beginning in 2008. The Go Green Fund currently  manages 20 contracts with Saskatchewan businesses,  organizations, and communities. Funding has  supported household energy efficiency and water  conservation programs, such as the Energy Efficiency  for New Homes Program and small scale renewable  energy initiatives in Saskatchewan, including solar,  wind, and biomass through the Net Metering Program.  Examples of Go Green Fund projects include: • Saskatchewan Government Insurance Green Vehicle   Rebates program • Provincial climate change program • Aquistore carbon capture and storage project through   the Petroleum Technology Research Centre  • Green energy programs including Solar Heating  Initiative for Today and Municipal Energy Efficiency  • High level wind energy storage project with Cowessess  First Nations and the Saskatchewan Research Council  Carbon Capture Storage Saskatchewan is currently engaged in a number of  Carbon Capture and Storage Initiatives including the  following examples.  The International Energy Agency Greenhouse Gas  Weyburn-Midale CO2 Monitoring and Storage Project  was launched in 2000 and has studied carbon dioxide  injection and storage into two depleted oilfields in  south-eastern Saskatchewan. The end result was the  publication of a Best Practice manual in 2012 and a  scientific publication in June 2013 to recommend best  practices for the geological storage of carbon dioxide in  a depleted oil reservoir. Approximately 8500 tonnes CO2  per day are captured from a coal gasification facility— owned by the Dakota Gasification Company located in  Buelah, North Dakota. The gas is compressed to a liquid  phase and transported via a 320 kilometer pipeline to  the Weyburn and Midale oil fields for injection. This is  the first time that a man-made source of CO2 has been  used for enhanced oil recovery.  The Boundary Dam Integrated Carbon Capture and  Storage Demonstration Project will see Unit #3 at a  coal-fired power plant located in Estevan rebuilt as  the first commercial-scale power plant equipped with  a fully-integrated carbon capture and storage system.  Operations are expected to begin in 2014. The Boundary  Dam project will reduce carbon dioxide emissions by up  to 1 Mt a year.   Aquistore is an independent research and monitoring  project to demonstrate that storing liquid CO2  deep underground (in a brine and sandstone water  formation), is a safe, workable solution to reduce  greenhouse gases. Aquistore is located in south-eastern  Saskatchewan near Estevan. Aquistore will serve as  the storage site for the world’s first commercial post-    071  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  combustion CO2 capture, transportation, utilization,  and storage project form a coal-fired electrical  generating station. The project is expected to store  300,000 tonnes CO2 by 2014.    4.5.1.9 Alberta Alberta was the first province to regulate GHG  emissions from large industry. As of July 1, 2007,  companies that emit more than 100,000 tonnes CO2 eq  are required to reduce their emissions intensity by 12%,  using a baseline based on past emissions between   2003–2005. These Regulations apply to just over  100 facilities that make up about 50% of Alberta’s  emissions. Regulated facilities have four compliance  options to achieve their reduction requirement:  improve the GHG intensity of their operations; buy  emissions performance credits from other regulated  facilities that achieve reductions beyond their  requirement; buy Alberta-based offsets; or pay $15 per  tonne CO2 eq to the Climate Change and Emissions  Management Fund that is used to support development  and application of clean energy technologies.  As of 2013, the Regulation covers 106 facilities from  15 industrial sectors and has resulted in a cumulative:  • 40 Mt of emissions avoided (20 Mt in facility   reductions and 20 Mt through carbon offsets).  • $398 million paid to the Climate Change and   Emissions Management Fund with $182 million  allocated to 48 clean energy projects.  In July 2008, Alberta announced its Climate Change  Action Plan with an objective to reduce greenhouse gas  emissions by 50 Mt from a ‘business as usual’ scenario  by 2020 and by 200 Mt by 2050. Alberta is currently  working on renewing this strategy to ensure policies  and programs are in place to meet the targets. The  Government of Alberta will be investing $2 billion  into the Green Transit Incentives Program, a program  providing capital funding assistance for sustainable  public transit infrastructure.   In April 2008, the province created the Alberta Carbon  Capture and Storage Development Council to develop a  roadmap for implementing carbon capture and storage.  Alberta is investing $1.3 billion in two major capture  and storage projects, the Shell Quest and Alberta  Trunk Line projects, expected to store 2.8 Mt CO2 a year  by 2016.   The Government of Alberta implemented a Renewable  Fuels Standard in April 2011, to accelerate the use of  fuels derived from renewable sources. The Renewable  Fuels Standard requires an average of 2% renewable  content in diesel fuel and 5% renewable alcohol in  gasoline. The renewable fuel content must have at least  25% less GHG emissions than the equivalent petroleum  fuel on a life-cycle basis. The Renewable Fuels Standard  is expected to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at  least 1 Mt annually.   In April 2011, Alberta extended and expanded its  Bioenergy Producer Credit Program until 2016. The  program has been in place since 2006 and provides  incentives to develop bioenergy products to support  implementation of the Renewable Fuel Standards and  the development of new technologies and facilities that  use non-food crops, waste biomass and wood fibre for  fuel, power and heat.   Since 2005, the Government of Alberta has been  purchasing ECOLOGO certified electricity (or Green  Power) generated from local, renewable sources to  supply government-owned buildings and operations.   4.5.1.10 British Columbia  The 2008 Climate Action Plan took the first step for  achieving a legislated GHG reduction target of 33%  below 2007 emissions levels by 2020. A broad-based  revenue-neutral carbon tax was introduced in 2008 as  a core economic policy to support the Province’s GHG  reduction targets. The carbon tax applies to emissions  from the combustion of fossil fuels and is currently  at a rate of $30 per tonne. The B.C. Government has  committed to maintain that rate for five years or until     072  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  other jurisdictions implement similar measures. Since  2008, the carbon tax generated a cumulative $3.7 billion  in revenues which were returned to British Columbians  through personal, small business, and corporate income  tax cuts, as per the legal requirement.   Carbon neutrality for the entire public sector was  achieved in 2010, 2011 and 2012. To reach this goal,  the British Columbia public sector has reduced direct  emissions and has invested to date almost $60 million  in carbon offsets through the Pacific Carbon Trust,  a Crown Corporation established in 2008 to deliver  B.C. based GHG offsets and support the growth of B.C’s  low-carbon economy.   The B.C. Climate Action Charter commits signatory  local governments to measure and report on  emissions, achieve carbon neutral corporate  operations by 2012, and work toward compact,  energy efficient communities. As of June 2013, 182  of 190 local governments had signed the Charter.  Participating governments have their carbon tax  payments fully refunded annually to support regional  reduction initiatives. Other actions include: • A $14 billion Provincial Transit Plan designed   to expand transit services to communities and  increase ridership.  • The LiveSmart BC Efficiency Incentive Program which  invested $110 million from 2008 to 2013, helping over  75,000 homeowners reduce their energy bills by   15%–28%, and providing assistance to over  10,000 small businesses to reduce a total of  $6 million/year in energy bills.  British Columbia’s commitment to taking action on  climate change is enshrined in legislation. Several  pieces of climate action legislation are currently  in force:  • Greenhouse Gas Reductions Targets Act:   Setting greenhouse gas reduction targets for the  Province and mandating the provincial government  become carbon neutral in 2010.   • Greenhouse Gas Reduction (Cap and Trade) Act:  Though B.C. is not pursuing a cap and trade system  at this time, the Reporting Regulation under the Act  is in effect, providing foundational data for emissions  reductions and policy development. The Regulation  requires industrial facilities emitting over 10,000  tonnes CO2 eq to report their GHG pollution each  year to the Province, which is then posted publically.  • Clean Energy Act: Increases provincial commitments  to conservation and development of clean  energy resources including wind, solar, tidal and  hydro power.   • Renewable and Low Carbon Fuel Requirements Act:  Requires 5% renewable content in gasoline and 4%  renewable content in diesel, and a minimum 10%  reduction in carbon intensity of transportation  fuels by 2020.  Clean Energy and Innovation in British Columbia  Making the transition to a clean energy economy is  a cornerstone of British Columbia’s climate action  plan. British Columbia’s Energy Plan: A Vision for  Clean Energy Leadership (2007), British Columbia’s  Clean Energy Act (2010) and other initiatives have  been adopted to reduce emissions from the energy  sector and foster innovation including through carbon  capture and sequestration for coal-fired electricity and  a commitment to generate at least 93% of energy from  clean or renewable sources.  The Clean Energy Vehicle Program, announced in  2011, which provides purchase incentives for approved  clean energy vehicles (plug-in electric, extended  range electric, hydrogen, and compressed natural  gas). Incentives have been extended until March 31,  2014. The program also includes aggressive charging  infrastructure deployment. B.C. continues to have one  of the highest clean energy vehicle adoption rates in  Canada on a per capita basis.   These measures and commitments have allowed British  Columbia to be on track to meet its 2012 target of  reducing GHG emissions by 6% below 2007. By 2011,     073  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  B.C. had seen emissions reductions relative to 2007 of  5.8%, putting it within reach of its 2012 interim target.  Between 2007 and 2011 B.C. has seen greater reductions  in per capita fossil fuel sales than the Canadian average.  Researchers at the University of Ottawa are attributing  at least a portion of this reduction to the Revenue  Neutral Carbon Tax. 2  4.5.2  Territories Beyond the measures outlined below, in 2011, Canada’s  three northern territories released the Pan-Territorial  Adaptation Strategy and the Pan-Territorial Renewable  Energy Inventory, outlining the impacts of climate  change and proposing strategies for collaborative  actions and at the same time supporting-specific  initiatives to meet each jurisdiction’s unique challenges.  4.5.2.1 Yukon  The Yukon Government Climate Change Action  Plan was released in February 2009. The Action Plan  recognizes many actions already underway and sets out  33 priority actions the Yukon Government undertakes in  support of enhancing knowledge and understanding of  climate change, adapting to climate change, reducing  GHG emissions and leading Yukon action in response to  climate change. A key initiative was the creation of the  Climate Change Secretariat. The Secretariat provides  corporate leadership on climate change within Yukon  government. The Action Plan commits to annually  report internal emissions through the Climate Registry,  a 20% reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from  government operations by 2015, and carbon neutral  government operations by 2020.   In September 2012, Yukon government released a  progress report which, in addition to updating on  work that has been completed since 2009, outlines  sector-specific targets for emission reductions within  transportation, building, electricity, and industrial  sectors. Highlights of completed actions include: • Adoption of GreenHome energy efficiency standards   for all new construction completed by the Yukon  Housing Corporation.  • Implementation of a policy where fuel economy is  a major factor when purchasing vehicles, helping to  reduce emissions from the government fleet.   • Initiation of pilot projects to demonstrate home  and commercial energy efficiency and new  heating technologies.  • Completion of a transportation analysis to  inform actions to reduce emissions in the  transportation sector.   Yukon released its Energy Strategy in January 2009.  The Strategy considers how to best meet Yukon’s  energy needs while balancing environmental and  economic objectives for the Territory. The Energy  Strategy proposes goals, long-term strategies and short- term actions for electricity, renewable energy, energy  efficiency/conservation and oil and gas. Key initiatives  related to climate change include: • Increasing total renewable energy generation in the   territory by 20% by the year 2020. • Increasing territorial energy efficiency by 20% by the   year 2020. • Developing/implementing industry best   management practices for GHG emissions.  • Promoting energy efficient products.  4.5.2.2 Northwest Territories  Since 2001, when the first Northwest Territories  Greenhouse Gas Strategy was first prepared, the  Government of the Northwest Territories has taken a  coordinated approach to responding to climate change  concerns. The updated Greenhouse Gas Strategy for  the Northwest Territories: 2011–2015 was released in  December 2011 with a goal to stabilize greenhouse gas  emissions to their 2005 level by 2015. The Strategy  emphasizes renewable energy development, increased  collaboration with the other territories, a transportation  policy, and community engagement, while recognizing  that the territory faces rising emissions with increased  economic development.  The territorial government is investing to support  continuous improvements in energy efficiency for     074  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  homeowners and communities and upgrades to the  energy performance of existing government facilities.  New facilities developed by the Government of the  Northwest Territories must meet the requirements  of the Good Building Practice for Northern Facilities  2009 guidebook so they meet an energy performance  benchmark of 25% above the Model National Energy  Code for Buildings 1997.   The use of residual heat recovered from diesel- electric generators in district heating systems is being  expanded in communities and new systems are being  installed and will provide opportunities for greater use  of biomass heat in future years.   The territorial government also supports energy  planning in all communities. Some, like the City of  Yellowknife have already adopted their own emission  targets and are well into implementation.   The 2012–2015 Northwest Territories Biomass Energy  Strategy specifies 15 actions with the aim of increasing  the use of biomass fuels for space heating, ensure  sustainable consumption, achieve life cycle greenhouse  gas emissions reductions, and create economic benefits.  The Strategy builds on the progress achieved in the  implementation of the 2010 Northwest Territories  Biomass Energy Strategy, and complements actions  under the 2011–2015 Greenhouse Gas Strategy.   The 2012–2017 Solar Energy Strategy outlines  nine actions to promote the use of solar energy  technologies, including: providing energy information  and workshops to the private and public sector,  establishing a Government of the Northwest Territories  Interdepartmental Solar Energy Committee, installing  solar panels on public buildings, developing a  comprehensive program to connect solar systems to  the electricity grid while continuing to support off-grid  solar applications, setting up solar systems to replace  up to 20% diesel consumption in communities, and  expand solar potential to replace 75% consumption,  and developing a Solar Energy Monitoring Program.  4.5.2.3 Nunavut In April 2012, the Nunavut Climate Change Centre was  launched to provide current climate change information  relevant to the territory’s residents. It also assists the  government in monitoring the implementation of the  territory’s climate adaptation strategy.   In June 2011, Nunavut released Upagiaqtavut—Setting  the Course, Impacts and Adaptation in Nunavut, which  provides a framework and sets strategic objectives for  climate change adaptation in Nunavut, building on  commitments of its 2003 Climate Change Strategy.  Key objectives include: identifying new and innovative  partnership opportunities with federal, provincial  and territorial governments, communities and other  organizations; strengthen monitoring of climate  change impacts in Nunavut; integrate climate change  considerations into all government decision making,  land use planning, environmental assessments, and  emergency planning.  The Nunavut government has also produced Inuit  Qaujimajatuqangit of Climate Change in Nunavut,  a territory-wide examination of Inuit traditional  knowledge with respect to climate change.   Nunavut released an energy strategy in 2006. One of  its major goals is to reduce dependency on imported  fuel through conservation and development of  renewable energy sources. Virtually all fuel used for  heating and electricity is imported, and the territory  spends about 20% of its budget on purchasing, selling  and subsidizing fuel.   4.6  How Policies and Measures are  Modifying Long-Term Trends in  Greenhouse Gas Emissions and  Removals  Canada’s actions on climate change at all levels of  government are modifying longer-term trends in GHG  emissions, contributing to reductions into the future.     075  4 POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  The Government of Canada’s sector-by-sector  regulatory approach involves setting regulatory  performance standards for equipment and facilities  to generate reductions in absolute GHG emissions  over the long term. The regulations are designed to  maintain competitiveness vis-à-vis major trading  partners and drive investments in new clean energy  technologies and industries. They are also designed  to be stringent but flexible to stimulate innovation  and are predictable to provide investment certainty,  which encourages longer-term investments in energy  efficiency, clean energy technologies and non-emitting  electricity generation.   For example, the Government of Canada’s regulations  to reduce carbon dioxide from coal-fired electricity  generation will implement a permanent shift to lower  or non-emitting types of generation and will achieve  significant reductions beyond the 2020 horizon.  Combined with actions being undertaken by provinces  (e.g., Ontario coal phase out) the regulations are  expected to result in a net cumulative reduction in  GHG emissions of about 214 Mt from 2015 to 2035.   Similarly, Canada’s regulations to reduce emissions  from vehicles will have significant impacts on emissions  after 2020. For example, 2025 passenger vehicles and  light trucks will emit about half as many GHGs as 2008  models. The light duty vehicle Regulations will reduce  greenhouse gas emissions by 92 Mt over the lifetime of  the vehicles produced in the model years 2011 to 2016  and 162 Mt of reductions over the lifetime of 2017 to  2025 model years.  Canada is one of the leading investors in carbon  capture and storage technology in proportion to its  economy. Federal and provincial governments are  making significant investments towards carbon capture  and storage projects. For example, the SaskPower  Boundary Dam Project in Estevan, Saskatchewan, will  be the world’s first commercial scale power plant with  a fully integrated carbon capture and storage system.  Disseminating the knowledge and shared learning  generated from these projects is also a key priority for  Canada, and is critically important in moving towards  global deployment of carbon capture and storage.  Additional actions by provinces, territories and  municipalities in their areas of jurisdiction will modify  long-term trends in GHG emissions and removals.  These actions include policies and measures related to  mass transit, the energy efficiency of built environment,  urban planning and addressing urban sprawl, and other  land-use planning measures to protect natural features  that perform important carbon-storage functions.   References 1 The energy savings target for electricity in the Quebec Energy   Strategy 2006–2015 is 8 terrawatts per hour for 2015. This target   was then revised to 11 terrawatts per hour under the 2007–2010   Energy Efficiency and New Technology Master Plan.  2 For example: Rivers, Nicholas and Schaufele, Brandon, Salience   of Carbon Taxes in the Gasoline Market (June 10, 2013). Available   at SSRN: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2131468 or http://dx.doi.  org/10.2139/ssrn.2131468  http://ssrn.com/abstract=2131468 http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2131468 http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.2131468   076  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  5 Projections and the Total Effect of Policies and Measures 5.1 Introduction  This chapter provides projections of greenhouse gas  (GHG) emissions through 2030, aligned to Canada’s  historical emissions from 1990 to 2011 as presented in  Canada’s 2013 National Inventory Report (NIR) and  Chapter 3: Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory of  this report. The projections are presented by gas and  by sector as well as selected subsectors. The sectors  are aligned to the same sectoral categorisation as in  the Policies and Measures chapter of this report—as  recommended in the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) guidelines.  A description of how this method of categorisation  maps to Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC) sectors is provided below.   Projections presented in this report represent a “with  current measures” scenario and include actions taken  by governments, consumers and businesses up to 2011  as well as the future impacts of policies and measures  that were announced or put in place as of May 2013.  The policies and measures modeled in this section  are listed in Annex 1 of this chapter and are described  in more detail in Chapter 4: Policies and Measures. It  should be noted that the sum of emission reductions  associated with individual policies and measures in  Table 3 of the Biennial Report will not be equivalent  to the overall projected emission reductions of  policies and measures in this chapter due to the  interaction effects between measures and the different  modeling approaches being used.  For the purposes of presenting progress to Canada’s  2020 target, the “with current measures” scenario is  compared to a “without measures” projection that  assumes no action taken after 2005, Canada’s target  base year. The difference between the two scenarios  represents the total effect of policies and measures by  both federal and provincial Canadian governments as  well as actions by businesses and consumers. Under   the “with current measures” scenario, Canada’s GHG  emissions in 2020 are projected to be 734 megatonnes  (Mt) carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2 eq). This is 128 Mt  less than under a scenario where emissions would be  in 2020 if consumers, businesses and governments  had taken no action to reduce emissions since 2005,  highlighting the significant progress that has been  achieved at lowering emissions from a business-as- usual trajectory.  Canada has chosen not to include a “with additional  measures” scenario at this time, as further regulatory  and other actions by federal, provincial and territorial  governments remain under development. As such,  policies that may be proposed or planned but  are not yet implemented are not included in this  chapter’s projections.   5.2  Comparing Activity Sector Categories  to Economic Sectors  Canada’s GHG projections are derived using a detailed  bottom-up simulation model where energy data is  allocated to individual subsectors using the North  American Industrial Classification System. These  subsectors are then aggregated into the economic  sectors presented in this report. Considering that  Gross Domestic Product (GDP) and relative energy  prices are a key driver of GHG emissions in most  sectors, macroeconomic models are the primary  tool for generating emissions projections in Canada.  This method of energy and emissions allocation is  essential for identifying possible impacts from current  and future policies and measures implemented in a  particular sector.  According to the National Communication reporting  guidelines, Parties have the flexibility to present  their policies, measures and projections according to  sectoral categories that are appropriate to their own  national circumstances. Canada has chosen to use     077  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Figure 5.1 Total Canadian 2011 GHG emissions   (702 Mt CO2 eq)—Methods of Categorisation  economic sectors in our Biennial Report and National  Communication as these categories more accurately  reflect the drivers of emissions than the IPCC activity  based sectoral categories. This approach is used in  Canada’s Emissions Trends, an annual publication that  provides projections of GHG emissions to the year  2020. It is also presented in Canada’s NIR along with  GHG emissions categorised under the IPCC reporting  requirements by activity sectors such as emissions  from energy use, fugitive emissions, transportation  emissions, and emissions from industrial processes.   Figure 5.1 shows the distribution of 2011 emissions on  an IPCC activity basis versus an economic sector basis.  Some adjustments that are made to estimate economic  sector emissions include: • Reallocating off-road transportation emissions   related to farming (primarily farm tractors and other  mobile machinery) to the Agriculture Sector instead  of transportation.  • Reallocating off-road transportation emissions related  to mining operations from transportation to the Oil  and Gas Sector and the Emissions-Intensive and  Trade-Exposed (EITE)1 Industry Sector.  • Reallocating emissions related to pipeline operations  to the Oil and Gas Sector.  • Reallocating some of the industrial process emissions  to the Buildings Sector.  In addition, stationary combustion emissions under  the IPCC categorisation are allocated across economic  sectors, as appropriate. Almost all industrial process  and fugitive emissions under these processes are  aligned with the economic sector that generates them  (primarily in the EITE and Oil and Gas Sectors). In  addition, emissions from landfills are included in the  Waste and Others Sector.   Table 5.1 GHG Emissions by Economic Sector (Mt CO2 eq) from 1990  to 2011  1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2011  Transportation 128 137 155 168 167 170  Oil and Gas 101 124 150 162 164 163  Electricity 94 98 129 121 99 90  Buildings 70 76 82 84 79 84  Emissions- Intensive &  Trade-Exposed  Industries  93 94 85 87 75 78  Agriculture 54 61 66 68 69 68  Waste and  Others  50 49 51 49 48 49  NATIONAL  GHG TOTAL  591 639 718 737 701 702    078  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  5.3 Historical Emissions Trends  Although historical emissions have been described in  detail in Chapter 3: Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory,  a brief summary of historical trends by economic sector  is provided here.2  As shown in Table 5.1, from 1990 to 2005, total emissions  grew from 591 Mt to 737 Mt. The majority of this  increase occurred in the Transportation, Oil and Gas,  and Electricity Sectors. In the Transportation Sector,  population and economic growth were primary drivers  of a 40 Mt increase in emissions over this period. As  production increased and Canada’s oil sands industry  developed, emissions in the Oil and Gas Sector  increased 61 Mt. The Electricity Sector3 contributed to a  further 27 Mt of the increase in total emissions as more  fossil-fueled power generation came online to meet  rising demand.   Canadian GHG emissions fell by 35 Mt from 2005 to  2011, driven mostly by reductions in the Electricity  and EITE Sectors. Emissions in most other sectors  were stable over the period. The decline in emissions  from the Electricity Sector is primarily the result of  Ontario’s coal-fired electricity generation phase-out,  while the trend in the EITE Sector reflects the impacts  of the economic recession and the subsequent recovery.  Compositional changes within the sectors, energy  efficiency improvements, and changes to energy prices  have all helped contribute to relatively stable emissions  in the other sectors.   Emissions are intrinsically linked to economic activity,  although in Canada this linkage has weakened over the  past two decades due to technological and structural  changes such as increases in energy efficiency and  the growth of lower-emissions and service-based  industries. Emissions intensity, defined as GHG  emissions per dollar of GDP, measures the relationship  between economic activity and emissions generation.  In Canada, emissions intensity has declined at an  average annual rate of 1.5% between 1990 and 2011, or a  cumulative 28% over the entire period.   5.4  GHG Emissions Projections by  Economic Sector and Gas  5.4.1  National Emissions Projections GHG projections depend on a number of evolving  variables and are subject to significant uncertainty. In  addition, developments in technology, demographics  and resource extraction will alter the future emissions  pathway. In this chapter, emissions are projected to  2030 with comparisons made to 2005, Canada’s base  year for its Copenhagen target. Projections are based  on policies and measures in place as of May 2013  and assume no further government action. Where  applicable, historical emissions for 2010 and 2011  (the most recent year for which historical emissions  are available) are also shown. Projections are based  on Environment Canada’s Energy, Environment  and Economy Model for Canada (E3MC) which is  internationally recognized and incorporates external  data from consistent sources.   5.4.2  Emissions Intensity The link between growth in GDP and GHG emissions  continues to weaken. There has been an average annual  decline in Canadian emissions intensity (emissions  per unit of GDP) of approximately 1.5% since 1990.  Emissions intensity is expected to continue to decrease  through 2030 (Figure 5.2).   However, given that a connection still remains between  economic growth and GHG emissions, under a “with  current measures” scenario, absolute emissions are  projected to rise over the period, although at a rate  slower than economic growth. Before taking into  account any further action by federal, provincial,  and territorial governments, by 2020 emissions are  projected to reach 734 Mt, a decrease of 3 Mt from  2005. By 2030 emissions are projected to reach 815 Mt,  an increase of 11% over 2005 levels. However, GDP is  expected to increase by 59% over the same period,  demonstrating the continued decoupling of economic  and emissions growth. In addition, actual emissions in  2030 will be lower if federal, provincial and territorial  governments take additional measures.     079  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Figure 5.2 Canadian Emissions Intensity (1990 to 2030)   Of note, the Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry  (LULUCF) contribution has only been estimated up to  our target year (2020). This is because although data  is available through 2030, the Reference Level used  to measure progress in the managed forests was only  constructed and negotiated to 2020. Since estimating  the LULUCF contribution requires this Reference  Level, the contribution cannot be estimated for years  after 2020. It is anticipated that Canada will develop a  post-2020 Reference Level as part of its participation  in international negotiations on post-2020 treatment  of the land sector in an international climate change  regime under the UNFCCC.  5.4.3  Per Capita Emissions Total GHG emissions divided by the population of  Canada (per capita emissions) have been decreasing  significantly since 2005 when they were 22.9 tonnes  CO2 eq per person. In 2011, emissions per capita were  only 20.4 tonnes CO2 eq per person, which is the lowest  level recorded since records began in 1990.   Projections show per capita emissions to continue  to decrease through 2030 as per capita emissions are  projected to fall to 20.0 tonnes CO2 eq per person in  2020 and to 19.6 tonnes per person in 2030 (Table 5.2).  This reflects a projected increase in Canada’s population   of 29% between 2005 and 2030, while emissions are  projected to increase by only 11%.  Table 5.2 Canadian GHG Emissions Per Capita*  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Per Capita  Emissions  (t CO2 eq)  22.9 20.5 20.4 20.1 20.0 19.6  * Excluding the contribution of LULUCF.  5.4.4  Emissions by Gas Total Canadian GHG emissions over the projection  period are presented by gas in Tables 5.3 and 5.4, in  their native gaseous forms and in CO2 eq respectively.   CO2 emissions are projected to rise throughout the  projection period to 2030 increasing by 6% between  2005 and 2020, and by an additional 7% between 2020  and 2030. On a CO2 eq basis, CO2 represented 79%  of total Canadian GHG emissions in 2005. By 2020,  CO2 emissions are projected to represent 80% of total  emissions. By 2030 this share is expected to increase  slightly to 81%.  Given that CO2 emissions comprise roughly 80% of  total GHG emissions, the trends in CO2 emissions  follow the same growth trends as GHG emissions.     080  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5.3 Total Canadian Emissions Projections by Gas, Excluding LULUCF Emissions (kilotonne (Kt)—natural form) from 1990 to 2030  1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  CO2 459,028 490,973 564,021 578,709 553,786 555,467 575,390 614,199 656,171  CH4 3,424 4,089 4,474 4,669 4,308 4,316 4,300 4,067 4,119  N2O 158 173 157 162 153 149 153 157 165  HFCs 1 0 2 4 5 6 8 10 14  PFCs 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0  SF6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0  Between 2005 and 2030, CO2 emissions are projected  to rise in every economic sector of Canada with the  exception of the Electricity Sector where CO2 emissions  are projected to fall by 32% between 2005 and 2020,  and by a further 28% between 2020 and 2030. Total  methane (CH4) emissions have increased in Canada  since 1990. Between 1990 and 2005, emissions increased  by 36% due to increasing activity in the Agriculture  and Oil and Gas Sectors. Between 2005 and 2020, this  long term trend is projected to reverse as emissions  are expected to fall by 13% reflecting decreasing CH4  emissions in both the Agriculture and the Oil and Gas  Sectors. Fugitive CH4 emissions from conventional oil  production are expected to decline due to decreasing  production as a result of depletion of reserves. Between  2020 and 2030, CH4 emissions are projected to remain  almost constant in all Canadian economic sectors.   Nitrous oxide (N2O) emissions, which decreased  slightly between 2005 and 2010, are projected to  remain relatively stable over the projection period. N2O  emissions arise primarily from the Agriculture Sector.   Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) have been increasingly  used in the last decade or so in refrigeration and  air conditioning systems as an alternative to ozone  damaging hydrochlorofluorocarbons, commonly  referred to as HCFCs that are being phased out  under the Montreal Protocol. However, HFCs are also  potent GHGs with long atmospheric lifetimes and are   projected to triple by 2030 from relatively low levels in  2010, increasing at a faster rate than economic growth  due to the current lack of cost-effective substitutes  to HCFCs. HFC emissions are projected to rise in the  Transportation and Building Sectors from mobile air- conditioning and refrigerants respectively.   Perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur-hexafluorides  (SF6) are projected to decrease substantially over the  projection period. The main releases of these gases  into the environment occur during the manufacture  of semi-conductors, refrigeration equipment and the  production of aluminium as well as other industrial  processes such as in the magnesium industry.  Reductions are anticipated from voluntary measures in  the aluminum industry and other sectors.   Table 5.4 converts the above information into CO2 eq  with global warming potential values from the second  Assessment Report of the IPCC and provides emissions  totals including and excluding LULUCF emissions.    081  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5.4 Total Canadian Emissions Projections by Gas in CO2 eq, Including and Excluding LULUCF Emissions (Mt CO2 eq) from 1990 to 2030  1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  CO2 incl LULUCF 296 590 443 563 607 594 458 484 512  CO2 excl LULUCF 459 491 565 579 554 555 575 614 656  CH4 incl LULUCF 75 105 96 104 102 102 92 87 88  CH4 excl LULUCF 72 86 94 98 90 91 90 85 86  N2O incl LULUCF 51 66 50 54 54 53 48 50 52  N2O excl LULUCF 49 54 49 50 47 46 47 49 51  HFCs 1 1 3 5 7 8 10 13 19  PFCs 7 6 4 3 2 2 2 2 2  SF6 3 2 3 2 0 0 0 0 0  Figure 5.3 Total Canadian Emissions by Gas, 1990–2030: CO2, CH4,  N2O, HFC  5.4.5  Emissions Projections by Sector Table 5.5 illustrates how the projected trends in GHG  emissions vary by economic sector. This is a result of the  expected evolution of the key drivers of emissions in each  sector, as well as various government and other initiatives  vary by sector. For example, in the Transportation Sector,  the growing population in Canada affects the number  of cars on the road, thus emissions from the passenger  transportation subsector are projected to rise. However,   offsetting this trend are the Federal Government’s GHG  performance standards for new vehicles which are  causing the average emissions intensity of all vehicles to  decline through the projection period. For the Electricity  Sector, emissions are expected to fall, largely due to the  combined impact of various government measures to  create a cleaner electricity system, predominately by  replacing coal fired generation with lower-emitting  natural gas and non-emitting sources.     082  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5.5 GHG emissions by Economic Sector (Mt CO2 eq) from 2005  to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Transportation 168 167 170 174 176 179  Oil and Gas 162 164 163 177 200 241  Electricity 121 99 90 84 82 59  Buildings 84 79 84 89 95 110  Emissions-Intensive  & Trade-Exposed  Industries  87 75 78 82 90 101  Agriculture 68 69 68 69 69 70  Waste and Others 49 48 49 50 50 55  Subtotal 737 701 702 725 762 815  Expected LULUCF NA NA NA NE 228 NE  Total 737 701 702 725 734 815  Abbreviations: NA = Not applicable; NE = Not estimated.   5.4.5.1 Transportation In 2011, emissions from transportation (including  passenger, freight, and off-road emissions) were  the largest contributor to Canada’s GHG emissions,  representing 24% of overall GHGs.   Between 1990 and 2005, emissions in the  Transportation Sector increased 31%, from 128 Mt in  1990 to 168 Mt in 2005. This was driven by a strong  period of economic growth and low oil prices from 1990  to 1999 that influenced the fleet composition and its use  (e.g., from cars to light-duty trucks).   Since 2005, transportation emissions have been  relatively stable, representing 170 Mt in 2011. The  increasing fuel efficiency of light-duty vehicles has  offset the effects of an increased population putting  more vehicles on the road and resulting in more  kilometres (km) driven. For example, between 2005 and  2011, the sales-weighted on-road fuel efficiency for new  gasoline cars improved from 9.2 litres (L) per 100 km  to 8.5 L/100 km, while the sales-weighted on-road fuel  efficiency for new gasoline light trucks improved from  13.2 L/100 km to 11.7 L/100 km.   In October 2010, the Government of Canada released  the final Passenger Automobile and Light Truck  Greenhouse Gas Emission Regulations, which prescribe  progressively more stringent annual emission standards  for new vehicles of model years 2011 to 2016. The  Government has also published proposed regulations  in the Canada Gazette for the second phase of action on  light-duty vehicles, which contain increasingly stringent  GHG emissions standards for light-duty vehicles of  model years 2017 to 2025.   These regulations will achieve significant and sustained  GHG reductions and fuel-savings benefits. By 2020, it  is estimated that Canadian regulations for model years  2011 to 2016 will lead to annual reductions of between  9 and 10 Mt. Preliminary estimates indicate that the  proposed regulations for model years 2017 to 2025, once  finalized, will reduce GHG emissions by an additional  3 Mt in 2020, increasing to 18 Mt by 2030, as these new  efficient vehicles replace the existing stock.   Under both phases of light-duty vehicle regulations,  spanning model years 2011 to 2025, the fuel efficiency  of new cars will increase by 41%, as compared to model  year 2010 (and 50% compared to the 2008 model year),  and the fuel efficiency of new passenger light trucks  will increase by 37%. The sales-weighted fuel efficiency  of new cars is projected to improve from 8.6 L/100 km  in 2010 to 6.4 L/100 km in 2020, and to 5.1 L/100 km  by 2025. The sales-weighted fuel efficiency of new  passenger light trucks are projected to improve from  12.0 L/100 km in 2010 to 9.1 L/100 km in 2020, and to  7.6 L/100 km by 2025.  Total transportation emissions are projected to  increase from 168 Mt in 2005 to 176 Mt by 2020, a  marked deceleration of emissions growth in the  sector due to the projected increased fuel-efficiency  of on-road vehicles. This deceleration from historical  trends is expected to continue as a result of greater  fuel efficiency in vehicles being accelerated by federal  vehicle emissions regulations, despite projected  increases in population and number of vehicles.     083  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Emissions are projected to increase by only 3 Mt  between 2020 and 2030 as the stock of existing  vehicles is gradually overturned with the newer, more  efficient models.   As depicted in Table 5.6, the Transportation Sector  comprises several distinct subsectors: passenger,  freight, air and others (e.g., rail and marine). Each  subsector exhibits different trends during the  projection period. For example, emissions from  passenger transportation are projected to decrease by  16 Mt between 2005 and 2030, while those for ground  freight, off-road and other vehicles are projected  to grow by 24 Mt over the same time period due  to anticipated growth in GDP. Note that although  absolute emissions are projected to grow in the freight  subsector, emissions are expected to decrease relative  to business-as-usual levels as a result of various  federal, provincial and territorial programs. The  recently announced heavy-duty vehicle regulations  will improve the average fuel efficiency of trucks from  2.5 L/100 tonne-km to 2.1 L/100 tonne-km by 2020.   Table 5.6 Transportation: Emissions by Subsector (Mt CO2 eq) from  2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Passenger Transport 96 97 96 95 90 80  Cars, Trucks and  Motorcycles  87 88 88 86 81 70  Bus, Rail and  Domestic Aviation  9 8 8 8 9 10  Freight Transport 57 60 61 66 70 81  Heavy-Duty Trucks,  Rail  49 52 54 58 61 71  Domestic Aviation  and Marine  8 8 7 8 9 10  Other: Recreational,  Commercial and  Residential  14 11 13 14 15 18  Total Emissions 168 167 170 174 176 179  5.4.5.2 Oil and Gas Emissions in the Oil and Gas Sector are related to the  production, transmission, processing, refining and   distribution of oil and gas products. In 2011, the Oil  and Gas Sector produced the second largest share of  GHG emissions in Canada (23%). Emissions increased  61 Mt over the 1990 to 2005 time period, primarily as a  result of the development of the unconventional oil and  gas industry.   Since 2005, GHG emissions from the Oil and Gas  Sector have remained fairly consistent around 162 Mt.  Increased emissions from unconventional oil sands  activity have been offset by the gradual depletion of  conventional natural gas and oil resources in Canada  and a decline in refining emissions.   Upstream Oil and Gas Production Upstream oil and gas includes the extraction,  production and processing of both conventional and  unconventional oil and gas. This subsector represented  approximately 70% of the Oil and Gas Sector in 2011  and this share is expected to increase to 74% by 2030 as  oil sands extraction increases significantly.   In general, extracting oil from oil sands via an “in situ”  method (e.g., using in-ground techniques to separate  the oil from the sand) is more emissions intensive than  the more traditional mining methods. However, within  the oil sands sector, the overall emissions intensity of  upstream oil production has been decreasing over time,  as declining intensity from increasingly energy efficient  in-situ operations more than offsets increasing intensity  of oil sands mining operations (which are extracting  deeper/poorer-quality bitumen-sand).   Working against this historical trend, there are several  forces that are driving emissions intensity up in the  oil sands subsector (e.g., declining reservoir quality,  aging of existing facilities, shift from mining to more  emissions-intensive in situ etc.). It is therefore unclear  if these historical improvements in emissions intensity  will continue. On the other hand, technological  improvements have the potential to reduce oil sands  emissions intensities. This technological potential is  discussed in Text Box 5.1.     084  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Box 5.1 Potential Oil Sands Technology/Method Improvements Although conventional oil production is expected  to continue its historic decline, unconventional oil  production from oil sands (mixtures of sand, clay and a  dense petroleum product called bitumen) is projected  to rise from 1.1 to 3.3 million barrels of bitumen per day  between 2005 and 2020. In the absence of technological  improvements in oil sands production, GHG emissions  could increase by roughly 70 Mt from 2005 levels by  2020 (see Table 5.8). Development of new technologies  has, however, reduced the emissions intensity of oil  sands production over the last 20 years, and further  technological advances could play an important role  in mitigating GHG emissions growth from the rapidly  expanding oil sands sector.   Compared to conventional methods, unconventional  production from oil sands requires considerably more  energy, because bitumen cannot be pumped directly  out of the ground under natural conditions. In addition,  depending on the extraction method, bitumen may  be upgraded to synthetic crude oil (oil that has  similar properties to conventionally produced crude  oil). Currently there are two approaches to oil sands  extraction: oil sands mining or in-situ techniques. In oil  sands mining, bitumen-containing ore is dug out of the  ground in a shovel-and-truck operation, and then the  bitumen is separated from the associated sands using  hot water. In-situ techniques currently involve either  pumping out bitumen with sand (primary oil sands  production) or pumping out bitumen after heating oil  sands deposits with steam (cyclic steam stimulation  (CSS) and steam-assisted gravity drainage (SAGD)).  Additional energy is used to convert bitumen to value- added petroleum products at upgraders or refineries  (e.g., synthetic crude oil, diesel, gasoline).  Overall GHG emissions intensity (emissions per barrel  of oil) of oil sands has fallen considerably since the  start of oil sands operations in the early 1990s, with  this trend dominating over the various subsectors  (see Figure 5.4). In recent years, some efficiency  improvements have plateaued as technological  improvements have been negated by shifts to more   energy-intensive extraction techniques and declining  reservoir quality. Given the many competing factors,  it is difficult to predict the future evolution of overall  emissions intensity in the oil sands. For the purposes  of this report, emissions intensities have been held  constant for a given oil sands extraction method.  However, there are several emerging technologies  that have the potential to further improve intensities  through reductions in energy use or carbon capture  and storage. Since the majority of new production  is expected to occur at new facilities, there is an  opportunity to adopt these technologies when making  choices on capital investments.   The following are examples of promising technologies  that may have scope for wider use: • Cold bitumen extraction methods would allow   separation of sand from mined bitumen without the  need for heat, hence reducing energy and emissions.  • Oxy-fuel steam generation optimizes the fuel  oxygen mix for more efficient combustion in steam  generators. The resultant waste flue gas is rich in  CO2 and thus more amenable to carbon capture and  storage, where CO2 is stored underground.  • Solvent-aided processes (SAPs) involve the co- injection of solvents along with steam into SAGD  production wells to increase the fluidity of bitumen  with less energy input.  • Infill wells are additional wells drilled between  producing pairs of SAGD wells to increase production  with minimal additional steam inputs.  • Partial upgrading of in-situ bitumen can be  carried out to eliminate the need for diluent  for transportation.  Although technological advances in oil sands extraction  and processing will result in emissions intensity  improvements, trends in absolute emissions will  depend on the combination of emissions intensity,  production levels, and the resource quality. For the  projections presented in this report, a conservative  approach to the penetration of these new technologies  in the oil sands sector has been applied.     085  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  figure 5.4 historical oil sands emissions intensity (kilograms co2 eq/ barrel) 1990–2011   Considering the uncertainties associated with  emissions intensities in the oil sands, the modelled  projections have assumed constant emissions intensity  throughout the projection period. Alternatively, under a  scenario where historical trends in intensity reductions  continue, oil sands emissions could be 10% lower in  2020 than under the reference scenario assuming a   10-year moving average.   Emissions projections in the Oil and Gas Sector are  based on the National Energy Board’s preliminary  projections of oil and natural gas prices as well as  preliminary estimates of anticipated production. Under  the assumptions made for this report, emissions from  upstream oil and gas production are estimated to grow  from 109 Mt in 2005 to 144 Mt in 2020 and 177 Mt in  2030. This increase is driven by the growth in bitumen  production, where emissions are expected to increase  from 21 Mt in 2005 to about 76 Mt by 2020 and 107 Mt  by 2030. Specifically, emissions from oil sands mining  are projected to more than double over the 2005 to 2020  time period and almost triple over the 2005 to 2030  time period. Even more significantly, emissions from  in situ production are expected to increase from 11 Mt in  2005 to 55 Mt in 2020 and 82 Mt in 2030.   Emissions from conventional crude oil production are  expected to fall from 32 Mt in 2005 to 31 Mt in 2020,   and decrease further to 22 Mt in 2030 as conventional  reserves are depleted. Emissions from natural gas  production and processing are also expected to fall  from about 56 Mt in 2005 to 37 Mt by 2020, but then  rebound slightly in 2030 (to 48 Mt) as the production of  natural gas is projected to increase in later years due an  anticipated increase in price.   table 5.7 upstream oil and natural Gas Production: emissions and  drivers  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  conventional oil Production   emissions (Mt co2  eq)  32 29 30 36 31 22  Production (1,000  barrels/day)  1361 1228 1262 1459 1304 891  natural Gas Production and Processing   emissions (Mt co2  eq)  56 49 47 40 37 48  Production (billion  cubic feet)  6984 5873 5938 5029 4861 6318  Bitumen Production   emissions (Mt co2  eq)  21 35 37 51 76 107  Production (1,000  barrels/day)  1064 1614 1743 2338 3316 4567    086  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Emissions from the pipeline transport of oil and natural  gas are expected to fall from about 16 Mt in 2005 to 9 Mt  by 2020 but then increase to 12 Mt in 2030 due to the  increased production and distribution of natural gas  over this time period. The emissions associated with  the upgrading of oil sands bitumen are expected to rise  from 14 Mt in 2005 to 26 Mt by 2020 and 29 Mt by 2030.  Further details on emissions from oil sands upgrading  are outlined in the following section on petroleum  refining and upgrading. Emissions from the production  of synthetic crude oil are linked to the petroleum  refining industry.  Emissions from the downstream subsectors are  expected to remain relatively unchanged throughout  the projection period. Emissions are projected to  decrease from 24 Mt in 2005 to 19 Mt in 2020 but then  increase to 21 Mt in 2030.   Liquified natural gas (LNG) is natural gas  (predominantly methane) that has been converted to  liquid form for ease of storage and transport. Canadian  projects in British Columbia and eastern Canada aim to  produce LNG to sell in global markets, where it would  be re-gasified and distributed as pipeline natural gas.  There is a high degree of uncertainty regarding LNG  production in Canada since its potential for export  resides in factors such as the cost and acceptability  of export terminals and pipelines on the West Coast,  as well as the long term price expectations of natural  gas, both domestically and internationally. For this  report, modeling assumptions have used the National  Energy Board’s preliminary projections of expected  LNG production through 2030. GHG emissions for LNG  production represent emissions from the incremental  energy consumption required for LNG processes.   Table 5.8 Oil and Gas Sector Emissions by Production Type  (Mt CO2 eq) from 2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Natural Gas  Production and  Processing   56 49 47 40 37 48  Conventional Oil  Production  32 29 30 36 31 22  Conventional  Light Oil  Production  10 10 10 13 11 7  Conventional  Heavy Oil  Production  21 18 18 22 18 12  Frontier Oil  Production  2 2 2 2 2 2  Oil Sands 34 52 55 73 101 137  Bitumen In situ 11 11 23 36 55 82  Bitumen Mining 9 14 14 16 21 25  Bitumen  Upgrading  14 18 18 21 25 28  Oil and Natural Gas  Transmission  16 11 11 10 9 12  Downstream Oil and  Gas  24 22 20 19 19 21  Petroleum  Products  22 20 18 17 17 18  Natural Gas  Distribution  2 2 2 2 3 3  Liquid Natural Gas  Production   0 0 0 0 2 4  Total 162 164 163 177 200 241 Note: numbers may not add due to rounding.  Petroleum Refining and Upgrading Table 5.9 displays emissions associated with petroleum  refining and upgrading. As noted above, the GHG  emissions from upgrading bitumen into synthetic crude  oil are included in the Traditional Refineries category.  From 2005 to 2020, emissions from bitumen upgrading  are projected to increase by 12 Mt, while emissions from  traditional petroleum refining are projected to decline  by 6 Mt. Over the longer term to 2030, emissions are  expected to remain constant in traditional refineries  through 2030 whereas they are expected to increase by a  further 3 Mt in in upgrading.     087  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5.9 Petroleum Refining and Upgrading Sector Emissions  and Drivers   2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Traditional Refineries  Emissions (Mt CO2  eq)  22 20 18 17 17 17  Refined Petroleum  Processed  (1,000 barrels/day)  2165 2113 2035 2136 2143 2282  Upgraders  Emissions (Mt CO2 eq) 14 18 18 21 26 29  Upgraded Products  (1,000 barrels/day)  611 865 932 1064 1317 1513  Canadian refineries are expected to increase their  output by 16% between 2011 and 2030. However,  GHG emissions actually decrease over this  timeframe due to improvements in energy efficiency  (e.g., refurbishments).   5.4.5.3 Electricity Generation As more than three quarters of the electricity supply in  Canada is generated by non-GHG emitting sources of  power, the Electricity Sector only comprised 13% of total  emissions in 2011.   Historically over the 1990 to 2005 period, demand  for electricity rose and this increase in demand was  being met with varying sources of power. Emissions  from the Electricity Sector increased over this time  period as some provinces expanded their capacity by  building fossil fuel-fired power plants or by increasing  the utilization rate of existing coal units in place of  nuclear plants, as was done in the province of Ontario.  In addition, other provinces increased their natural  gas-fired generation to meet growing demand. Post- 2005, emissions in this sector are projected to fall  significantly as coal-fired units will have been closed  and more lower and non-emitting sources will have  been brought online.  The recent downward trend in emissions from the  Electricity Sector is expected to continue over the next   decade as a result of various federal and provincial  governmental initiatives. Emissions in the Electricity  Sector are projected to fall by 32% between 2005 and  2020 and by a further 28% between 2020 and 2030.   Several provinces have introduced significant measures  to move away from fossil fuel electricity generation  to cleaner sources of power and will contribute to  the decline in emissions in the Electricity Sector. In  particular, Ontario’s coal-fired generation phase-out  will have all coal units in the province retired by the end  of 2014. As well, Nova Scotia aims to decrease emissions  in its Electricity Sector through a cap on emissions and  through a renewable portfolio standard that will require  40% of electricity sales to come from renewable sources  by 2020.   In addition, the Federal Government released final  regulations to reduce emissions from the coal- fired electricity generation in September 2012. The  regulations apply a stringent performance standard to  new coal-fired electricity generation units and those  coal-fired units that have reached the end of their  economic life. The regulations come into effect on  July 1, 2015 and will facilitate a permanent transition  towards lower or non-emitting types of generation such  as high-efficiency natural gas and renewable energy.  With this regulation, Canada became the first major  coal user to ban construction of traditional coal-fired  electricity generation units.   Table 5.10 outlines the decline in projected emissions  alongside the expected increase in electricity generation  through 2030.   Table 5.10 Electricity Sector: Emissions and Drivers  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Emissions (Mt CO2 eq) 121 99 90 84 82 59  Generation (terawatt  hours)  550 523 545 573 609 685    088  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  The increase in electricity generation expected through  2030 will be powered from various fuel sources  depending on the Canadian province and available  resources. Although coal usage for electricity generation  is declining, the proportion of power generation from  fossil fuels is expected to vary by province depending on  the availability of electricity from hydro, nuclear power,  and non-hydro renewable energy sources such as wind.4  Hydro-power generation is expected to increase in most  Canadian provinces.   On a national level, emissions from coal-fired  generation are projected to decline by 75 Mt over the  2005 to 2030 time period. Emissions from natural gas  are expected to increase by 16 Mt over the period in  this sector, as natural gas replaces coal in electricity  generation and meets requirements of increasing  overall demand.   Table 5.11 Electricity Sector Emissions by Fuel Type (Mt CO2 eq) from  2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Coal 101 80 69 62 60 26  Refined Petroleum  Products   7 3 2 3 2 3  Natural Gas 13 16 19 18 21 29  Total 121 99 90 84 82 59  The proportion of utility electricity generation coming  from wind power and other renewable sources,  excluding hydro and nuclear, is projected to increase  between 2005 and 2030. Non-hydro renewables  comprised 0.36% of total utility electricity generation  in 2005 and are expected to account for 4.4% of total  generation by 2030. It is assumed that renewables do  not generate emissions.    5.4.5.4  Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed  Industries  The EITE Sector includes metal and non-metal mining  activities, smelting and refining, and the production  and processing of industrial goods such as chemicals,  fertilizers, aluminum, pulp and paper, iron and steel  and cement.  Emissions from the EITE Sector were responsible for  16% of total Canadian emissions in 1990, and fell to  11% in 2011. The decline (9 Mt) reflects the economic  downturn, technological changes such as improved  emission control technologies for perfluorocarbons  (PFCs) within the aluminum industry, and the closure  of the adipic acid plant in Ontario. Energy efficiency  measures, replacement of raw materials with recycled  materials, and use of unconventional fuels such as  biomass and waste in production processes were also  responsible for the GHG reductions over time.  Emissions from the EITE Sector are expected to reach  2005 levels again by 2020 and increase by 11 Mt between  2020 and 2030. Emissions are estimated to have been  at their lowest point in 2010 following a decline in  pulp and paper and mining output, but then began  to recover following an upward trend consistent with  production growth anticipated in the fertilizer, cement,  chemicals, and lime and gypsum subsectors.   Table 5.12 EITE Industries: Emissions and Drivers   2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Emissions (Mt CO2  eq)  87 75 78 82 90 101  Gross Output of  EITE sectors (1997  $billions)  129 104 108 115 123 137  Emissions generated by most EITE subsectors are  projected to be near 2005 levels by 2020, owing to  modest production growth in the recovery years of  the economic downturn, and continued reduction of  emissions intensities. Exceptions include decreased  emissions in pulp and paper, and increasing emissions  from mining, chemicals and fertilizers as several new  plants are expected to be built.   Over the 2020 to 2030 timeframe a number of  subsectors are projected to increase. For example,  the chemicals and fertilizers subsector is projected to  demonstrate growing emissions which are projected to  rise by 17%. Mining emissions are projected to increase  by 30% over the period, while emissions from cement     089  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  increase by 17%.This reflects expected increases in  production while the energy efficiency of the subsectors  increase more slowly.   Table 5.13 EITE Industries’ Emissions by Subsector (Mt CO2 eq) from  2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Mining 5 7 8 9 10 13  Smelting and  Refining  (Non-ferrous metals)  12 10 11 11 11 12  Pulp and Paper 9 6 6 6 5 5  Iron and Steel 20 16 17 17 19 20  Cement 13 10 10 11 12 14  Lime and Gypsum 3 3 3 3 3 3  Chemicals and  Fertilizers  25 24 24 26 30 35  Total 87 75 78 82 90 101  5.4.5.5 Buildings Emissions in Canada’s commercial and residential  buildings increased by 14 Mt between 1990 and 2005,  and then remained relatively stable around the 2005  levels through to 2011. Still, since 1990 buildings have  accounted for about 12% of Canada’s GHG emissions  in any given year. Despite a growing population and  increased housing stock and commercial/institutional  building stock, energy efficiency improvements are  helping to keep emissions stable.   Emissions from commercial and residential buildings  are projected to increase by 12% over the 2005 to 2020  timeframe, and then by an additional 17% over the  2020 to 2030 timeframe (excluding indirect emissions  from electricity).   Residential As shown in Table 5.14, GHG emissions from the  residential buildings (e.g., houses, apartments and  other dwellings) are expected to remain relatively stable  between 2005 and 2020, rising 3 Mt, before increasing  by another 4 Mt between 2020 and 2030. This is  despite an expected national increase of 4.4 million   households between 2005 and 2030, a key driver of  residential emissions growth. This highlights the  decreasing emissions intensities in the average home  which are taking place due to increasing energy costs  being managed with better technologies and practices.  In addition, federal and provincial measures aimed at  increasing the energy efficiency of residential buildings,  such as building code regulations, rebates for energy  efficiency improvements and voluntary housing energy  efficiency standards are helping to improve efficiencies  in this subsector.   Table 5.14 Residential Subsector: Emissions and Drivers   2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Emissions (Mt CO2 eq) 44 41 45 45 47 51  Households (millions) 12.7 13.7 13.9 14.7 15.6 17.1  Tonnes per household 3.46 2.99 3.23 3.06 3.01 2.98  Commercial GHG emissions from Canada’s commercial buildings  are expected to reach 48 Mt in 2020, an increase of  9 Mt from 2005. Emissions continue to rise from 2020  to 2030 increasing by an additional 11 Mt (Table 5.15).  Emissions in the commercial subsector remained stable  between 2005 and 2011 while floor space continued  to increase due, in part, to strengthening of building  energy codes, an increased commitment to benchmark  energy use and undertaking of energy-related retrofits.  Even with continued efficiency improvements,  emissions are expected to grow due to two factors: an  expansion of commercial floor space (the principal  driver of emissions from this subsector) as the economy  continues to grow; and the expected increase of HFCs  in refrigeration and air conditioning for the commercial  sector, due to the phase-out of ozone-depleting HCFC  refrigerant alternatives. As HFCs5 have an average  global warming potential that is up to 1900 times more  potent than CO2, even a small increase in HFC use has  a significant impact on emissions. Between 2020 and  2030, emissions are projected to increase by 23%, while  floor space increases by 26%.     090  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5.15 Commercial Subsector: Emissions and Drivers   2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Emissions (Mt CO2 eq) 39 38 39 44 48 59  Floor space (millions  square meters)  654 719 727 789 884 1118  5.4.5.6. Agriculture GHG emissions from primary agriculture in Canada  consist mainly of methane and nitrous oxide from  livestock and crop production systems as well as  emissions from on-farm energy use. Emissions  have remained stable over the 2005 to 2011 period at  approximately 69 Mt, following an increase of 14 Mt  from 1990 to 2005. Since 1990, emissions from the  sector grew from 8% of Canada’s total emissions to  12%. Emissions and removals of carbon from land  management and land-use change associated with  agricultural lands are accounted for separately in the  LULUCF Sector.  While emissions remain stable over the 2005 to 2030  period, there are a number of compositional trends in  the sector. Between 2005 and 2011, increases in on-farm  fuel use were offset by decreases in animal projection.  However, this trend reverses in the projection period  as animal production is expected to increase and fuel  use is expected to decrease through improved farm  management practices.  Given these compositional trends, agriculture emissions  are projected to remain relatively stable, reaching a  total of 69 Mt in 2020 and 70 Mt in 2030.  Table 5.16 Agriculture Sector Emissions by Subsector (Mt CO2 eq)  from 2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  On-Farm Fuel Use 9 13 14 14 13 10  Crop Production 19 22 22 22 22 23  Animal Production 39 33 32 33 34 37  Total Agriculture 68 69 68 69 69 70  5.4.5.7 Waste and Others Emissions from waste management and other non- emissions-intensive industrial sectors such as electric and  transport equipment manufacturing, remained relatively  stable between 1990 and 2005. From 1990 to 2011, GHG  emissions from municipal solid waste landfills decreased  by some 3 Mt as provincial government measures aimed at  capturing landfill gas and solid waste diversion helped to  slow growth from the historical period.  Non-emissions-intensive industrial subsectors included  in the Waste and Others Sector represent a wide  variety of operations, and include light manufacturing  (e.g., food and beverage, and electronics), construction  and forestry. Emissions from these various subsectors  are projected to remain relatively stable over the 2005  to 2020 timeframe increasing slightly in the 2020 to  2030 timeframe.   Table 5.17 Waste and Others Emissions by Subsector (Mt CO2 eq)  from 2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Waste 21 22 22 20 18 18  Coal Production 2 4 4 4 4 3  Light Manufacturing,  Construction & Forest  Resources  25 22 23 26 29 34  Total Waste and  Others  49 48 49 50 50 55  5.4.5.8  Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry  LULUCF is a particularly important sector for Canada  given our vast land areas. 10% of the world’s forests are in  Canada. Our managed forest covers 229 million hectares,  more than the managed forest of the entire European  Union. Canada also has 65 million hectares of total farm  area as reported in the 2011 Census of Agriculture.  LULUCF emissions accounting represents only  emissions/removals from managed lands in Canada. For  example, the category of Forest Land Remaining Forest  Land includes only the area of forests that are managed  for timber and non-timber resources (including national/    091  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  provincial parks) or subject to fire projection. Managed  lands can act either as a carbon sink (i.e., remove CO2  from the atmosphere) or a GHG source (i.e., emit CO2  and other GHGs to the atmosphere). For example,  planting trees on non-forest land removes carbon from  the atmosphere as the trees grow but conversion of forest  land to other land uses (deforestation) will emit CO2 and  other GHGs to the atmosphere due to decomposition or  burning of the biomass.   Very little information is available on management  practices on Canadian agricultural grassland, and  it is unknown whether grazed land is improving or  degrading. While there are no detailed comprehensive  activity data for Canadian agricultural grassland, there  is no evidence to suggest that current management  practices are degrading grasslands.  Work is ongoing to  determine to what extent management of grasslands  can impact GHG emissions. Wetland information is  also incomplete, with little information on the wetland  areas subject to forest or agricultural management  practices. The methodology for creating projections is  still under development.  Finally, in settlements remaining settlements, urban  trees contribute very little to the national GHG budget.  Estimates for 2011 indicate modest removals of less than  0.2 Mt CO2 eq. Therefore, these have been left out of  projections analysis until more robust estimation and  projection methods are developed.  While GHG emissions from the LULUCF Sector are  included in Canada’s annual NIR, the sector was left  out of projections provided in Canada’s 5th National  Communication and was not included in the updated  projections provided to the Expert Review Team during  the May 2011 review. A unique challenge in forecasting  and accounting for LULUCF emissions and removals  resides in addressing the effects of natural disturbances  (e.g., wildfires, insect infestations such as the mountain  pine beetle) that can result in significant variations in  the annual emission and removal estimates and generally  cannot be predicted for future years. As a result, the  effects of natural disturbances cannot be included in  projection estimates because they cannot be reasonably  predicted, apart from a low level of background fire  expected to occur every year and residual effects from  past events. The impact of natural disturbances, when  included in annual estimates of GHG emissions from  the LULUCF sector, also makes it difficult to discern the  effects of improved management practices.  The LULUCF projection estimates presented in the  table below are modeled separately from the other  sectors. Specifically, each subsector has been modeled  by the experts in the relevant departments of the  Federal Government.   Canada has opted for accounting approaches to GHG  emissions for each subsector that take into account  the unique structure of these forests and lands. These  accounting approaches are seen as a scientifically   Table 5.18 LULUCF Emissions by Subsector (Mt CO2 eq) from 1990 to 2030  1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Forest Land Remaining Forest Land 2181 116 2130 214 68 54 2120 2133 2147  Cropland Remaining Cropland 22 24 27 210 213 213 210 29 26  Forest Land Converted to Other Land  Categories  26 19 18 18 17 17 15 15 12  Land Converted to Forest Land 21.0 21.0 21.0 20.9 20.7 20.7 20.5 20.4 20.4  Total LULUCF 2158 130 2120 27 72 57 2115 2128 2142 Note: estimates up to and including 2011 include natural disturbances; estimates for 2015 and beyond are projections and exclude the impacts of  natural disturbances except for a low background level expected to occur every year. Numbers may not add due to rounding.    092  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  credible way to measure improvements over time in  this complex sector, and to a large extent are based on  approaches that were internationally accepted at the  UNFCCC Conference of the Parties in Durban in 2011.  Under this approach, the contribution of LULUCF  in 2020 is estimated to be 28 Mt. This approach is  described in detail in Annex 2 of this chapter.  Table 5.19 Projected Emissions (+) or Removals (2) from the LULUCF  Sector in 2020a  (In Mt of GHG  emissions/removals)  2005  Estimate/  Reference   Level  2020  Projected  Emissions/  Removals  Expected  Contribution   in 2020  Emissions  Forest Land Remaining  Forest Land  2107b 2133 226  Cropland Remaining  Croplandc  210 29 1  Forest Land Converted  to Other Land  Categoriesd  18 15e 24  Land Converted to  Forest Land   20.9 20.4 0.6  Total 2100 2128 228 a  Numbers may not add due to rounding. b  For Forest Land Remaining Forest Land, a 2020 reference level is   used for determining the contribution.  c Cr opland remaining Cropland includes residual emissions after  20 years from forest conversion to cropland.  d  Includes all emissions from the conversion of Forest Land to other  categories, except residual emissions 20 years or more after the  forests are converted to cropland.  e  Differences between these values and those reported in the NIR are  due to the inclusion here of emissions from the conversion of forest  to other land after 20 years or more, except in the case of conversion  of forest to cropland.  5.4.5.9 Foreign Passenger and Foreign Freight Emissions from Foreign Passenger and Foreign Freight  Sectors are not included in the national total consistent  with UNFCCC reporting guidelines.   Emissions from the Foreign Passenger and Foreign  Freight Sectors comprise total Canadian fuel sold to  ships. Emissions are expected to increase 20% between  2005 and 2030 as the number of foreign transportation  vehicles and number of kilometers traveled increases.  The short-term drop in emissions in 2011 can be  primarily attributed to the global economic slowdown  and its effect on foreign fuel consumers.  Table 5.20 Fuel Sold to Ships Emissions by Subsector (Mt CO2 eq)  from 2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Foreign Passenger 8 8 8 9 10 12  Foreign Freight 5 4 3 3 4 4  Total Foreign 13 12 11 12 13 16  Table 5.21 Provincial and Territorial GHG and Per Capita Emissions from 2005 to 2011  GHG Emissions  (Mt CO2 eq)  GHG Emissions  (Mt CO2 eq)  GHG Emissions  (Mt CO2 eq)  Per Capita  Emissions   (t/capita)  Per Capita  Emissions   (t/capita)  Per Capita  Emissions   (t/capita)  2005 2010 2011 2005 2010 2011  Newfoundland and  Labrador  10 9 9 19.2 18.3 18.3  Prince Edward Island 2 2 2 15.5 14.0 15.3  Nova Scotia 23 20 20 24.9 21.3 21.6  New Brunswick 20 18 19 26.9 24.3 24.6  Quebec 86 80 80 11.3 10.1 10.0  Ontario 206 175 171 16.4 13.2 12.8  Manitoba 21 20 20 17.8 16.2 15.9  Saskatchewan 71 73 74 71.5 70.1 69.7  Alberta 232 241 246 69.8 64.5 64.5  British Columbia 64 60 59 15.3 13.2 12.8  Territories 2 2 2 21.9 18.8 17.7  Canada 737 701 702 22.9 20.5 20.4    093  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5.22 Provincial and Territorial GHG Emissions (Mt CO2 eq) from 2005 to 2030  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Newfoundland and Labrador 10 9 9 10 10 10  Prince Edward Island 2 2 2 2 2 2  Nova Scotia 23 20 20 19 16 15  New Brunswick 20 18 19 19 18 16  Quebec 86 80 80 80 81 84  Ontario 206 175 171 170 177 189  Manitoba 21 20 20 21 22 24  Saskatchewan 71 73 74 78 74 66  Alberta 232 241 246 265 295 320  British Columbia 64 60 59 60 64 85  Territories 2 2 2 2 2 3  LULUCF NA NA NA NE -28 NE  Canada 737 701 702 725 734 815 Abbreviations: NA = Not applicable; NE = Not estimated.   5.5 Emissions by Province6  Emissions vary significantly by province, driven by  diversity in population size, economic activities and  resource base, among other factors. For example,  provinces where the economy is oriented more toward  resource extraction will tend to have higher emissions  levels whereas more manufacturing- or service- based economies tend to have lower emissions levels.  Electricity generation sources also vary, with provinces  that rely on fossil fuels for their electricity generation  having higher emissions than provinces that rely more  on hydroelectricity. Table 5.21 shows the provincial/ territorial distribution of emissions in absolute terms as  well as their per capita (t/capita) emissions.  Table 5.22 displays projected provincial and territorial  GHG emissions from 2005 to 2030. The projected  emissions reflect a diversity of economic factors and  government measures to reduce GHG emissions.  These include public education campaigns, energy  efficiency and renewable electricity programs, greening  government operations, carbon taxes or levies (i.e.,   British Columbia, Alberta and Quebec), regulatory  measures, and legislated renewable electricity targets.7  The provinces oriented toward resources extraction  and/or that are highly reliant on fossil fuels for their  electricity generation (i.e., Alberta, Saskatchewan, New  Brunswick and Nova Scotia) have per capita emissions  above the national average. The provinces highly reliant  on hydroelectricity or less emission-intensive sources for  their electricity generation (i.e., Quebec, British Columbia,  Ontario, Newfoundland and Labrador, and Manitoba)  have per capita emissions below the national average.   Table 5.23 displays projected provincial and territorial  per capita GHG emissions out to 2030 and compares  them to actual emissions in 2005 and 2011. Per capita  emissions are projected to fall in all provinces in 2020  relative to 2005 levels and to continue to fall in most  provinces out to 2030.    094  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5.23 Provincial and Territorial Per Capita Emissions (t/capita) from 2005 to 2030   2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Newfoundland and Labrador 19.2 18.3 18.3 20.0 19.1 20.2  Prince Edward Island 15.5 14.0 15.3 14.1 13.0 11.3  Nova Scotia 24.9 21.3 21.6 20.0 17.3 15.5  New Brunswick 26.9 24.3 24.6 24.4 23.9 21.0  Quebec 11.3 10.1 10.0 9.6 9.4 9.1  Ontario 16.4 13.2 12.8 12.2 12.2 12.1  Manitoba 17.8 16.2 15.9 15.9 15.8 15.6  Saskatchewan 71.5 70.1 69.7 69.2 61.2 48.6  Alberta 69.8 64.5 64.5 64.0 64.9 59.3  British Columbia 15.3 13.2 12.8 12.3 12.4 14.6  Territories 21.9 18.8 17.7 19.4 17.7 23.1  Canada 22.9 20.5 20.4 20.1 20.0 19.6  5.6  Assessment of Aggregate Effect of  Policies and Measures  Canada associated with the Copenhagen Accord  in January 2010 and committed to reduce its GHG  emissions to 17% below 2005 levels by 2020. In light  of strong economic growth this could be challenging:  Canada’s economy is projected to be approximately 31%  larger (in real terms) in 2020 compared to 2005 levels.  The Government of Canada’s approach is to encourage  strong economic growth and job creation while  achieving Canada’s environmental objectives.  Progress in reducing GHG emissions is measured  against a “without measures” scenario. The “without  measures” scenario is constructed by beginning the  model’s forecasting mode in 2006 configured to  exclude any government policies implemented after  2005. Historical macroeconomic data is used between  2006 and 2011 and wholesale energy prices throughout  the entire projection period are kept the same as those  used in the reference scenario. Changes in electric- generation energy use resulting from non-policy driven  factors, including nuclear refurbishment or historical   weather-related fluctuations in hydroelectric dam  capacities are included in the “without measures”  scenario. Oil sands emissions are derived using  2005 emissions intensities. Agriculture emissions  from livestock and crop production are maintained  at reference scenario levels throughout the entire  projection period. The analysis indicates that if  consumers, businesses and governments had taken no  action to reduce GHG emissions after 2005, emissions  in 2020 would have risen to 862 Mt.  The difference between this baseline scenario and  the “with current measures” scenario presented in  this report represents the total effect of policies and  measures by both federal and provincial Canadian  governments and actions by businesses and consumers.  Through actions of governments, consumers and  businesses, emissions are projected to be 128 Mt less in  2020 than under a scenario where no action to reduce  emissions had been taken since 2005, highlighting  the significant progress that has been achieved at  lowering emissions from a business-as-usual trajectory  (Figure 5.5).     095  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Figure 5.5 Scenarios of Canadian Emissions to 2020 (Mt CO2 eq) *  * The “with current measures” line (post-2005) includes the  compliance contribution of the LULUCF Sector towards the  Copenhagen target, and therefore actual emissions trends (without  LULUCF) will be 28 Mt higher in 2020.  Government programs and measures send signals  to consumers and firms which result in emissions  reductions. There is an extensive list of federal and  provincial/territorial measures that have been modeled,  including federal policies such as the electricity  performance standard for coal-fired generation,  renewable fuel content regulations, light-duty vehicle  GHG regulations (2011–2016 and 2017–2025).   Taken together, these policies have and will continue to  influence GHG emissions reductions, from projected  levels in 2020 and beyond. Most importantly, they  encourage further action by demonstrating that  government policies are having a quantifiable impact on  GHG emissions.   Please see Annex 2 of this chapter for a discussion  on the contribution of LULUCF towards Canada’s  Copenhagen target.     096  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Annex 1 Baseline Data and Assumptions Key Economic Drivers and Assumptions  Table 5A.1 Summary of Key Assumptions Used in Base Case  Development and Projection Analysis from 1990 to 2030  Key Underlying Assumptions  Historical Projected  1990 2011 2020 2030  Oil Price (C$2010/bbl) $38.63 $97.73 $105.42 $110.82  Natural Gas Price (C$2010/GJ)  $2.71  $4.28  $5.29  $6.34  Real GDP Chain-Weighted  ($1997)*  0.2% 2.5% 1.6% 1.7%  Real GDP per capita ($1997)* 21.3% 1.3% 0.6% 0.9%  Consumer Price Index  (1992=100)*  4.8% 2.9% 2.2% 2.1%  Population* 1.5% 1.2% 1.0% 0.8%  Population of driving age  (18–75)*  1.5% 1.3% 0.7% 0.6%  Labour Force* 1.3% 0.9% 0.7% 0.5%  *Annual growth rate  Abbreviations: C$ = Canadian dollars, bbl = Barrels, GJ = Gigajoule,  Kt CO2 eq = Kilotonne of carbon dioxide equivalent, GDP = Gross  domestic product.  Baseline Data and Assumptions Many factors influence the future trends of Canada’s   greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. These key factors  include the pace of economic growth, as well as  Canada’s population and household formation, energy  prices (e.g., world oil price and the price of refined  petroleum products, regional natural gas prices, and  electricity prices), technological change, and policy  decisions. Varying any of these assumptions could have  a material impact on the emissions outlook.   In constructing the emissions projections, Environment  Canada developed alternative views of changes in  certain key drivers (e.g., world oil price, the pace of  economic growth) that result in a range of plausible  emissions growth trajectories. The baseline emissions  projections scenario represents the mid-range of these  variations, but remains conditional on the future path  of the economy, world energy markets and government  policy. The assumptions and key drivers are listed   in this section. Alternative cases are explored in the  sensitivity analysis in Chapter 5 Annex 3.   The emissions projections baseline scenario is designed  to incorporate the best available information about  economic growth as well as energy demand and supply  into the future. The projections capture the impacts of  future production of goods and services in Canada on  GHG emissions.   Historical data on GDP and disposable personal income  are provided from Statistics Canada. Consumer price  index and population demographics are also produced  by Statistics Canada while historical emissions data  are provided by the National Inventory Report, 2013  (NIR 2013). The economic projections to the year 2018  are calibrated to Finance Canada’s June 2013 Private  Sector Survey.8 The outer years (2018–2030) are based  on Finance Canada’s longer-term fiscal projections  included in their “Economic and Fiscal Implications of  an Aging Population” report.9  Forecasts of major energy supply projects from the  National Energy Board’s preliminary 2013 projections  were incorporated for key variables and assumptions  in the model (e.g., oil sands production, large hydro- capacity expansions, nuclear refurbishment and  additions). The Board is an independent federal  agency that regulates international and interprovincial  aspects of the oil, gas and electric utility industries.  The U.S. Energy Information Administration’s outlook  on key parameters is also taken into account in the  development of energy and emissions trends.  Economic Growth The Canadian economy grew by 1.4% per year over 2005  through 2011, a period that includes the 2009 global  recession. Real GDP growth is expected to average 2.1%  per year from 2011 to 2020, and 1.6% from 2020 to 2030.    097  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  The growth in the labour force and changes in labour  productivity influence the changes in Canada’s real  GDP. Labour productivity is expected to increase by  an average of 1.4% annually between 2011 and 2020,  an improvement over the 0.3% average annual growth  during the period between 2005 and 2011. The increase  in productivity is attributed to an expected rise in  capital formation, and contributes to the growth in  real disposable personal income, which is expected to  increase by an average of 1.6% per year between 2011  and 2020.   Population Dynamics and Demographics The population size and its characteristics (e.g., age,  sex, education, household formation, among others)  have important impacts on energy demand. Canada’s  overall population is projected to grow on average at  an annual rate of 1.1% between 2011 and 2015, slowing  to 1.0% per year between 2015 and 2020, and further  slowing to 0.9% between 2020 and 2030.   Table 5A.2 Macroeconomic Assumptions, 1990–2030 Average  Annual Growth Rates   1990–2005 2005–2011 2011–2020 2020–2030  Gross  Domestic  Product   2.8% 1.4% 2.1% 1.6%  Consumer  Price Index*  2.1% 1.9% 1.8% 1.9%  *  The consumer price index in the macroeconomic model is a  function of the disaggregated price components of personal  consumption. The projection targets the mid-point of the Bank  of Canada’s target of 1 to 3% inflation throughout the projection.  However, due to the fact that inflation is endogenous, rates do not  equal 2% in each year.   Major demographic factors that can have measurable  impacts on energy consumption are summarized below: • Household formation: This is the main determinant   of energy use in the residential sector. The number of  households is expected to increase on average by 1.3%  per year between 2011 and 2020 and by an average of  0.9% per year between 2020 and 2030.  • Labour force: This is expected to have a decelerating  growth rate, reflecting the aging population. Its  annual average growth rate was 1.3% per year between  2005 and 2011, and is projected to slow to 0.8% per  year between 2011 and 2020 and then further slow to  0.6% between 2020 and 2030.  World Crude Oil Price A major factor in projected GHG emissions is the  assumption about future world oil prices since this  drives the level of production of oil. Canada is a price  taker in crude oil markets as its shares of world oil  production and consumption are not large enough  (4% and 2%, respectively) to significantly influence  international oil prices. West Texas Intermediate  (WTI) crude oil is used as an oil price benchmark.  North American crude oil prices are determined by  international market forces and are most directly  related to the WTI crude oil price at Cushing, which  is the underlying physical commodity market for  light crude oil contracts for the New York Mercantile  Exchange. The increase in North American supply and  the resulting transportation bottleneck at Cushing  have created a disconnect between the WTI price of  crude oil and the Brent price of crude oil. As such, the  North American oil market is currently being priced  differently from the rest of the world.  The emissions outlook’s reference case is anchored  by the world oil price assumptions developed by the  National Energy Board. According to the Board, the  world crude oil price for WTI is projected to increase  slightly from about $82 Canadian dollars (C$) per barrel  of oil (bbl) in 2010 to about C$105/bbl in 2020 and rise  further to C$111/bbl in 2030. A higher price scenario,  in which 2020 prices are C$136/bbl and 2030 prices are  C$142/bbl is used for the sensitivity analysis in Annex 3  of this Chapter. Under the higher price scenario, GHG  emissions are expected to be lower.    098  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Figure 5A.1 Crude Oil Price: WTI and Alberta Heavy (C$ 2010/bbl)  Figure 5A.1 shows crude oil prices for light crude oil  (WTI)and heavy oil. Historically the price of heavy oil/ bitumen (Alberta Heavy) has followed the light crude  oil price (WTI) at a discount of 50% to 60%. However,  in 2008 and 2009 the differentials between the prices  of light and heavy crude oils (“bitumen/light-medium  differential”) narrowed significantly owing to a global  shortage of heavier crude oil supply. The bitumen/ light-medium differential averaged 22% over the 2008  to 2009 period, compared with 44% over the five-year  average from 2003 to 2007.   Alberta’s Energy Resources Conservation Board expects  the bitumen/light-medium differential to average 26%   over the forecast period, compared with the five-year  average of 36% and the 2009 average of 17%.10  As shown in Figure 5A.2, the Henry Hub price for  natural gas in Alberta (the benchmark for Canadian  prices) declined in 2010 to about four Canadian dollars  per gigajoule (GJ). In the projection, it begins to recover  to reach about C$5.30 per GJ by 2020 and then C$6.26  per GJ by 2030, still well below its peak of over C$10  in 2005. This reflects the National Energy Board’s  assumption that major pipeline expansions such as  Mackenzie and Alaska pipelines may not occur before  2020 due to low natural gas prices.  Figure 5A.2 Henry Hub Natural Gas Price ($C 2010/GJ)    099  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5A.3 Crude Oil Production in thousands barrels per day  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Crude and Condensates 1534 1380 1410 1592 1441 1029  Conventional Light 511 512 556 707 612 414  Conventional Heavy 526 425 428 523 432 290  C5 & condensates 173 152 148 133 137 138  Frontier Light (offshore + north) 324 291 277 229 260 187  Oil Sands 1064 1614 1743 2338 3315 4567  Oil Sands—Primary 150 194 211 243 243 243  Oil Sands—In-situ 286 563 640 1093 1794 2725  Steam Assisted Gravity Drainage 82 319 374 805 1467 2360  Cyclic Steam Stimulation 204 244 266 288 328 364  Oil Sands Mining 628 857 892 1003 1278 1599  Total Production (gross) 2597 2994 3153 3930 4756 5596  Energy and Electricity Production National Energy Board projections show that both  natural gas and conventional oil production will  decrease over time as a result of declining supply,  although the projected increase in production from oil  sands operations will more than compensate for this  decline. As such, under assumed prices and absent  further government policy actions, it is expected  that from 2010 to 2030 oil sands in situ production  will increase nearly fivefold and oil sands mining  production will nearly double (see Table 5A.3) with  further increases out to 2030.   Table 5A.4 illustrates oil sands disposition. There are  two main products from oil sands production: synthetic  crude oil (or upgraded bitumen) and non-upgraded  bitumen, which is sold as heavy oil. Synthetic crude  oil production is projected to increase from about  932,000 barrels per day (bbl p/d) in 2011 to about  1.3 million bbl p/d by 2020 and then to about 1.5 million  bbl p/d by 2030. Non-upgraded bitumen will increase  from 697,000 bbl p/d in 2011 to 1.8 million bbl p/d   by 2020 and then to 2.8 million bbl p/d by 2030. This  non-upgraded bitumen is either sold as heavy oil to  Canadian refineries or transported to U.S. refineries for  upgrading to refined petroleum products.  Table 5A.4 Oil Sands Disposition in thousands barrels per day  2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Synthetic 610 932 932 1064 1317 1513  Non-upgraded  Bitumen   368 700 697 1127 1817 2844  Oil Sands (net) 979 1632 1,630 2191 3,133 4356  Own-use 85 111 114 147 182 210  Oil Sands (gross) 1,064 1743 1,743 2338 3,316 4,567  Projections show gross natural gas production will  decline to some 4.9 trillion cubic feet (TCF) in 2020, as  new production and non-conventional sources such as  shale gas and coal-bed methane come to market11 but  do not quite offset conventional declines. These new  sources of natural gas production increase output to  6.3 TCF by 2030.    100  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5A.5 Natural Gas Production in billion cubic feet   2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Supply  Gross Production 6984 5873 5938 5029 4861 6319  Own-use  Consumption  722 503 629 664 781 1122  Marketable Gas 6262 5370 5309 4365 4081 5197  Imports 346 828 1148 828 828 828  Total 6608 6198 6456 5193 4908 6024  Liquid Natural Gas  production  0 0 0 0 550 1100  The emissions outlook reflects plans by provincial  and territorial utilities with respect to key electricity  capacity expansions.   Taking into account these provincial/territorial utility  expansion plans, plus additional units forecast to be  built by the Energy Emissions and Economy Model for  Canada (E3MC) to meet growth in electricity demand,  aggregate electricity generation is also expected to  increase substantially, by about 26% from 2011 to 2030,  with fuel mix changes as generation increases. As  Table 5A.6 illustrates, the proportion of generation  coming from wind power and other non-hydro  renewable sources is expected to increase from 2005 to  2030, starting at only about 0.4% in 2005 and reaching  4.4% of total generation by 2030. Importantly, though,  the proportion of natural-gas-fired generation in 2030  is projected to be triple 2005 levels.  Government actions, such as the introduction of  the Electricity Performance Standard, will cause  fuel switching in the overall electricity generating  portfolio. As noted above, it is expected that natural  gas-fired generation will increase substantially by 2030  because of its appeal as a relatively cleaner source of  power generation and a reliable means to cover peak  loads. The lower natural gas price also makes it an  attractive choice. Coal and petroleum coke generation  are projected to fall from 18% of the generation in the  Canadian portfolio in 2005 to 4.1% in 2030.  Table 5A.6 Electricity Generation by Fuel, terawatts per hour   2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2030  Coal and Petroleum  Coke  97 76 66 59 58 28  Refined Petroleum  Products  12 3 2 4 3 4  Natural Gas 25 29 37 36 40 69  Hydro 327 321 342 357 397 456  Nuclear 87 86 88 92 84 97  Other Renewables 2 9 10 25 28 30  Total Generation 550 523 545 573 609 685  Emissions Factors Table 5A.7 provides a rough estimate of carbon dioxide  equivalent emissions emitted per unit of energy consumed  by fossil fuel type. These numbers are estimates based on  latest available data based on Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC) methodology. Specific emission  factors can vary slightly by year, sector, and province.   Table 5A.7 Mass of CO2 eq Emissions Emitted Per Quantity of Energy  for Various Fuels  Fuel CO2 eq. Emitted    [grams per mega joule (g/MJ)]  Aviation Gasoline 73.37   Biodiesel 8.30   Biomass 4.63   Coal 90.81   Coke 7.63   Coke Oven Gas 36.77   Diesel 74.06   Ethanol 4.32   Gasoline 68.61   Heavy Fuel Oil 74.49   Jet Fuel 68.86   Kerosene 67.42   Landfill Gases/Waste 19.46   Light Fuel Oil 70.41   Liquefied Petroleum Gas 60.62   Natural Gas 49.90   Natural Gas Raw 66.13   Petroleum Coke 84.65   Still Gas 47.94     101  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Federal, Provincial and Territorial Measures Table 5A.8 identifies the major federal, provincial and  territorial measures that are included when modeling  the reference case. This includes federal measures that  have been implemented or announced in detail as of  May 2013. Where program funding is set to end, the  projections assume that the impacts of these programs,  other than those embodied in consumer behaviour,  cease when the approved funding terminates. The  analysis also includes existing provincial and territorial  measures. Environment Canada involves provinces and  territories in extensive consultations to ensure their  initiatives are accounted for in analysis and modeling  of emissions trends. For the purposes of this report,  provincial/territorial measures announced and fully  implemented as of May 2013 have been included  wherever possible.   Although the reference case includes existing measures  that have been implemented or announced in detail,  it does not take into account the impact of broader  strategies or future measures within existing plans  where significant details are still under development.  These policies still under the development will be  included in subsequent projections as their details  become finalised. Canada has chosen not to include a  “with additional measures” scenario at this time, since  upcoming measures are still being analysed at both the  provincial and federal levels.  Note also that the modeled polices and measures in  Table 5A.8 will not match the full list of measures  included in the previous chapter of this report. This  is because the economic modeling will only account  for measures that have been fully funded, legislated or  where sufficiently detailed data exists that make them  possible to add to the modeling platform.     102  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Table 5A.8 GHG Measures Reflected in Projections (in place May 2013)  Provincial/Territorial Measures Federal Measures  Alberta • Specified Gas Emitters Program   •  Electricity Performance Standard for Coal Fired Generation  •  Residential Building Code changes for energy efficiency (EnerGuide-80 or R-2000  level) applying to all provinces  •  Renewable Fuel Content Regulation  • Adoption of the National Energy Code for Buildings of Canada 2011 or its equivalent,  by all provinces and territories, except Northwest Territories, by 2016  •  Commercial appliance efficiency improvements (excludes lighting)  •  Residential appliance efficiency improvements. Includes refrigeration, freezers,  ranges and dryers  •  Industry Expansion of Canadian Industry Program for Energy Conservation  including International Organization for Standardization (ISO) and Canadian  Standards Association (CSA) certification programs  •  Light Duty Vehicles 1 (LDV-1) GHG emissions standards for the light-duty vehicle  model years 2011 to 2016  •  Light Duty Vehicles 2 (LDV-2) GHG emissions standards increases stringency for  model years 2017 to 2025  •  Heavy Duty Vehicles (HDV) Regulation for greater stringency on GHG emissions  from heavy-duty truck vehicle years 2014 to 2018  •  The Pulp and Paper Green Transformation Program, to improve environmental  performance of mills including GHG emissions reductions. The program ended in  2012 but will result in on-going emission reductions  •  Public Transit Subsidy income tax credit for transit passes and subsidy to all levels  of government to improve public transit service in communities. Includes standards  for renewable fuels  • Incandescent Lighting Phase-Out Program  British Columbia • B.C. Carbon Tax •  Renewable fuels tax exemptions for minimum   ethanol and biodiesel content  • B.C. Emissions Offsets Regulations • Landfill Gas Management Regulation  Manitoba •  Renewable fuels provincial tax credit/exemption   for minimum ethanol content  Nova Scotia •  Renewable Portfolio Standard for electric   generation • Electric demand-side management policies •  Solid Waste Management Resources   Management Strategy  Ontario •  Ontario Residential Electric Peak Savings (Time-  of-Use pricing) •  Ontario Feed-In Tariff Program •  Provincial Commercial Building Code changes   for process efficiency improvements •  Landfill Gas Regulation (O. Reg. 216/08 and   217/08) •  Ontario Coal Phase-Out Program  Quebec •  Renewable fuels tax reimbursement/income tax   credit •  Quebec and California cap and trade system •  Quebec’s Carbon Levy •  Landfill Gas Regulation  Saskatchewan •  Renewable fuels distributor tax credit for ethanol   produced and consumed in the province    103  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Canadian provinces and territories have committed  to taking action on climate change through various  programs and regulations. Environment Canada’s  emissions reduction modeling does not take these  generalized targets into consideration in the emissions  projections modeling within this report. Instead,   individual policies that are brought forward as methods  to attain the provincial targets may be included in the  modeling platform if they meet the criteria discussed  above. Table 5A.9 lists the emissions reductions targets  announced by each province or territory.  Table 5A.9 Announced GHG Reduction Targets of Provincial/Territorial Governments  Province/Territory Target  Newfoundland and Labrador 10% below 1990 by 2020  Prince Edward Island 10% below 1990 by 2020 and 75% to 85% below 1990 levels in the long-term  Nova Scotia 10% below 1990 by 2020  New Brunswick 10% below 1990 by 2020  Quebec 20% below 1990 by 2020  Ontario 15% below 1990 by 2020 and 80% below 1990 by 2050  Manitoba 15% below 2005 by 2020 and 50% to 80% below 2005 by 2050  Saskatchewan 20% below 2006 by 2020  Alberta 50 Mt below business as usual by 2020 and 200 Mt below business as usual by 2050  British Columbia 33% below 2007 by 2020 and 80% below 2007 by 2050  Nunavut No Territorial target announced  Yukon 20% below 2009 by 2015 and carbon neutral by 2020   Northwest Territories No Territorial target announced    104  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Annex 2  The Contribution of the Land Use, Land-use  Change and Forestry Sector  Over the last two decades, important changes have  occurred in land management practices in Canada  that have reduced GHG emissions or enhanced their  removals from the atmosphere. For example, farmers  have increasingly adopted no-till practices and reduced  field area under summerfallow, which contribute to a  higher rate of soil carbon sequestration.   Beneficial management practices have also been  adopted by the forestry sector, primarily as a result of  provincial policies and/or regulations in their areas of  jurisdiction. Although these policies and regulations are  aimed broadly at improving sustainability in the sector,  they can also reduce carbon emissions and increase  sequestration. They include: relatively more reliance  on tree planting as opposed to natural regeneration;  more use of improved seed stock for tree planting; more  and faster rehabilitation of harvest roads and landings;  and adjustments in management practices to reduce  soil compaction. Recently, economic factors have had  a large impact on the forest sector: it experienced a  43% decline in harvest levels between the peak year of  2004 and 2009, resulting in the lowest harvest since  1975—although harvests recovered somewhat in 2010  and 2011.12  Each subsector’s contribution to Canada’s 2020  emissions reduction target is estimated using an  accounting approach that compares projected estimates  for 2020 emissions/removals to 2005 emissions/ removals, with the exception of Forest Land Remaining  Forest Land, where 2020 projected estimates for  emissions/removals are compared to a 2020 Reference  Level13 (see Table 5.19). The Reference Level approach  is currently seen as the most scientifically-credible  approach to account for emissions and removals  from Canada’s managed forests considering Canada’s  inventory methodology and forest structure.   The Durban agreement for Land Use, Land-use Change  and Forestry (LULUCF) included Canada’s proposed  Reference Level for the 2013 to 2020 period.14 As  Canada’s target is focused on the single year of 2020, it  is the 2020 value from the Reference Level time series  that is used here. Canada’s work to analyze alternative  accounting approaches is ongoing, and changes to the  accounting approach may be made in future.   Contribution of the LULUCF Sector to 2020  Projected Emissions On the basis of current estimates, the projected  contribution of the LULUCF sector to achieving the  2020 target is 28 Mt CO2eq. This estimated contribution  may change as subsector projections are refined over  time as a result of further analysis, new data, updated  projections, or a change in accounting approaches.  In particular, there remains uncertainty with respect  to future approaches that may be included under a  new climate change agreement that would be applied  after 2020. Actions aimed at reducing emissions or  increasing removals in this sector will also change  this measurement.   Subsector Emissions Trends and Methodologies Further detail on Canadian emissions trends and  methodologies used are provided for each of the  subsectors below: • Forest Land Remaining Forest Land. As per   Table 5.19, this subsector dominates the expected  LULUCF contribution in 2020. Harvesting is the  human activity with the most impact on emissions  in this subsector. As already noted, harvest levels  reached a 35-year low in 2009 before recovering  somewhat in 2010 and 2011. However, current  projections suggest that harvests will remain below  the recent average historical level used in estimating  the Reference Level. The projected value for the  Forest Land Remaining Forest Land contribution in     105  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  2020 is derived by using these projected harvests to  determine the expected sink in 2020 and comparing  that to the Reference Level. Both the projected sink  in 2020 and the Reference Level are derived using  an assumption of no natural disturbances from 2012  onward except a low background level expected to  occur every year.  • Land Converted to Forest Land. Given the low  levels of new forest creation, it is not possible to  identify any trends in the activity except that recent  new forest creation appears to be lower than in the  1990s. Data on creation of new forests for 2009 to  2011 are not available. Therefore it was assumed that  the 2000 to 2008 average rate in each ecozone in  each province would be the business-as-usual rate in  the future, totaling about 2,700 hectares per year for  Canada as a whole.   • Cropland Remaining Cropland.15 Soil carbon  sequestration in Canada has increased from a rate  of 2 Mt CO2 eq per year in 1990 to 13 Mt CO2 eq  per year in 2011 (NIR 2013). This increase has been  driven by several factors such as: increased uptake  of no-till, reduced use of summerfallow and  changing crop patterns. Estimates indicate that  the rate of sequestration is expected to decline to  9 Mt CO2 eq from 2011 to 2020 as a result of the soil   sink approaching equilibrium and limited scope for  additional practice adoption. For example, on most  of the land where using no-till makes economic  sense, that practice is already in use and it is assumed  that there will be little additional uptake. Also, a  significant portion of the land already in no-till will  have been in that practice for 20 years or more by  2020 and therefore approaching or at equilibrium.  The rate of sequestration is expected to continue  decreasing after 2020.  • Forest Land Converted to Other Land Categories.  Current forest conversion rates in Canada are  estimated at 46,000 hectares per year, down from  64,000 hectares per year in 1990. Part of the emissions  due to forest conversion occurs immediately upon  the conversion event, while the remaining emissions  take place over subsequent years and decades and  are related to the rate of decay of forest material.  Forest conversion emissions are projected to decline  slightly to 2020 relative to 2005. The circumstances  surrounding forest conversion activities in Canada  are extremely varied and involve a wide range of  economic drivers (agriculture, urban expansion,  resource extraction—Figure 5A.3). As such, future  projections will be adjusted as a result of revised  conditions for each of these sectors.   Figure 5A.3 Main Drivers of Forest Conversion in 2005 and Projected  for 2020*  * These charts include all emissions from forest conversion since 1970,  except for conversion to harvested peat sites (Peatlands) included  in historical estimates for 2005 but not available for the projections  to 2020.  Note that the “Built-up” section includes Industrial and commercial  buildings, urban and municipal expansion, and recreation.    106  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Annex 3  Modeling and Methodological Differences from  Canada’s 5th National Communication  Canada’s 5th National Communications included  projections of GHG to the year 2012 in-line with our  reporting requirements under the Kyoto Protocol  Implementation Act (KPIA), which are no longer  applicable. Canada’s reporting obligations under the  United Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC) now require preparing emission  projections to 2020 and 2030. The projections in  this report use the same model as Canada used  for the 5th National Communications—the E3MC  model—as well as the same modeling methodology.  Differences arise through updated input data (e.g.,  historical GHG emissions, gross domestic product  (GDP), etc.), updated assumptions about domestic  and international evolving energy markets, and  the inclusion of current government measures. Of  particular importance is that projections in the 5th  National Communication included the expected impact  of the Clean Air Regulatory Agenda that was ultimately  not implemented. This 6th National Communication  report includes new provincial and federal government  measures (e.g., Federal Electricity Performance  Standard for coal fired generation).   During the expert review process by the UNFCCC in  2011, Canada submitted Canada’s Emissions Trends  Report 201116 which was subsequently publicly released  and contained its national GHG projections to 2020.  Differences in modeling and economic assumptions  used in the development of the projections submitted  during the 2011 review process versus the development  of this year’s submissions are outlined below. These  modeling and assumption adjustments impact  historical and projected emissions data as highlighted  in various sections of the report. Select adjustments are  outlined below: • Improvements in the oil and gas sectors include the   ability to more accurately model energy demand  and unit characteristics of cogeneration units,   as well as updates to intensity and production  expectations. Previously, inefficient facilities were  assumed to increase production into the future in  order to meet increased demand. A revision to the  production method now holds existing facilities’  production constant at the 2011 level and allocates  new production to a generic new facility. Energy  intensity was increased substantially and calibrated  to an IHS Cambridge Energy Research Associates  report resulting in an approximate increase of 3 Mt in  primary oil sands emissions.  • Improvements in the transportation sector include  an update to data sources and a refinement of  efficiency assumptions. The new source originates  from mandatory manufacturer reporting as required  under the light-duty vehicle regulations starting in  model year 2011. The degradation factor for converting  lab-tested to on-road fuel efficiency has been changed  from 85% to 80%.  • Changes in the Agriculture Sector reflect revised  emissions data and fuel use assumptions. Updates  to the exogenous agriculture module were  provided by Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada  using 2011 census data, affecting future livestock  production projections.  • The Emission-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Sector  modeling was updated based on consultation with  experts, and included some refinements in fuel  and emissions allocation. Industrial gross output  projections for select subsectors have been revised  based on consultation with Environment Canada’s  engineers and sector specialists.  • Improvements in the Electricity Sector incorporated  updated historical data and a revised outlook on future  projects. The adjustment to historical data included  adding previously missing units and correcting fuel  usage for existing units. Projects that have been placed  on hold due to economic circumstances have been  taken out of the reference case.     107  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Canada acknowledges the important role of the  LULUCF Sector in addressing climate change and, as in  the 2012 Emissions Trends Report, has placed a focus on  this sector in the development and analysis of emissions  projections to 2020. Some estimates in LULUCF  contributions have changed due to the following  technical adjustments implemented in 2013: • Classification of LULUCF subsectors has changed   in order to maintain alignment between our  LULUCF accounting and our Inventory reporting  to the UNFCCC. Forest Management is replaced by  “Forest Land Remaining Forest Land”; Cropland  Management is replaced by “Cropland Remaining  Cropland”; Deforestation is replaced by “Forest  Land Converted to Other Land Categories”; and  Afforestation is replaced by “Land Converted to Forest  Land”. As noted in the LULUCF section of Chapter 5:  Projections and the Total Effects of Policies and   Measures, this has implications for land-use change  reporting.  • Projections have been remodeled to take into account  updated information and improved modeling  consistent with Canada’s most recent (2013) NIR. New  sources of information include the 2011 Census of  Agriculture and updated historical data on harvests,  fire and insect infestations.   • Reference Level used for the managed forest (Forest  Land Remaining Forest Land) has been updated from  Canada’s original Reference Level included in the  Durban Agreement to, reflect the updated data and  methodologies used to produce the NIR 2013, and the  shift to accounting based on Forest Land Remaining  Forest Land. The impact of this technical correction  on the Reference Case is primarily due to the  inclusion of the actual level of natural disturbances  that occurred in the years 2010 and 2011.   Annex 4 Alternate Emissions Scenarios Emissions projections depend on a number of economic  and energy variables which make them subject to  uncertainty and thus, most appropriately viewed as  a range of plausible outcomes. Future developments  in technologies and the rate of resource extraction  cannot be foreseen with certainty. Typically, these  key uncertainties are addressed through examining  alternative cases. The sensitivity analysis presented  here focuses on two key uncertainties: future  economic growth and the evolution of world oil prices  and their impacts on macroeconomic growth and  energy consumption.  In Table 5A.10, the emissions outcomes of these  alternative cases are presented independently and in  various combinations. These alternative cases explore  the interaction of energy markets and economic  growth, and their impact on emissions, under a range  of assumptions.   Under a scenario where oil prices are assumed to be  27% higher than in the reference case in 2020 and   annual average growth in GDP between 2010 and 2020  is expected to be 2.6% (compared with 2.2% in the  reference scenario), emissions could reach 773 Mt CO2  eq including the contribution from LULUCF in 2020.17  Alternatively, under a scenario with slower GDP growth  (average growth of 2.0% between 2010 and 2020) and  lower world oil prices (29% lower than the reference  case in 2020), emissions could be as low as 686 Mt CO2  eq including the LULUCF contribution in 2020.   In the baseline scenario, the world oil price is projected  to grow from $79/bbl in U.S. dollars ($US) in 2010 to  $102/bbl ($US) in 2020. A higher-price scenario, in  which 2020 prices are $130/bbl ($US), is used alone  and in combination with different GDP growth  assumptions. A low-price scenario is also included  where the world oil price remains fairly stable at $72/bbl  ($US) after 2015. These high and low oil price extremes  were provided by the National Energy Board as the  probable range of future energy prices used within  their analysis.     108  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  The fast and slow GDP extremes were derived by  applying the assumptions from the 2013 Annual Energy  Outlook by the U.S. Energy Information Agency for  fast and slow economic growth for population and  productivity in the macroeconomic framework of the  model. Also applied were high and low population  growth assumptions for Canada, based on impacts  derived from Statistics Canada’s 2010 population  growth projections for high and low population growth.  The fast and slow GDP growths were then solved  endogenously within the model.  Figure 5A.4 illustrates how differing price and GDP  growth assumptions in various combinations might  impact Canadian GHG emissions through 2020.   GHG emissions in the fast-GDP-growth scenario are  about 11% higher in 2020 than 2010 levels. As economic  activity increases, there will unquestionably be a higher  demand for energy and a corresponding increase in  emissions. In contrast, emissions are expected to be   much lower if the Canadian economy grows at a slower  pace. When combined with high oil prices, emissions  could be 16% higher than 2010 levels by 2020. Expected  growth of the economy is the primary driver of expected  emission growth. Any variation in this path will lead  to a different set of projections about expected future  emissions. Table 5A.10 quantifies the results of the  full range of emissions alternatives illustrated in the  above figure.  Table 5A.10 Sensitivity Analysis: Change in GDP and/or World Oil/ Natural Gas Prices in Mt CO2 eq with LULUCF in 2020  Cases  GHG  Emissions in   2020  GHG  Emissions  Change  Between  2005 and   2020  Slow GDP 726 211  Fast GDP 749 12  Low World Oil Prices 718 219  High World Oil Prices 742 5  Slow GDP—Low World Oil Prices 686 251  Slow GDP—High World Oil  Prices  730 27  Fast GDP—Low World Oil Prices 745 8  Fast GDP—High World Oil Prices 773 36  Reference 734 23  Sensitivity Results 686 to 773 36 to 251  Figure 5A.4 Projected GHG Emissions Under Full Range of  Alternative Economic Assumptions (excluding LULUCF)    109  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  The growth in emissions is expected to slow down as  the world price of oil increases since overall economic  activity would decline as the price of oil rose. However,  the increase in price drives higher production in  the Oil and Gas Sector which generally offsets this  effect. Emissions from the Oil and Gas Sector in  the high world oil price case rise by 71 Mt from 2010  to 2020 whereas they only rise by 48 Mt in the low  price scenario.   The range in total projected emissions from all  scenarios rises as we extend our projection further into  the future. As a result of the assumptions made about  the growth in Canadian GDP and the future world oil  price, in 2020 the range is roughly 87 Mt.   Under all scenarios over the forecast period, emissions  are expected to grow the fastest in oil sands extraction  and upgrading. Electricity generation and the  conventional oil and gas sectors are projected to  see an emissions decrease. Emission changes in the  transportation sector show a deceleration from the  long-term growth trend in all scenarios.   The oil sands sector displays the fastest growth in  emissions, but it also displays the greatest range of  uncertainty about future emissions depending on the  assumptions used. Emissions could rise by as much  as 74 Mt—or as little as 58 Mt—over the 2005 to  2020 period. The baseline scenario projects oil sands  emissions would increase by 67 Mt.   Annex 5 Methodology for Development of Emissions Scenarios  The scenarios developed to support Environment  Canada’s GHG emissions projections derive from a  series of plausible assumptions regarding, among  others, population and economic growth, prices,  demand and supply of energy, and the evolution of  energy efficiency technologies. The projections also  assume no further government actions to address GHG  emissions beyond those already in place as of May 2013.   The emissions projections presented in this report  cannot be viewed as a forecast or prediction of  emissions at a future date. Rather, this report presents  a simple projection of the current structure and policy  context into the future, without attempting to account  for the inevitable but as yet unknown changes that will  occur in government policy, energy supply, demand and  technology, or domestic and international economic  and political events.   The emissions projections have been developed in  line with generally recognized best practices. They  incorporate IPCC standards for estimating GHG  emissions across different fuels and processes, rely  on outside expert views and the most up-to-date data  available for key drivers such as economic growth,   energy prices, and energy demand and supply, and  apply an internationally recognized energy and  macroeconomic modeling framework in the estimation  of emissions and economic interactions. Finally, the  methodology used to develop the projections and  underlying assumptions has been subject to peer review  by leading external experts on economic modeling  and GHG emissions projections, as well as vetted with  key stakeholders.  The approach to developing Canada’s GHG emissions  projections involves two main features: • Using the most up-to-date statistics on GHG   emissions and energy use, and sourcing key  assumptions from the best available public and  private expert sources.   • Developing scenarios of emissions projections using  a detailed, proven Energy, Emissions and Economy  Model for Canada (E2MC).  Up-to-date Data and Key Assumptions Each year, Environment Canada updates its models  using the most recent data available from Statistics  Canada’s Report on Energy Supply and Demand in  Canada and Canada’s NIR. For these projections, the     110  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  most recent historical data available were for 2011.  Environment Canada’s projections and historical data  in the NIR are aligned, based on economic sector.   In addition to the most recent historical information,  the projections are based on expert-derived  expectations of key drivers (e.g., world oil price).  Projections are based on the latest energy and economic  data, with key modeling assumptions aligned with  Government of Canada views: • National Energy Board views on energy prices and   large-scale energy projects • Economic growth from Finance Canada’s June 2013   Update of Economic and Fiscal Projections • Statistics Canada’s population growth projections  Even with the benefit of external expert assumptions,  there is considerable uncertainty surrounding energy  price and economic growth assumptions, particularly over  the medium- to long-term. As such, a range of emissions  is presented representing a series of sensitivity analyses.  These cases were based on high and low GDP growth as  well as high and low oil prices and production levels.  The Without Measures Scenario In 2013, the “without measures” scenario has been fully  remodeled to take into account all of the structural  changes occurring within the model and also to update  assumptions about key drivers. Moreover, a refined  methodology is being used to ensure that the drivers  are being reflected in accordance with the description  of the scenario.   The “without measures” scenario is constructed by  beginning the model’s forecasting mode in 2006,  configured to exclude any government policies  implemented after 2005. Historical macroeconomic  data are used between 2006 and 2011, and wholesale  energy prices throughout the entire projection period  are kept the same as those used in the reference scenario.  Changes in electricity-generation-sector energy use  resulting from non-policy-driven factors, including  nuclear refurbishment or historical weather-related   fluctuations in hydroelectric dam capacities, are reflected  in the “without measures” scenario. Exogenous oil sands  emissions are derived from 2005 emissions intensities.  Exogenous agriculture emissions from livestock and crop  production are maintained at reference scenario levels  throughout the entire projection period. All other sectors  belonging to Transportation, Oil and Gas, Buildings,  Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Industries, and  Waste and Others are derived from the highest of either  the 2005 or 2011 emissions intensity, subject to a limit of  no greater than 30% more than the value in 2011.  Energy, Emissions and Economy Model for Canada  The projections presented in this chapter were  generated from Environment Canada’s E3MC model.   E3MC has two components: Energy 2020, which  incorporates Canada’s energy supply and demand  structure; and the in-house macroeconomic model of  the Canadian economy.  Energy 2020 is an integrated, multi-region, multi- sector North American model that simulates the supply  of, price of, and demand for all fuels. The model can  determine energy output and prices for each sector, both  in regulated and unregulated markets. It simulates how  such factors as energy prices and government measures  affect the choices that consumers and businesses make  when they buy and use energy. The model’s outputs  include changes in energy use, energy prices, GHG  emissions, investment costs, and possible cost savings  from measures, in order to identify the direct effects  stemming from GHG reduction measures. The resulting  savings and investments from Energy 2020 are then used  as inputs into the macroeconomic model.  The in-house macroeconomic model is used to  examine consumption, investment, production, and  trade decisions in the whole economy. It captures  the interaction among industries, as well as the  implications for changes in producer prices, relative  final prices, and income. It also factors in government  fiscal balances, monetary flows, and interest and     111  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  exchange rates. More specifically, the macroeconomic  model incorporates 133 industries at a provincial and  territorial level. It also has an international component  to account for exports and imports, covering about  100 commodities. The macroeconomic model projects  the direct impacts on the economy’s final demand,  output, employment, price formation, and sectoral  income that result from various policy choices.  These, in turn, permit an estimation of the effect of  climate change policy and related impacts on the  national economy.  E3MC develops projections using a market-based  approach to energy analysis. For each fuel and  consuming sector, the model balances energy supply  and demand, accounting for economic competition  among the various energy sources. This ensures  consistent results among the sectors and regions.  The model can be operated in a forecasting mode or  an analytical mode. In forecasting mode, the model   generates an annual energy and emissions outlook  to 2050. In analytical mode, it assesses broad policy  options, specific programs or regulations, new  technologies, or other assumptions.  The model’s primary outputs are tables showing energy  consumption, production and prices by fuel type, year  and region. The model also identifies many of the key  macroeconomic indicators (e.g., GDP or unemployment)  and produces a coherent set of all GHG emissions   (such as CO2, CH3 and N2O) by sector and by province.  Figure 5A.5 shows the general structure of E3MC. The  component modules of E3MC represent the individual  supply, demand, and conversion sectors of domestic  energy markets, and also include the macroeconomic  module. In general, the modules interact through  values representing the prices of the energy delivered  to the consuming sectors and the quantities of end-use  energy consumption.   Figure 5A.5 Energy, Emissions and Economy Model for Canada    112  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  To develop this projection of energy use and related  emissions, it was necessary to provide a view of the  Canadian economy to 2020. The level and composition  of energy supply and demand, and the resulting GHG  emissions, are determined based on many assumptions  that influence the overall size and growth rate of  the economy.  Treatment of Interaction Effects Estimates of the net impact of government measures  incorporated into the modeling scenarios need to take  into account major interaction and behavioural affects.  The analytical approach permitted by E3MC addresses  these key modeling challenges:  Additionality This issue relates to the question of what would have  happened without the initiative in question. Problems  of additionality arise when the stated emissions  reductions do not reflect the difference in emissions  between equivalent scenarios with and without the  initiative in question. This will be the case if stated  emissions reductions from an initiative have already  been included in the reference case: emissions  reductions will effectively be double-counted in the  absence of appropriate adjustments. The E3MC model  controls for additionality by basing its structure on  incremental or marginal decision-making. The E3MC  model assumes a specific energy efficiency or emission  intensity profile at the sector and end-use point   (e.g., space heating, lighting, or auxiliary power). Under  the E3MC modeling philosophy, if the initiative in  question were to increase the efficiency of a furnace,  for example, only the efficiency of a new furnace would  be changed. The efficiency of older furnaces would not  change unless those furnaces are retired and replaced  with higher-efficiency ones. As such, any change in  the model is incremental to what is reflected in the  business-as-usual assumptions.  Free ridership  A related problem, free ridership, arises when stated  reductions include the results of behaviour that would   occur regardless of the policy. This can occur when  subsidies are paid to all purchasers of an item   (e.g., a high-efficiency furnace), regardless of whether  they purchased the item because of the subsidy. Those  who would have purchased the product regardless are  termed free riders. In the E3MC model, the behaviour  of free riders has already been accounted for in the  reference case. Thus, their emissions are not counted  toward the impact of the policy. Instead, the E3MC  model counts only the incremental take-up of the  emissions-reducing technology.  The rebound effect This describes the increased use of a more efficient  product resulting from the implied decrease in the  price of its use. For example, a more efficient car  is cheaper to drive and so people may drive more.  Emissions reductions will generally be overestimated  by between 5% and 20% unless estimates account  for increased consumption because of the rebound  effect. Within the model, we have mechanisms for fuel  choice, process efficiency, device efficiency, short-term  budget constraints, and cogeneration, which all react  to changes in energy and emissions costs in different  time frames.18 All of these structures work to simulate  the rebound effect. In the example above, the impact  of extra kilometres that may be driven as a result of  improved fuel efficiency is automatically netted out of  the associated emissions-reduction estimates.   Policy interaction effects This describes impacts on the overall effectiveness of  Canada’s emissions-reduction measures when they  interact with each other. A policy package containing  more than one measure or policy would ideally take  into account these impacts in order to understand the  true contribution that the policy package is making (in  this case, to emission reductions).   E3MC is a comprehensive and integrated model  focusing on the interactions between sectors and  policies. In the demand sectors, the fuel choice, process  efficiency, device efficiency, and level of self-generation     113  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  are all integrally combined in a consistent manner. The  model includes detailed equations to ensure that all  the interactions between these structures are simulated  with no loss of energy or efficiency. For example, the  electric generation sector responds to the demand for  electricity from the energy demand sectors, meaning  that any policy to reduce electricity demand in the  consumer sectors will impact the electricity generation  sector. The model accounts for emissions in the  electricity generation sector as well as for emissions in  the consumer demand sectors. As the electricity sector  reduces its emissions intensity, policies designed to  reduce electricity demand in the consumer sectors will  cause less of an emissions reduction. The natural gas  and oil supply sectors similarly respond to the demands  from the consumer sectors, including the demands  for refined petroleum products for transportation.  The model also simulates the export of products by  supply sectors.  Taken as a whole, the E3MC model provides a detailed  representation of technologies that produce goods and  services throughout the economy, and can simulate, in a  realistic way, capital stock turnover and choices among  technologies. The model also includes a representation  of equilibrium feedbacks, such that supply and  demand for goods and services adjust to reflect policy.  Given its comprehensiveness, E3MC covers all the  GHG emissions sources, including those unrelated to  energy use.  Simulation of capital stock turnover As a technology vintage model, E3MC tracks the  evolution of capital stocks over time through retirements,  retrofits, and new purchases, in which consumers and  businesses make sequential acquisitions with limited  foresight about the future. This is particularly important  for understanding the implications of alternative time  paths for emissions reductions.   The model calculates energy costs (and emissions) for  each energy service in the economy, such as heated   commercial floor space or person-kilometres traveled.  In each period, capital stocks are retired according to  an age-dependent function (although the retrofitting of  unretired stocks is possible, if warranted by changing  economic conditions). Demand for new stocks grows  or declines depending on the initial exogenous  forecast of economic output (i.e., a forecast that is  external to the model and not explained by it) and  the subsequent interplay of energy supply–demand  with the macroeconomic module. A model simulation  iterates between energy supply–demand and the  macroeconomic module until there is a convergence.  The global convergence criterion is set at 0.1% between  iterations. This convergence procedure is repeated for  each year over the simulation period.   The E3MC model simulates the competition of  technologies at each energy service node in the  economy, based on a comparison of their cost and  some technology-specific controls, such as a maximum  market share limit in cases where a technology is  constrained by physical, technical or regulatory means  from capturing all of a market. The technology choice  simulation reflects the financial costs as well as the  consumer and business preferences, revealed by real- world technology acquisition behaviour.  Model Limitations While E3MC is a sophisticated analytical tool, no  model can fully capture the complicated interactions  associated with given policy measures between and  within markets or between firms and consumers.  Unlike computable general equilibrium models,  however, the E3MC model does not fully equilibrate  government budgets and the markets for employment  and investment. That is, the modeling results reflect  rigidities such as unemployment and government  surpluses and deficits. Furthermore, the model, as used  by Environment Canada, does not generate changes  in nominal interest rates and exchange rates, as would  occur under a monetary policy response to a major  economic event.    114  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Annex 6  Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry  Modeling Methodology   LULUCF projections have been modeled separately  from the other sectors. Each LULUCF subsector has  been projected using a different model/methodology  as determined by the relevant Government department  subsector experts.   Forest Land Converted to Other Land Categories  (Provided by Science and Risk Management  Directorate, Environment Canada)  Emissions associated with forest conversion to other  land use are reported in Canada’s 2013 NIR under the  LULUCF sector. Emissions for forest conversion is not  a LULUCF reporting category, since it overlaps with  the subcategories of land converted to cropland, land  converted to wetlands and land converted to settlements;  it is nevertheless reported as a memo item in the annual  inventory submission. Emissions from forest conversion  to all land categories are estimated using a consistent  approach, further described in this section.   Historical estimates for forest land conversion were  developed based on an earth observation sampling  approach with resulting emissions impacts calculated  using the Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian Forest  Sector. These estimates take into account activity  extending back to the 1970’s and up to 2011 and were  developed by driver (agriculture, built-up, hydroelectric  development, non-renewable and renewable resource  extraction-(mining and oil and gas), renewable  resource extraction, transportation and hydroelectric  reservoirs) and end land use categories (cropland,  wetlands, settlements).   The projected estimates for forest conversion were  developed are based on a business-as-usual (BAU)  scenario of forest conversion activity for the 2011–2020  period, using the best available knowledge of drivers,  policies and practices. The sampling and estimations for  both historical and BAU are based on a sub-provincial   ecological stratification spatial framework taking into  consideration regional conditions and factors.   Emission estimates for projected forest conversion  were developed using an empirical model; model  parameters were derived by driver and ecological region  based on the relationship between areas converted and  resulting emissions as reported in the most recent NIR  submission. All emission estimates for forest conversion  use an instantaneous oxidation approach to represent  the conversion of forest to harvested wood products,  which is in keeping with the approach used for the  development of estimates for Canada’s 2013 NIR.  Forest Land Remaining Forest Land and Land  Converted to Forest Land    Canada’s National Forest Carbon Monitoring,  Accounting and Reporting System (Provided by Canadian Forest Service, Natural  Resources Canada).  Canada’s National Forest Carbon Monitoring  Accounting and Reporting System builds on  information in the National Forest Inventory and  on additional provincial and territorial forest  inventory information. Natural Resources Canada  developed and maintains the Carbon Budget Model  of the Canadian Forest Sector, a Tier 3 forest carbon  dynamics estimation tool fully consistent with the IPCC  inventory guidelines.   With the Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian Forest  Sector as its core model, the system provides annual  estimates of greenhouse gas emissions and removals as  affected by forest management, natural disturbances,  and land-use change. Natural Resources Canada,  in collaboration with the Canadian Space Agency  uses remote sensing and other data to monitor the  area annually disturbed by wildfires, and maintains  a deforestation monitoring program to estimate     115  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  the area annually affected by conversion of forest  to non-forest land uses in both the managed and  unmanaged forest area.  This system has been in place since 2006 and is  described in detail in Canada’s 2013 NIR. The system  is used to produce the projections shown here, using  assumptions about human activities in the future. This  ensures that the projections are fully consistent with  historical emission estimates.   For Forest Land Remaining Forest Land (FLFL),  projections are based on the same methodologies used  for the production of FLFL estimates for NIR 2013. As  noted above, harvesting is the human activity with  the greatest impact on this subsector. Because future  harvest levels are unknown, Canada has based its  projection on the latest available projected harvest  estimates from provincial and territorial governments.  Additionally, as the effects of future disturbances are  unknown, Canada has assumed no natural disturbances  would occur from 2012 onward, apart from a low,  background level of wildfire expected to occur each  year (based on more than 50 years of historical data).  Projected emissions from harvested wood products use  the same assumptions as used in FLFL estimates for the  2013 NIR, i.e., that the pool of harvested wood products  starts in 1990, with emissions occurring over time.   As described above, the projected contribution  from FLFL for accounting purposes is derived  using a Reference Level approach. The Reference  Level approach is an internationally accepted and  scientifically-credible approach to account for  emissions and removals from managed forests.  The Reference Level value Canada submitted to the  UNFCCC in 2011 has been updated, reflecting a process  of technical correction outlined in the Durban LULUCF  agreement,19 as well as a shift to the use of UNFCCC  inventory categories (i.e. Forest Land Remaining Forest  Land, as opposed to Forest Management). The technical  correction ensures that the Reference Level reflects the  latest updated data and methodological improvements   consistent with 2013 NIR, and is methodologically  consistent with the projection for FLFL. The component  of the technical correction with the greatest impact on  the Reference Level value is inclusion of the impacts  of fire and insect infestations in 2010 and 2011: these  impacts were not known in 2011 when the Reference  Level was first derived. However, it is important to note  that key assumptions about management originally  used in deriving the Reference Level—such as those  related to harvest rates—cannot be changed. In  particular, the Reference Level was derived using the  assumption that the historical average harvest rate in  1990–2009 would occur in 2013–2020, after recovery  from the recent major downturn in the forest sector.  This assumption has not been changed.  For Land Converted to Forest Land, projections were  based on average historical rates, consistent with  the estimates reported in the 2013 NIR. As noted  above, there is limited information available on Land  Converted to Forest Land in recent years, so projections  were based on the assumption that the 2000–2008  historical average provided the best representation of  business-as-usual in the future.   Cropland Remaining Cropland (Provided by Agriculture and Agri-Food  Canada (AAFC)).  AAFC generated estimates for Cropland remaining  Cropland (CLCL) by using two models: The Canadian  Regional Agricultural Model (CRAM) and the Canadian  Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Monitoring Accounting  and Reporting System (CanAG-MARS). CRAM was  used to estimate the resource use patterns in the  agriculture sector which were then fed into   CanAG-MARS to provide estimates of emissions/ removals from cropland remaining cropland.  CRAM is an economic model maintained by AAFC  which provides a detailed characterization of  agriculture activities in Canada. It is a static partial  equilibrium model of the Canadian agriculture sector  which operates by maximizing consumer and producer     116  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  surplus. CRAM’s features include coverage of all major  cropping activities, livestock production and some  processing, detailed provincial and/or sub-provincial  breakdown of activities and a detailed breakdown of  cropping production practices including choice of  tillage regime, use of summer fallow and stubble.   CRAM is directly calibrated to the 2011 Census of  Agriculture and all resource use patterns are the same as  what is reported in the Census for that year. As CRAM  is a static model it does not provide any information  on how the agriculture sector changes over time. In  order to estimate future resource use patterns a 2020  baseline was created where CRAM was aligned to the  crop and livestock production estimates from AAFC’s  2013 Medium Term Outlook (MTO). The 2013 MTO  provides a 10 year estimate from 2012 to 2022. Since  estimates for crop and livestock production levels are  not available for 2030 the 2020 production levels were  held constant out to 2030. The CanAG-MARS is a model  maintained by AAFC which reports on GHG sources  and sinks resulting from changes in land use and land  management practices in Canada’s agricultural sector.  The estimation procedure follows a Tier 2 methodology  under IPCC Good Practice Guidance for LULUCF. The  model quantifies the annual change in soil organic  carbon (SOC) associated with land use or land  management changes (LUMC).   The amount of organic carbon retained in soil  represents the balance between the rate of primary  production (C transfer from the atmosphere to the soil)  and SOC decomposition (C transfer from the soil to the  atmosphere). How the soil is managed can determine  whether the amount of organic carbon stored in soil is  increasing or decreasing. The estimation procedure is  based on the premise that changes in soil management   influence the rate of soil carbon gains or losses for a  period of time following a land management change  (LMC). If there was no change in land management,  then SOC is assumed to be at equilibrium and the  change in carbon stock is deemed to be zero.   Carbon emissions and removals on mineral soils are  estimated by applying country-specific, spatially  disaggregated carbon emission and removal factors  multiplied by the relevant area of land that undergoes a  management change. The carbon factor represents the  rate of change in soil C per unit area for each LMC as a  function of time since the land management change.   The 2011 and 2020 resource use patterns generated  within CRAM were combined with activity data from  past census periods dating back to 1951. Within the  CanAG-MARS model, activity data is annualized  assuming a constant rate of change between census  periods and projection years. The data is linked to soil  landscapes and annual changes in land activities are  estimated through a set of rule based mechanisms.  Factors are applied to the area of current and past  LUMC activities to generate GHG emissions/removals  for each inventory year. Since activity data for 2030  was held constant at 2020 levels, GHG data reported  for 2030 reflect emissions/removals associated with  changes in land management activities up to and  including the 2020 projection year.   Residual emissions from forest land converted to  cropland were provided by Environment Canada as  AAFC does not have the capacity to estimate some  components of this, such as the decay of woody  biomass. These estimates were combined with the  estimates generated by CRAM and CanAG-MARS and  to provide the final estimated CLCL emissions.    117  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  Annex 7 Further Sources Environment Canada produces two products that report  on greenhouse gas emissions.   1. National Inventory Report  The NIR provides Canada’s historical emissions  starting in 1990. The Report fulfills Canada’s  obligations as a signatory to the UNFCCC, to  prepare and submit an annual national greenhouse  gas inventory covering anthropogenic emissions  by sources and removals by sinks. The Report is  prepared with input from numerous experts and  scientists across Canada.   2. Canada’s Emissions Trends  Canada’s Emissions Trends is a projection of  greenhouse gas emissions tos the year 2020, at the  national, provincial and sector level. The report  is used to for a variety of purposes, including  supporting climate change policy development. The  projections are generated by an in-house integrated  energy, economy and environment modeling  platform, peer-reviewed by external experts.  Environment Canada draws also upon the National  Energy Board’s Energy Outlook as a basis for its oil  and gas sector modeling. The Outlook contains  comprehensive energy supply and demand  expectations to 2030 and includes scenarios for  all energy commodities including oil, natural gas,  natural gas liquids and electricity. Further, the Board  provides data on energy prices, factors affecting  prices and the deliverability of natural gas. Data  and projections from the National Energy Board are  incorporated into the exogenous oil and gas module  in E3MC.   References 1 EITE subsectors include mining activities, smelting and refining,   and the production and processing of industrial goods such as   chemicals, fertilizers, pulp & paper, aluminum, iron & steel and   cement.  2 Canada’s NIR 2013 provides historical emissions by IPCC sector   and by economic sector.  3 For purposes of modeling emissions projections, Environment   Canada defines the electricity sector as consisting of electricity   production from power plants whose primary purpose is to sell   electricity to the grid (i.e., to the public. This is as per the North   American Industry Classification System code that begins with   “22”). This definition does not necessarily include all electricity   production in Canada (e.g., does not include industrial electric-  ity generation that is not sold to the grid).  4 See Annex Table 5A.6 Electricity generation by fuel.  5 For its projections of HFCs, Environment Canada assumes   emissions arise from the total HFC bank (i.e., bulk imports   plus net product imports); projected emission rates from the   total bank of HFCs is assumed to remain unchanged from the   historical rates over the last three years; and bulk imports of   HFCs and net product imports of HFCs are assumed to grow at   the rate of population growth. The commercial buildings and   transportation sectors account for the largest majority of HFC   use, although recycling of refrigerants and prevention of leaks   has improved considerably.  6 While reported at the Provincial/Territorial level in Canada’s   Emissions Trends report, emissions associated with ammonia   production as well as with the consumption of PFCs and SF6   (except for electric utilities) are only reported at the national   level in Canada’s NIR. As such differences in emissions totals   may occur, if these totals are calculated by summing up provin-  cial values.  7 Although provincial and territorial governments have   announced a diverse range of measures, only measures that   could be readily modeled or have an announced regulatory or   budgetary dimension were modeled. Aspirational goals and tar-  gets that were not supported by measurable, real and verifiable   actions were not included in the projections.  8 Department of Finance Canada (2013): June 2013: Department of   Finance Private Sector Survey. Web-site http://www.fin.gc.ca/  pub/psf-psp/2013/2013-06-eng.asp, accessed 10 Sep 2013.  9 http://www.fin.gc.ca/pub/eficap-rebvpc/eficap-rebvpc-eng.pdf  10 http://www.ercb.ca/docs/products/STs/st98_current.pdf  11 For the purposes of this document, shale gas development has   been included under natural gas production. As more data   http://www.ercb.ca/docs/products/STs/st98_current.pdf http://www.fin.gc.ca/pub/eficap-rebvpc/eficap-rebvpc-eng.pdf http://www.fin.gc.ca/   118  5 PROjECTIONS AND THE TOTAL EFFECT OF POLICIES AND MEASURES  ]  and information on likely shale gas production trends become   available, consideration will be given to modeling shale gas   separately.  12 National Forestry Database Program, www.nfdp.ccfm.org  13 In accordance with the process agreed at the UNFCCC 17th   Conference of the Parties in Durban, South Africa.  14 Canada’s submission on its reference level for 2013–2020 is   described in a submission to the UNFCCC at http://unfccc.int/  bodies/awg-kp/items/5896.php  15 The land categories where changes were examined for estimat-  ing emissions beyond 2011 were: land in annual cropping, forage   production and summerfallow.  16 Canada’s first Emissions Trends report was released in 2011.  http://www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/default.asp?lang=En&xm   l=E197D5E7-1AE3-4A06-B4FC-CB74EAAAA60F  17 No sensitivity analysis was performed on the Land Use, Land-  use Change and Forestry Sector. As such, emissions from this   sector are assumed to be constant in all scenarios.  18 A shift in energy prices will cause: cogeneration to shift in the   short to medium term, device efficiency to adjust over the short   to midterm, process efficiency to adjust in the midterm, and fuel   choice to react in the mid- to long-term. The actual adjustment   times depend on the particular sector.  19 Decision 2/CMP.7, Annex paragraphs 14–15, http://unfccc.int/  resource/docs/2011/cmp7/eng/10a01.pdf#page=11  http://unfccc.int/resourcedocs/2011/cmp7/eng/10a01.pdf#page=11 http://www.ec.gc.ca/Publications/default.asp?lang=En&xm1=E197D5E7-1AE3-4Ao6-B4FC-CB74EAAAA6oF http://unfccc.int/bodies/awg-kp/items/5896.php http://www.nfdp.ccfm.org   119  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  6  Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change Impacts and  Adaptation Measures  6.1 Introduction   Canada’s climate is changing and impacts have been  observed across the country. The economic impacts  of these changes are difficult to assess, but are  likely significant.1  Adaptation helps manage risks associated with a  changing climate. It involves making adjustments  in decisions and activities because of observed or  expected changes in climate, in order to moderate  harm or take advantage of new opportunities. Examples  of adaptation measures include the development of  different building standards for areas where heavier  snowfall is expected or limiting development in coastal  areas where sea level is projected to rise.  Adaptation is a shared responsibility, with roles for all  levels of government, the private sector, communities,  and individuals. Recognition of this responsibility  is reflected in the commitments to address climate  change adaptation by federal and provincial/ territorial governments, and adaptation plans and  implementation at the municipal level. A growing   number of organizations in the private sector are also  taking steps to prepare for a changing climate.  Since the publication of Canada’s 5th National  Communication, an increase in adaptation research  and activities in Canada is evident. Understanding  of the potential impacts, as well as the adaptation  process, has improved, more groups are involved in  adaptation discussions, and a number of adaptation  measures have been implemented. Adaptation is  increasingly acknowledged as an important part of a  broader response to climate change, and it is widely  accepted that adaptation can help manage risks and  take advantage of opportunities.  This chapter provides an overview of advances in  understanding climate change impacts and progress  on adaptation in Canada since 2010. It includes a brief  description of impacts in Canada and examples of their  consequences, and outlines key government policies,  strategies, and frameworks related to adaptation. It also  provides an overview of domestic adaptation measures  and highlights Canada’s work on this issue within the  international community.  Key developments since 2010 The Government of Canada renewed and expanded its  focus on adaptation by investing $148.8 million over  five years in 10 adaptation programs and adopting the  Federal Adaptation Policy Framework (2011) to help  bring climate change issues into the mainstream of  federal decision-making.  Adaptation has been incorporated into more strategies and  plans at the provincial and territorial level, so that most  jurisdictions now have stand-alone plans which highlight  the importance of adaptation and can help focus efforts.  Municipalities have taken action to prepare for a changing  climate, including the development of adaptation   strategies, incorporating considerations of impacts and  adaptation into official plans and planning policies, and  adopting measures to reduce climate-related risks.  Progress at all levels has been encouraged by new  mechanisms developed to facilitate collaboration, shared  learning, and priority-setting on adaptation research and  action. These include the Adaptation Platform and the  Climate Change Adaptation Community of Practice.  Canada is actively engaged in the international community  to strengthen and disseminate research and science related  to the impacts of climate change to ensure that adaptation  actions are informed by the best available knowledge.    120  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  6.2 Canada’s Changing Climate  Climate change impacts in Canada are well documented  in several reports (for example, From Impacts to  Adaptation,2 in press; Climate Change 2007: Synthesis  Report;3 Paying the Price: The Economic Impacts of  Climate Change for Canada4). This section illustrates  some of these impacts by providing regional and  sectoral examples as they relate to temperature  increases and altered precipitation patterns.  6.2.1  Temperature and Precipitation Between 1948 and 2012, the annual average surface air  temperature over Canada’s landmass has warmed by  about 1.7°C, approximately twice the global average.5  While warming trends are observed consistently across  the country, stronger trends are found in the north  and west, particularly during the winter and spring.6  Northern Canada (defined from a meteorological  monitoring perspective as north of 60° latitude) has  warmed at a rate approximately two-and-a-half times  the global average since the late 1940s. An increase in  warm days and warm nights has been observed while  fewer cold nights, cold days, and frost days have been  observed across the country.7  Although more difficult to assess given the strong  regional variability in precipitation trends and its  various states (rain, freezing rain, snow, etc.), Canada  has generally become wetter in recent years. Total  annual precipitation in Canada has increased over the  period 1948–2012.8 In most of southern Canada (south  of 60° latitude), there has been a decrease in snowfall  and an increase in rainfall, consistent with warmer  temperatures. The trends in extreme precipitation have  varied across the country and no consistent changes  have been observed.9  Increases in temperature and changing precipitation  patterns have led to a wide range of impacts, including  reduced Arctic ice cover, changes in timing and amount  of surface water availability, increased evaporation con- tributing to lower levels in the Great Lakes, increased  depth and extent of permafrost thaw, shorter seasons  and decreased quality of northern ice roads, increased  loss of forests due to pests and wildfires, more frequent  droughts and flooding, and increased risks from food- borne diseases (Figure 6.1).10  Figure 6.1 Examples of climate change impacts in Canada     121  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  6.2.2  Extreme Events All regions of Canada have experienced extreme  weather events. While it is difficult to attribute  individual incidents of extreme weather to climate  change, it is expected that the frequency and severity  of extreme weather events—including heat waves,  droughts, and floods—will change as a result of  climate change.  Insured losses for weather-related claims in Canada  have been near or above $1 billion in each year from  2009 to 2012. In 2011, insured losses hit $1.7 billion,  while insured losses in 2012 totalled $1 billion.  Insurance claims resulting from water and wind  damage caused by severe weather make up more than  half of all property insurance claims in Canada, and  are now responsible for more claims than damages  caused by fire.11  Extreme weather events can cause disruptions to  critical infrastructure, including water treatment  and distribution systems, energy generation and  transmission, and transportation systems. This can  lead to increased maintenance and insurance costs,  decreased productivity due to damaged transportation  services and infrastructure, and rebuilding costs.  For example, in a two-hour period on July 8, 2013,  126 millimetres of rain fell in the Greater Toronto  Area, the amount of average precipitation the region  receives for the month of July. According to the  Insurance Bureau of Canada, this was one of the most  expensive natural disasters in Ontario, with estimated  insured property losses of more than $850 million.12  In June 2013, heavy rainfall in parts of Alberta led to  catastrophic flooding that affected several communities  in the southwestern portion of the province.13 32 states  of local emergency were declared, and more than  100,000 people were displaced throughout the region.  The Government of Alberta estimated that the cost of  the flooding would likely exceed $5 billion.14  6.2.3  Arctic Sea Ice Changes in sea ice in the Canadian Arctic resulted  in record low ice coverage in both the northern  and southern routes of the Northwest Passage in  September 2012 with less than half of the September  average.15 Reductions in Arctic sea ice could lead to new  opportunities for mining exploration and development  in northern Canada, including improved access to  resources and new transportation options.16 However,  there are also challenges associated with operating in  the Arctic environment, including issues related to  environmental safeguards, marine navigation hazards,  access to uncharted and poorly charted or sensitive  areas, and poor weather forecasting.   6.2.4  Permafrost Permafrost temperatures have risen by up to 2°C  over the last 20–30 years,17 and the southern limit of  permafrost has retreated northward; for example by  130 kilometres during the past 50 years in northern  Quebec.18 Warming permafrost and increased thaw  depth have a number of negative consequences for  northern Canada, including increased settlement and  reduced ground strength under infrastructure projects,  changes in drainage leading to expansion or loss of  wetlands and lakes, risks to existing waste containment,  and increased erosion rates.  6.2.5  Coastal Zones Climate change-related risks to coastal areas in  Canada include coastal inundation, increased storm- surge flooding, and shoreline erosion. These impacts  are primarily related to changes in sea level, sea ice  cover, and the frequency and severity of storms, and  additionally will be highly variable on regional and local  scales. Coastal waste sites, as well as archaeological  and heritage sites, are becoming increasingly exposed,  threatening contamination of people and wildlife  and loss of cultural resources. Contaminated marine  resources may also become an issue for some coastal  Inuit and First Nations communities that depend on  marine resources for food, impacting their health, food  and cultural security, and cost of living. Large coastal     122  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  cities such as Vancouver may be impacted by rising  sea levels.19  6.2.6 Transportation Infrastructure Changing temperature and precipitation patterns  are affecting transportation infrastructure across the  country. In southern areas, extreme heat contributes  to increased pavement deterioration and buckling of  railway lines.20 In northern Canada, warmer winters  and resulting permafrost degradation affect the  viability of seasonal roads and airport runways. Coastal  infrastructure is also negatively affected by changing  sea levels and increased storminess while operations  on inland waterways are affected by lower water levels.  These changes will impact the costs associated with  maintaining and operating transportation infrastructure.  6.2.7  Agriculture For agriculture, climate change impacts may result  in longer and warmer growing seasons that allow  higher-value, warmer-weather crops to be grown, as  well as longer grazing seasons for livestock.21 However,  increased temperatures could also have negative  impacts on agriculture, including decreased water  availability in some regions, impaired livestock health  and productivity, reduced dairy production, and  reduced crop production.22 In addition, there will likely  be new pests, invasive species and diseases, and more  severe outbreaks of current ones.23  6.3 Building the Knowledge Foundation  Knowledge of climate change impacts and the potential  for associated risks is the foundation for organizations  to protect assets and resources and to strengthen  planning and decision-making. The development  of programs, policies, and actions related to climate  change impacts and adaptation are commonly informed  by research and different types of assessments,  including vulnerability, risk, and science assessments.  Efforts in Canada concerning impacts and adaptation  assessment have not been limited to vulnerability  assessment, though a number of sectoral or site-specific   vulnerability assessments have been undertaken, some  of which are highlighted in section 6.6 of this chapter.  Since Canada’s 5th National Communication, more  Canadian governments have completed some form  of climate change assessment focusing on their  own organization or specific sector. These research  and assessment activities have contributed to the  development of decision-support tools and have  revealed lessons learned that have supported  the advancement of adaptation. Expanding the  knowledge base continues to be an important part  of understanding the process of adaptation, as well  as implementation of specific adaptation measures  in Canada.  Natural Resources Canada published a national-scale  scientific assessment on the impacts of climate change  in Canada in 2008, titled From Impacts to Adaptation:  Canada in a Changing Climate.24 Through a regional  approach, this assessment highlighted adaptation  actions to minimize risks and take advantage of  opportunities associated with a changing climate, with  a focus on human and managed systems. Since its  publication, it has served as an authoritative reference  to inform adaptation decision-making at various levels  (e.g., national, regional, sectoral).  Natural Resources Canada is developing an update  to this report, to be released in 2014. While the 2008  assessment took a regional approach, the update takes  a sector-based approach which focuses on natural  resources (e.g., forestry, mining, and energy), food  production, industry, the natural environment and  biodiversity, human health, and infrastructure. In  addition to this report, sectoral assessments focused  on marine coasts, transportation, and mining will be  completed by 2016.25  Federal departments have undertaken assessments to  identify climate change risks and adaptation measures  in their areas of responsibility, including Fisheries  and Oceans Canada (2005), Health Canada (2008),     123  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada  (2010), and Natural Resources Canada (2010).26 Fisheries  and Oceans Canada began a new risk assessment  process in 2011, examining where its own infrastructure  is most vulnerable to changing conditions.27 The  information gathered through this exercise will inform  decision-making on, for example, incorporating  sea level rise considerations into new breakwater  designs and dredging needs arising from increased  sedimentation and erosion.  Provinces have also undertaken climate risk  assessments. For example, the Province of Alberta  has undertaken a climate risk assessment process for  selected departments based on the direct or indirect  interface of their core business functions with current or  potential future climate impacts. Adaptation strategies  have been developed for each of these departments  as part of the process, and the results of the risk  assessment process are informing the development of  a provincial climate change adaptation strategy. The  Government of Nova Scotia has also undertaken climate  risk assessments with a particular emphasis on coastal  and inland flood-risks, erosion hazards, and the impact  on infrastructure (e.g., dykelands, railways, roads,  culverts, bridges, and buildings). New flood risk and  vulnerability assessments are continuing through the  province’s new Flood Mitigation Framework (2013).28  Several sector-specific assessments have also been  conducted. For example, the Government of Yukon  completed a multi-year infrastructure risk and  vulnerability assessment of Yukon government  buildings in areas where permafrost is thawing.29 In  addition to identifying infrastructure adaptation  strategies, this assessment also created an inventory  of permafrost information to facilitate and encourage  cooperative and collaborative permafrost-related work  and research activities.  Assessments are often the first stage of municipal  adaptation planning processes. In this context, several  Canadian guidebooks have been produced that describe   the steps municipalities can take to assess and manage  climate change risks.30 For example, the Government  of Alberta developed the Climate Change Adaptation  Framework Manual (2010)31 to help government and  non-government organizations anticipate and prepare  for the economic and ecological impacts of climate  change. The Government of Newfoundland and  Labrador also developed 7 Steps to Assess Climate  Change Vulnerability in Your Community32 (2013),  which is suitable for non-experts and for communities  with limited resources. Natural Resources Canada has  also compiled case studies of land use planning tools  for local adaptation, which includes examples from  communities of varying sizes and from all regions  of Canada.33  Peel Public Health (Ontario) conducted a climate  change and health vulnerability assessment and  produced the report Health Vulnerability to Climate  Change: Assessing Exposure, Sensitivity, and  Adaptive Capacity in the Region of Peel (2013).34  The results suggest that Peel’s existing programs  will not be sufficient to address future health risks  resulting from a changing climate, such as increases  in temperature-related illnesses and deaths, and  worsening respiratory and cardiovascular conditions  as a result of reduced air quality. The report establishes  baseline information about climate-related impacts  to human health in the Region of Peel which will  contribute to the implementation of the Region of Peel  Adaptation Strategy.35  Assessments are also important elements of adaptation  planning in First Nations and northern communities.  For example, in 2012, the Jean Marie River First  Nation, in the Northwest Territories, assessed the  community’s vulnerability to permafrost degradation.  The initiative provides the community with a practical  tool for decision-making and a map of geological  hazards which may assist land use planning. The  community of Atlin, in northern British Columbia,  also assessed its vulnerability to changing climate  conditions, a process which led to its Climate Change     124  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  Adaptation Plan (2011).36 Financial support for these  projects was provided by Aboriginal Affairs and  Northern Development Canada’s Climate Change  Adaptation Program.  6.4  Setting Direction: Adaptation Policies,  Plans, and Frameworks  As the impacts of climate change have become  increasingly apparent and previous investments in  adaptation research, awareness, and capacity building  efforts in Canada have led to tangible results, actions to  address adaptation have become more formalized. They  can be seen in adjustments made in existing plans,  policies, and procedures to adapt to a changing climate,  and through the creation of stand-alone adaptation  plans and strategies.  6.4.1  Federal The federal government has continued to make  strategic investments in climate change impacts and  adaptation that focus on priority areas such as human  health and well-being, northern and vulnerable  communities, and economic competitiveness. Efforts  to better understand climate and climate change, and  to develop tools to support adaptation decision-making  across Canada, have also continued and are ongoing.  Canada’s 5th National Communication highlighted the  federal government’s 2007 investment of $85.9 million  in six programs which encouraged and supported  provinces, territories, municipalities, and professional  organizations to take action to adapt to climate change.  These programs laid a foundation by strengthening  the knowledge base, building capacity in national  and regional adaptation planning, and engaging  practitioners such as planners and engineers.  In 2011, the Government of Canada renewed its  domestic climate change adaptation funding with  an investment of $148.8 million in 10 programs over  five years.37 Six programs built on their previous  investments by broadening their reach to address   emerging issues and engaging the private sector.  Four programs were added to address new priorities,  focusing on transportation, fisheries, parks, and  northern infrastructure. Examples of Government of  Canada actions include: • Environment Canada continues to provide updated   information about observed and projected changes in  climate, as well as climate change scenarios;  • Natural Resources Canada has established a  national Adaptation Platform, whose participants  have collaborated to advance adaptation in several  areas such as coastal management and economics  (discussed in further detail in section 6.5);  • The Standards Council of Canada and Aboriginal  Affairs and Northern Development Canada are  working to ensure that building codes and standards  are effective in addressing climate-related risks  to northern infrastructure design, planning,  and management;  • Transport Canada is working to develop and evaluate  tools, technologies, and best practices to enhance  the resilience of existing and future northern  transportation infrastructure and operations to  climate change;  • Fisheries and Oceans Canada is developing new  science knowledge to support the development of  adaptation tools and strategies that will enable the  integration of climate change considerations into the  delivery of the Department’s programs and policies;  • Parks Canada Agency is working with partners to  reduce the potential impacts of climate-driven  changes on ecological integrity and traditional  lifestyles in Canada’s Arctic national parks by  mapping and developing ecological inventories, and  monitoring select northern national parks;  • Health Canada is expanding its Heat Alert and  Response Systems program, disseminating heat  and health related guidelines and information, and  supporting the development of health adaptation  plans and information tools in northern First Nations  and Inuit communities;    125  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  • The Public Health Agency of Canada is providing the  public health system with information and tools to  prevent and mitigate the occurrence of disease; and  • Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development  Canada is extending its funding program to support  Aboriginal and northern communities in assessing  the risks associated with climate change and  developing adaptation plans to address them.  These investments were guided by the Federal  Adaptation Policy Framework,38 which was adopted  by the federal government in 2011. The Framework  provides direction on adaptation and a basis for  increased coordination of federal adaptation activities.  It establishes a clear role for the federal government  focused on generating and sharing information and  knowledge to inform adaptation decision-making,  building the capacity of Canadians to take action,  and integrating—or mainstreaming—climate change  considerations into federal policies, planning,  and operations.  6.4.2  Provincial and Territorial All provinces and territories have made progress on  impacts and adaptation issues, and have either released  (or are in the process of developing) adaptation  strategies or have integrated adaptation efforts into  broader climate change action plans. This section  focuses on jurisdictions that have released stand- alone adaptation strategies or action plans since the  release of Canada’s 5th National Communication on  Climate Change in 2010. Therefore, Quebec, Ontario,  Manitoba, British Columbia and the three territories  (Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut) are  highlighted below.  Prior to 2010, the four Atlantic Provinces (New  Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Island,  and Newfoundland and Labrador) released a joint  adaptation strategy (2008). In 2009, Alberta released  the first phase of its provincial adaptation strategy,  which focused on risk assessment and capacity  building. While not a specific or stand-alone adaptation   plan, Saskatchewan’s Water Security Agency’s Plan  (2013–2014) identifies opportunities to advance  adaptation to ensure sustainability of surface and  ground water supplies and reducing risks associated  with flooding, drainage, and drought.  These strategies and plans reflect the growing  importance of adaptation among provincial and  territorial governments. Some of the shared priorities  across jurisdictions include building community  capacity, funding climate change adaptation research,  enhancing existing emergency preparedness  initiatives, and strengthening urban and rural land use  planning processes.39  6.4.2.1 Quebec The Government of Quebec published its 2013–2020  Climate Change Adaptation Strategy,40 which serves as  an update to its 2006–2012 strategy. Adaptation actions  completed under the first strategy include assessments  and research related to permafrost, coastal erosion,41  and forestry,42 as well as the incorporation of climate  change considerations into various management plans.  Quebec’s updated strategy sets out a broad plan to  strengthen the province’s resilience to climate change.  It defines the government’s strategic directions and  objectives in four priority areas: (1) the well-being  of residents and communities; (2) the continuity of  economic activity; (3) the safety and durability of  buildings and infrastructure; and (4) the maintenance  of ecological services. The strategy builds on initiatives  introduced in the 2006–2012 strategy, including, for  example, integrating adaptation into new policies  and legislation and taking adaptation into account in  decisions on land use and urban planning. The strategy  is supported by a $200 million investment in Quebec’s  2012–2013 budget.43  6.4.2.2 Ontario The Government of Ontario developed Climate  Ready: Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy and Action  Plan (2011)44 which outlines the province’s strategy  and actions to address climate change impacts over     126  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  a four year period (2011–2014). The strategy helps  support the Ontario government and partners to  prepare for risks and opportunities resulting from  climate change in the province. It identifies impacts  from climate change on various sectors and suggests  specific courses of action, such as promoting water  conservation, developing guidance for storm-water  management, and mainstreaming adaptation into  provincial policies and programs. The province also  published Ontario’s Biodiversity Strategy (2011),45  which includes several initiatives to assess species  and ecosystem vulnerability to climate change and  integrate this information into decision-making. Two  additional documents, Biodiversity: It’s In Our Nature  (2012)46 and A Practitioner’s Guide to Climate Change  Adaptation in Ontario’s Ecosystems (2011),47 were  also developed to assist natural resource managers  to identify ways that climate change risks can be  integrated into decision-making processes.  6.4.2.3 Manitoba In 2012, the Government of Manitoba launched its  Climate Change Adaptation Pathway48 which defines  the strategic direction of its adaptation efforts.  The Pathway consists of three inter-related phases:  (1) government and province-wide risk assessments;  (2) a provincial adaptation strategy; and (3) action  planning. An interdepartmental Climate Change  Adaptation Working Group has been established to  foster shared understanding of climate risks, as well  as current and planned adaptation initiatives, and  to provide a forum for effective adaptation decision- making and collaboration going forward across  government and within Manitoba.  6.4.2.4 British Columbia The Government of British Columbia developed  Preparing for Climate Change: British Columbia’s  Adaptation Strategy (2010)49 to ensure that knowledge  and resources are available and used efficiently and  directed to key sectors and decision-makers, relevant  government programs participate, and stakeholders and  the public recognize that adaptation is an important   part of addressing climate change. The overall objective  of the strategy is to help British Columbia maintain  sustainable communities and green economic  development in the face of a changing climate. To  date, the province has developed adaptation planning  tools for decision-makers, including Preparing for  Climate Change: An Implementation Guide for Local  Governments in British Columbia (2012).50 This guide  was designed to assist local government officials, staff,  planners, and others to plan and take action to increase  the resilience of their communities to the impacts of  climate change. Supporting this Guide, the Pacific  Climate Impacts Consortium, a regional climate service  centre, developed Plan2Adapt,51 a website that generates  maps describing projected future climate conditions for  British Columbia.  6.4.2.5 Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut In 2011, the three territorial governments jointly  released the Pan-Territorial Adaptation Strategy:  Moving Forward on Climate Change Adaptation.52  Recognizing their common interest in reducing risks  to northern infrastructure, economies, human health  and safety, ecosystems, and traditional cultures,  this strategy identifies a series of actions, including:  (1) collaborating with other governments in Canada  and across the circumpolar North to share knowledge  and develop cooperative activities; (2) enhancing  community resilience by supporting vulnerability  and risk assessments and adaptation planning, and  by providing information, training, and tools; and  (3) mainstreaming adaptation into government  operations and decision-making.  6.4.3  Municipal Given their responsibilities related to infrastructure,  municipal governments have a history of engagement  on climate change with a focus on adaptation.53 Actions  have often been triggered by observed damages from  past extreme weather events and through policy  initiatives from higher levels of government, including  significant federal support for research and capacity  building (adaptation tools, training, pilot projects) and     127  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  provincial requirements to develop adaptation plans  and strategies.54  Several Canadian cities have stand-alone adaptation  strategies. For example, Vancouver published its  Climate Change Adaptation Strategy (2012),55 in which  many of the proposed actions focus on increasing  understanding of anticipated challenges and  integrating climate change into planning, design, and  emergency management. These actions are intended to  guide the way Vancouver builds and maintains streets,  sewers, building infrastructure, parks, and green spaces  to ensure they are resilient to climate change.  Municipalities have also released plans to address  specific challenges. For example, Edmonton developed  the Urban Forest Management Plan (2012)56 in response  to serious threats to the city’s urban tree canopy from  drought, insect infestations, disease, storms, and  climate change. It includes a review of existing planting  strategies, which has led Edmonton’s Forestry Unit to  test the use of different tree species, such as red maples,  and alternative tree watering techniques.57  Climate change adaptation has been incorporated  directly into municipal official plans, which are formal  planning documents that set out the long-term  vision, goals, and objectives for the development of  municipalities. In 2010, Iqaluit, the capital of Nunavut,  became one of the first Canadian communities to  integrate climate change adaptation into its formal  planning processes.58 The plan includes five priority  vision statements, two high-level objectives, details on  the climate change issues of concern to the community,  and priority adaptation actions related to municipal  infrastructure. Adaptation is also included in the  official plan for the City of Ottawa. The plan notes  the City will consider impacts and adaptation when  completing environmental management and sub- watershed plans, ensure development avoids potential  natural hazards from extreme weather events, and  reduce the urban heat island effect.59  In addition to specific adaptation plans or strategies,  municipal governments in Canada use a variety  of practices to address climate change risks and  opportunities, including the adoption and enforcement  of bylaws and changes to policies and procedures  that take a changing climate into consideration. For  example, in the Halifax Regional Municipality, City  Council passed a bylaw for the downtown Halifax  waterfront in 2009 prescribing a 2.5 metre threshold  above the ordinary high water mark for ground floor  elevations of new developments to address risks related  to storm surges and sea level rise.60  6.5 Fostering Effective Collaboration  Collaboration continues to be a fundamental  mechanism for advancing adaptation in Canada. Many  examples of adaptation presented in this chapter  stem from effective cooperation and collaboration  between different groups, including various levels of  government, academia, and industry. In recognition  of this, a number of collaborative initiatives have been  developed since 2010, building on existing efforts.  As outlined in Canada’s 5th National Communication  on Climate Change, Natural Resources Canada  established the Regional Adaptation Collaborative  program61 to foster collaboration amongst decision- makers from government, communities, professional  organizations, and the private sector to: (1) advance  adaptation on common priorities; (2) focus on regional  priorities; and (3) draw on existing knowledge and  expertise to advance adaptation across all regions of  Canada. Six entities were established, each of which  focused on the adaptation priorities of a specific region  of Canada (Atlantic, Quebec, Ontario, the Prairies,  British Columbia, and northern Canada).  The program delivered an extensive collection of  adaptation-related products including: • An online compendium of water and adaptation   information to enable decision-makers from across     128  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  Canada to access the latest information on water  resource management in a changing climate;  • Flood risk assessments to support flood risk  management strategies for communities in  Atlantic Canada;  • Permafrost maps to inform land use planning as well  as adaptation guidance for municipal decision-makers  in villages in northern Quebec (Nunavik);  • Adaptation plans to address floods and droughts in  the Prairies;  • Guidelines for sea dykes and coastal flood hazard land  use in British Columbia; and  • Vulnerability assessments of the mining sector  and associated infrastructure in northern  Canada (Nunavut).  The Regional Adaptation Collaborative entities  continue to operate in conjunction with a new  collaboration mechanism launched in 2012.62 Natural  Resources Canada formed—and leads—the Adaptation  Platform,63 a program that brings together decision- makers from industry associations, professional  organizations, federal, provincial, and territorial  governments, as well as other relevant organizations,  to address shared adaptation priorities. It aims to  enhance the competitiveness of regions and industries  by providing a structure to bring together knowledge,  capacity, and financial resources from across Canada  to produce information and tools that are needed to  understand and adapt to the effects of a changing  climate. Through cost shared projects funded under  thematic working groups, such as coastal management,  economics, and measuring progress, practical tools  and information are developed and the results  shared broadly.  Complementary to the Adaptation Platform, the  Climate Change Adaptation Community of Practice64  supports the efforts of Canadian provinces and  territories to incorporate climate change adaptation  into planning and policies through the transfer of  knowledge across jurisdictions. It is an interactive portal  that provides a space for researchers and practitioners   from across Canada to come together to ask questions,  generate ideas, share knowledge, and communicate  with others working on climate change adaptation.  Launched in 2010, this initiative stemmed from an  idea of the Council of the Federation, a provincial  and territorial forum, which endorsed the creation  of such a virtual community in 2008. The knowledge  exchange and communication that take place during  webinars and forums demonstrate how the Community  of Practice helps form new relationships and connect  adaptation practitioners from across Canada.  6.6 Implementing Adaptation Measures  Current adaptation efforts in Canada have been  built upon a foundation of previous activities and  investments, and in many cases are extensions of  ongoing initiatives. Adaptation continues to be  undertaken in Canada to achieve a range of goals, such  as increasing capacity to adapt, improving resilience  to specific climate events (especially extreme events),  and enhancing ability to thrive under different  climate conditions.  As previously noted in this chapter, all levels of  government, as well as community groups and industry,  are actively engaged in adaptation. Recent government  approaches to facilitate climate change adaptation  reveal a strong orientation toward applied research,  development of decision-aiding tools, and support for  adaptation planning at local and regional levels.  This section presents a series of illustrative examples  of domestic adaptation measures within specific  sectors, chosen to reflect the breadth and range of  adaptation occurring across the country, focusing on  new initiatives.  6.6.1  Natural Environment Parks and protected areas conserve both terrestrial  and aquatic biodiversity by helping to protect native  species’ gene pools, and by reducing the effects  from non-climatic stressors such as habitat loss and     129  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  fragmentation. They also form core areas needed for  the long-term conservation of biodiversity within  broader landscapes, and provide an opportunity  to apply ecosystem-based approaches to climate  change adaptation.  A number of ongoing efforts are contributing to the  maintenance and protection of healthy, resilient  ecosystems and biodiversity in Canada. The Canadian  Parks and Protected Areas: Helping Canada Weather  Climate Change report, for example, outlines some of  the actions that provinces and territories are taking  on natural environments and protected areas in the  context of a changing climate.65  Canadian jurisdictions are expanding their systems  of parks and protected areas as part of their overall  approach to climate change adaptation.66 For example,  the Government of Saskatchewan has partnered with  environmental organizations to secure a significant  amount of natural landscape to connect fragmented  patches of habitat to enhance biodiversity conservation  and facilitate climate change adaptation.67  Assisted migration trials and habitat connectivity  models are important to the active management of  species that migrate slowly. The Government of Alberta  is currently conducting a pilot project which examines  biodiversity connectivity, species vulnerability,  and migration in relation to climate change. The  Government of Nova Scotia has taken steps to include  biodiversity connectivity, species vulnerability, and  ecosystem migration and adaptation when selecting  which provincial areas to protect under its Parks and  Protected Areas Plan (2013).68  A number of additional investments will support  adaptation through enhancements to Canada’s  environmental monitoring infrastructure and related  research and services. In 2010, the Government  of Canada invested $26.5 million over five years  (2010–2015) for the establishment of Arctic  marine meteorological areas, including extensive   enhancements to the federal government’s Arctic  environmental monitoring infrastructure and delivery  of marine meteorological services.69  6.6.2 Natural Resources Climate change impacts on the forestry, mining, and  energy sectors have already been observed, impacting  the viability of the sector and increasing the need to  advance planning to anticipate climate changes.  All levels of government in Canada have invested  in the development of scientific information and  tools for adaptation in the forestry sector. In 2011,  the Government of Canada invested $5 million in a  Canadian Forest Service (Natural Resources Canada)  initiative, named Forest Change, to provide information  and tools to support decisions on adaptation and  enhance forest sector competitiveness in a changing  climate.70 Since 2008, the Canadian Council of  Forest Ministers has focused on developing tools and  knowledge to adapt sustainable forest management  to a changing climate through the use of vulnerability  assessments.71 The goal of the initiative has been to  assist members of Canada’s forest sector in their efforts  to incorporate climate change considerations into all  aspects of sustainable forest management.  Efforts are underway to identify and implement  adaptation best practices in the mining sector. Natural  Resources Canada partnered with the Government of  Nunavut to develop and publish Good Environmental  Practices for Northern Mining and Necessary  Infrastructure (2012),72 which focuses on best practices  for mining infrastructure in Nunavut with respect to  climate change adaptation. Manitoba, Saskatchewan,  and Quebec are currently undertaking a collaborative  project with the International Institute for Sustainable  Development that seeks to understand how existing  mining policies, other than environmental assessment  policies, can act as drivers or barriers to effective  adaptation action in the mining sector.73    130  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  Adaptation is also an important risk management  issue for energy production and transmission given the  challenges climate change poses for the sector. Adaptive  management and non-structural adaptation approaches,  such as updating management policies on a regular basis,  allow producers to capitalize on the impacts of climate  change on hydrologic regimes. For example, BC Hydro  developed a comprehensive climate change strategy  which included adaptation actions such as collaborative  research on impacts, a corporate climate risk assessment,  and practical changes that help to manage climate risks  operationally.74 BC Hydro also identified climate change  impacts on assets and infrastructure. As a result, BC  Hydro modified its maintenance regimes and design  standards for transmission lines to increase their  resilience to wind and ice loads.75  6.6.3  Water Resources Water is frequently identified as one of the most  important cross-cutting climate change adaptation  issues in Canada, from the perspective of quantity,  quality, and availability. As such, efforts have been  made to continue to build the knowledge base and the  capacity to address the challenges of water resource  management and adaptation.  Natural Resources Canada partnered with the  Government of Ontario to provide decision-makers  from across Canada access to the latest information  on water resources management in a changing  climate through an online compendium of water  and adaptation material.76 Other jurisdictions have  also taken steps to support the implementation of  adaptation measures in the water resources sector.  For example, the Government of Quebec produced  a hydro-climatic atlas that depicts the anticipated  impacts of climate change on the St. Lawrence River  system.77 Nova Scotia examined the impact of climate  change on saltwater intrusion into coastal groundwater  aquifers and produced a province-wide groundwater  vulnerability map.78 Alberta has conducted hydro- climatic variability studies in the South and North   Saskatchewan River Basins to understand how climate  variability impacts water demand and supply.79  The Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment,  comprised of environment ministers from the  federal, provincial, and territorial governments, has  developed a suite of tools to address climate change  adaptation from a water resource management  perspective. These include, for example, guidance to  assist the development of climate change vulnerability  assessments of water quantity and water quality at  a watershed scale,80 evaluating water monitoring  networks to support adaptation needs,81 and a reference  document focused on valuation of water.82  The provinces of Alberta, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan,  along with the federal government, developed the  Prairie Regional Adaptation Collaborative83 program  to work on climate change-related challenges in water  resources management, including water supply and  demand, drought, and excess moisture resulting in  potential flooding in vulnerable communities. The  three provinces worked together to conduct studies  on different watersheds to understand current  and projected impacts of climate change on water  resources.84 For example, the Hydro-climatic Variability:  South Saskatchewan River Basin project examined the  amplification of climate extremes and departures from  average conditions (excessive moisture and drought) to  provide insight into how water levels will fluctuate to  inform adaptation planning and decision-making.85  The Northern Climate ExChange of the Yukon  Research Centre has partnered with Yukon Energy  Corporation, the University of Alberta, and the Yukon  Geological Survey to develop predictive tools to  improve understanding of the amount and timing of  water flow in the upper Yukon River watershed, and the  implications on downstream energy production. It is  anticipated that Yukon Energy Corporation will be able  to use this information to increase the efficiency of its  hydroelectric generating operations. This project will     131  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  also provide the corporation with tools to help predict,  plan for, and adapt to climate change.86  From a water infrastructure perspective, Canadian  cities have begun to implement adaptation measures  to separate storm and sanitary systems to reduce the  flow of storm water into waste water systems.87 For  example, the City of Toronto has increased monitoring  and maintenance of its culvert system.88 Other flood- prone communities in Ontario, including Cambridge  and Milton, are performing economic assessments  of the implications of climate change for drainage  infrastructure design.89 In addition, Transport Quebec  and Quebec City have taken steps to make structural  changes by requiring culverts to be over-designed to  account for changes in the frequency and intensity of  rain events as a result of future climate conditions.90  6.6.4 Coastal Zone Management Coastal zone management is a shared responsibility  between jurisdictions in Canada. Federal, provincial,  territorial, municipal, and Aboriginal governments all  play a role in managing coastal areas, and by extension,  in reducing risks to Canada’s coasts and adjacent land  and waters. A number of activities are underway that  contribute to adaptation in this context.  Natural Resources Canada provides geoscience expertise  to reduce risks and highlight opportunities to inform  adaptation solutions for coastal vulnerabilities and  infrastructure. In order to better predict future marine  and coastal conditions, Fisheries and Oceans Canada  is integrating enhanced research into adaptation tools  that could be used at all levels of government. For  example, the Canadian Hydrographic Service is working  to improve the accuracy of information on water levels   to help determine the risks of future sea level rise and  increases in storm surge severity.91  Building from increased awareness and the availability  of decision-support tools, communities have begun to  implement adaptation plans and measures. The City  of Halifax has implemented adaptation measures to  reduce the risk of sea level rise and flooding, where  planners have created a risk assessment database  containing information on the vulnerability of harbour  front properties. Halifax Regional Municipality has also  passed an updated municipal planning strategy and  land use bylaw for the downtown Halifax waterfront,  prescribing a 2.5 metre threshold above the ordinary  high water mark for ground floor elevations of  new developments.92  Several municipalities have employed land use  planning tools (see text box below), maps, and other  landscape visualizations to illustrate the nature and  extent of the changes expected in local climates,  the severity of projected impacts, and what possible  adaptation responses might look like.93 The University  of British Columbia’s Collaborative for Advanced  Landscape Planning94 sea level rise visualization project  highlighted risks associated with increased coastal  flooding and potential adaptation options in the City  of Delta.95 The Government of Newfoundland and  Labrador initiated a project in 2011 to map and identify  vulnerable coastlines, establish a coastal monitoring  network, and develop underlying data to support  enhanced land use planning and management. The  Government of Quebec has also developed coastal  erosion risk maps to assist with community adaptation  decision-making.96  Land use planning tools have been used by several  municipalities to facilitate adaptation to climate change  impacts. For example, in Beaubassin-est, a small coastal  community in southeast New Brunswick vulnerable to  the impacts of sea level rise and storm surge flooding,  Council passed an updated zoning bylaw to enhance   protection of new construction in the community’s  coastal zone in March 2011. This update implemented  a minimum height standard for buildings to enhance  protection of new construction in the community’s  coastal zone. The bylaw identifies a sea level rise  “protection zone” in which the minimum ground floor     132  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  elevation of any new building must be at least 1.43 metres  above the current 1-in-100 year flood mark. Rather  than restrict development outright, the zoning bylaw  imposes stricter building requirements on developers.   This update to the bylaw was based on the best available  scientific understanding of sea level rise for the area  and a high resolution digital map that the community  commissioned to help identify potential flood levels.  Collaborative efforts to address adaptation challenges  in the context of coastal zone management are also  underway. Collaboration has broadened public  engagement and raised awareness about the impacts  of climate change on Canada’s coasts, as has been the  case with the Storm Surge Forecast System Information  Portal for British Columbia,97 the Coastal Monitoring  initiative in Newfoundland and Labrador,98 and the  King Tide Photo Initiative (British Columbia).99  6.6.5  Municipalities and Infrastructure Municipal infrastructure has been an important area  of focus for adaptation in Canada. This is in part due to  the long-lived nature of infrastructure and the known  benefits of early and planned adaptation measures as  well as the need to respond to extreme weather events.  Municipal infrastructure has also been the focus of a  significant body of impacts and adaptation research,  while many municipalities view adaptation as an  extension of their efforts on sustainability. Capacity  building projects have been undertaken by Engineers  Canada and the Canadian Institute of Planners to  inform, train, and provide tools for engineers and  planners to address adaptation in their work.100  The Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability  Committee’s (PIEVC) Protocol101 has been used to assess  the risks to infrastructure in more than 25 case studies  across Canada, focusing on infrastructure for water  supply, storm and waste water, transportation, and  buildings. The results of these assessments have been  used in planning, design, and operation of existing  infrastructure. More recently, it was used to assess the  resilience of a planned upgrade to the Sandy Point Sewage  Treatment Plant in Nova Scotia in 2011. This case study is  unique in that the PIEVC Protocol was applied at the pre- design stage of the project, rather than conducting the  assessment after the infrastructure had been constructed.  Other municipal awareness raising and capacity  building efforts have emerged. The Federation of  Canadian Municipalities developed a website to  promote adaptation action among its members and  works to enhance the exchange of experiences in  implementing adaptation through sessions at its  national conferences.102 The International Council  for Local Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI) Canada  developed an adaptation guidebook103 and online  workbook for communities, as well as companion  documents targeted at specific topics.104 Through  its Building Adaptive and Resilient Communities  program,105 ICLEI Canada has provided training and  support to communities on risk assessment and  the adaptation planning process. Through Natural  Resources Canada’s Regional Adaptation Collaborative  program (see section 6.5 of this chapter), a number  of community-focused products were developed  and disseminated to help communities adapt to  climate change. As part of this work, case studies  of adaptation actions were developed and shared  between communities.106  The lifespan and durability of infrastructure is closely  linked to climate and weather, and Canada’s large  seasonal changes in weather and diversity in climatic  conditions have implications for infrastructure  planning and maintenance. Recent flooding (for  example, the Alberta107 and Toronto108 events referenced  earlier in this chapter) has highlighted the vulnerability  of Canada’s infrastructure to extreme events.  Much of the infrastructure in northern Canada is  dependent upon permafrost, which under normal  conditions provides stable surfaces for buildings and  pipelines, contains wastes, stabilizes shorelines, and  provides access to remote communities in the winter.109  As permafrost thaws and degrades, infrastructure built     133  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  upon it may become damaged or lose its structural  integrity. Jurisdictions and organizations operating  in northern Canada have taken steps to manage these  risks and adapt to changing permafrost conditions.  For example, the Standards Council of Canada  and Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development  Canada are working to ensure the ability of codes,  standards, and related instruments to address the  climate risks of northern infrastructure design,  planning, and management (e.g., thermosyphon- supported foundations, effects of permafrost  degradation on existing buildings, changing snow  loads, and community drainage).110 Other products  developed include permafrost maps to inform land  use planning, a review of climate hazard-related  mapping and vulnerability assessments of the built  environment in northern Canada,111 and adaptation  guidance for municipal decision-makers in villages in  northern Quebec.112  While the impact of permafrost degradation on  infrastructure is an issue limited to northern Canada,  common climate change and infrastructure challenges  remain across all Canadian regions. Environment  Canada is collaborating with the Canadian Commission  on Building and Fire Codes to update and improve  more than 6,000 specific climatic design values used in  the National Building Code of Canada and developing  specific products to address critical needs of the  engineering and construction communities.113  6.6.6 Agriculture and Food Production A changing climate presents the Canadian food system  with a number of opportunities as well as risks.  Agricultural programs in Canada are guided by the  Federal-Provincial-Territorial Growing Forward 2 Policy  Framework.114 This five-year policy framework, signed  by the federal, provincial, and territorial governments,  focuses on innovation, competitiveness, and market  development. It also provides cost-shared funding  with the provinces and territories to farmers to ensure  a competitive and resilient sector that can adapt to   changing conditions. Under Growing Forward 2, three  new, broad federal programs (i.e., AgriInnovation,115  AgriCompetitiveness,116 and AgriMarketing117) are aimed  at generating market-based economic growth in the  agricultural sector. Through these programs, farmers  can access information and funding to address on- farm risks, including those that may be exacerbated by  climate change.  The Government of Canada undertakes research to  inform adaptation decision-making in the agriculture  sector in Canada. This includes, for example, research  on current and future weather trends, as well as efforts  to improve weather forecasting. These efforts contribute  to the development of decision-support tools and  practices for farmers to adapt to climate change,  including optimizing land use and production, variety  selection, and breeding for new climatic conditions.  Other levels of governments and research organizations  contribute to agricultural adaptation in Canada as well.  The Government of Quebec, for example, has  developed an agro-climatic atlas118 that conveys current  and future climatic impacts on crops and agricultural  systems. The atlas and its interactive maps were  designed to help the farming sector manage climate- related risks and opportunities and support long-term  planning. Ouranos, a private non-profit organization  in Quebec that provides regional climate simulations,  is also examining how to support climate change  adaptation strategies in the Quebec agricultural sector.  Ouranos is focusing on providing sector stakeholders  with tools for making strategic choices in planning  agricultural activities in order to better manage the  risks and opportunities related to climate change.119  The Government of Saskatchewan, in conjunction  with the Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative,  developed the SaskAdapt Self-Assessment Tool to  help individuals and communities in Saskatchewan  evaluate decisions about adapting to climate change.120  It can assist in incorporating climate change into future  planning by providing a process for helping to decide     134  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  what actions should be taken to better prepare for  climate change.  6.6.7 Human Health and Well-being Government authorities at the federal, provincial,  territorial, and municipal levels are taking action  to prepare for climate change health impacts by  generating knowledge, including health risks in  climate change plans, and mainstreaming climate  change considerations into a range of health policies  and programs.  The Public Health Agency of Canada generates  knowledge and tools, including risk maps, surveillance  methods, and guidance documents for federal,  provincial, and territorial public health decision- making and action on emerging vector-borne  zoonoses (diseases and infections transmissible from  vertebrate animals to humans) in Canada.121 It is  currently developing a risk assessment framework for  quantitative analyses of impacts of climate change on  infectious diseases transmitted through food and water.  This will improve the management of future risks from  climate-related enteric (gastrointestinal) diseases.  Public health and emergency management officials  are also taking action to raise awareness of climate  change impacts and the need for adaptation, and are  providing information and tools to help address current  and projected future vulnerabilities. Recognizing the  need for effective communication to health service  providers and the public to manage health risks from  extreme heat events, Health Canada developed the  Communicating the Health Risks of Extreme Heat  Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency  Management Officials (2011).122 The toolkit is based  on best communication practices for addressing  health risks associated with extreme heat events  and is intended for use by health and emergency  officials who are developing or updating heat-health  communication strategies.  An expanded range of measures and tools to adapt  to the health impacts of climate change, including  vulnerability assessment guidelines, and vulnerability  mapping, among others, are available to public health  and emergency management officials in Canada.  To help communities develop effective adaptation  measures to address heat-health risks, Health Canada  also recently published the Heat Alert and Response  Systems to Protect Health: Best Practices Guidebook  (2012).123 The Guidebook provides guidance on  developing, communicating, and evaluating heat alert  and response systems. The guidebook also outlines  examples of preventative action in reducing urban heat.  Rosemont-La Petit-Patrie is a central borough in  Montreal, Quebec that is very densely built, resulting  in a pronounced urban heat island effect. In April 2011,  the borough Council revised its comprehensive zoning  bylaw to include four regulatory measures aimed at  tackling urban heat islands: (1) when replacing an  existing roof or constructing a new building, the owner  must install either a green roof or a highly reflective  roof; (2) for all new parking lots of 10 or more spaces, at  least 15% of the area must be open ground landscaped  with plants, bushes, and trees; (3) all new paving  materials must meet a minimum specified surface  reflectivity rating; and (4) when constructing a new  building, at least 20% of the building site must remain  open ground and be landscaped with plants, bushes,  and trees. These four measures apply to all public and  private property throughout the borough. More than  300 permits for reflective roofs were issued in the first  year after the bylaw was passed.124  Provincial-scale Heat Alert and Response Systems are  currently being developed in the provinces of Manitoba  and Alberta. The Government of Quebec has also  developed an interactive tool that allows the public to  identify urban heat and cooling islands along with the  surface temperature for the most densely populated  areas in southern Quebec.125 At the municipal level, the  City of Toronto has implemented its own heat-health  warning and alert system which determines when the     135  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  Medical Officer of Health should declare a heat or  extreme heat alert. Once a heat alert is declared, key  response partners, community agencies, and the public  are notified and hot weather response activities are  implemented (e.g., public cooling centres).126  6.7  Contributing to International  Initiatives   Canada works with the international community to  strengthen and disseminate research and science  surrounding the impacts of climate change to  ensure that adaptation actions are informed by the  best available knowledge. Canada is also assisting  developing countries, in particular those that are the  most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change,  through development assistance, multilateral  instruments, and partnerships with non-governmental  and international organizations in order to increase  their resilience to climate change.127 For example,  from 2010–2013, the Government of Canada allocated  approximately 15% of Canada’s $1.2 billion fast-start  commitment to multilateral and bilateral partners  for adaptation-related projects.128 Some of these  projects benefited from tools developed under  Canada’s domestic adaptation activities, including the  application of the PIEVC Protocol to infrastructure  assessments in Costa Rica and Honduras, for example.  More information on Canada’s fast-start financing can  be found in Chapter 7: Financial Resources and Transfer  of Technology.  6.7.1  Research and Science Canada is leading and participating in a number of  climate-related fora and initiatives that contribute  to adaptation decision-making. For example, in 2013,  Canada is presiding over the World Meteorological  Organization (WMO), which is responsible for the  oversight and implementation of the Global Framework  for Climate Services (GFCS). Canada also contributes to  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Working  Groups I and II on an ongoing basis. These and other  climate and climate change-related research efforts   are outlined in more detail in Chapter 8: Research and  Systematic Observation of Climate Change.  Climate services, which can be broadly defined to  include activities that deal with generating and  providing information on past, present, and future  climate, can assist all countries in preparing for climate  change. The GFCS is being implemented globally,  regionally, and nationally. Canada is currently the  second largest donor, targeting initiatives such as the  development of a Regional Climate Centre in the Arctic.  The GFCS will enable better adaptation to climate  change through the development and incorporation  of science-based climate information and prediction  into planning, policy, and practice at all scales and  by supporting capacity development and better  dissemination of scientific information, in particular in  the most vulnerable countries.  6.7.2  Regional and Bilateral Collaboration  Regionally, Canada is collaborating with the U.S.  and Mexico on the North American Climate Services  Partnership, formed in 2011. This Partnership focuses on  advancing data sharing, information communication,  climate prediction, and capacity development among  seven areas including the North American Seasonal  Forecast System and the Great Lakes.  Canada is also engaged in climate change adaptation  work through the Arctic Council. Canadian scientists  and researchers contributed to the Arctic Biodiversity  Assessment and the Arctic Ocean Acidification report  that have advanced the understanding of the range  and extent of impacts of climate change in the Arctic  region. In addition, Canada continues to play a role  in the Adaptation Actions for a Changing Arctic  project. Initiated in 2012, this project consists of three  components aimed at enabling more informed, timely,  and responsive adaptation decision-making in a rapidly  changing Arctic. Canada led the first two components  of this initiative, which assess Arctic Council reports  that contribute to and inform adaptation decisions, and  provide a compendium of existing national, regional,     136  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  and local adaptation efforts in the circumpolar North.  Canada is also engaged in the final component which  will provide an integrated assessment of all relevant  drivers of change in the Arctic, scheduled to be  delivered in 2017. Finally, during Canada’s 2013–2015  Chairmanship, the Council will be developing a  mechanism that will facilitate the active exchange of  Arctic-related adaptation information.  As an example of bilateral collaboration, Health Canada  and the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention  entered into an agreement in 2011 to establish a North  American Working Group on Climate Change and  Human Health. The goal of the Working Group is to  foster cross-border relationships and increase adaptive  capacity in North America in the area of climate change  and health. Areas of focus have included climate change  and infectious diseases, coordinating adaptation across  international borders, and raising awareness of climate  change and health issues in North America.  6.7.3   Development Assistance, Multilateral  Instruments and International Aid  Partnerships  Beyond financial contributions, Canada continues to  support international organizations and initiatives that  strengthen understanding and disseminate knowledge  related to climate change in the most vulnerable  countries by providing expert engagement, scientific  advice, and capacity development.  Canada’s development assistance promotes action  on climate change by integrating environmental  sustainability into its development programming and  is supporting projects specifically aimed at reducing  vulnerability to climate change. The integration of  environmental sustainability considerations across all of  its development policies and programming is currently  driven by both policy and regulatory requirements. The  International Development Program of the Department  of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development has a Policy  for Environmental Sustainability (1992),129 and in 2009,  environmental sustainability was announced as a cross-  cutting theme and is integrated across international  assistance priorities.130  As reported in Chapter 7: Financial Resources and  Transfer of Technology, Canada continues to support  international climate change adaptation with a variety  of partners and multilateral instruments, such as a  $20 million contribution to the Global Environment  Facility and the Least Developed Countries Fund  in 2010.131 While recognizing that public finance  is important to support international adaptation  actions, Canada is also partnering with multilateral  organizations to finance projects that catalyze private  sector investments in climate change adaptation.  The International Development Research Centre  is also exploring ways to enhance private sector  investment for adaptation through its Private Finance  Advisory Network. Canada also works closely with  the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and  Development and other international partners to  improve the integration of environmental considerations  into development planning and decision-making,  especially through strategic environmental assessment.  6.8 Conclusion   A wide range of impacts have been experienced across  Canada and are likely to be exacerbated as climate  continues to change in the future, increasing the need  for adaptation.  Governments have developed adaptation strategies  and policy frameworks, and have been facilitating  climate change adaptation through the establishment  of collaborative mechanisms to enable applied research,  development of decision-support tools, and sharing  of adaptation experiences. Sectors with the greatest  sensitivity and exposure to climate and weather, such as  infrastructure and natural resources (e.g., forestry and  hydroelectricity), are taking actions to actively adapt to  climate change impacts.    137  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  A number of adaptation activities have been  documented since Canada’s 5th National  Communication. These measures are built upon a  foundation of previous activities, including climate  science, impacts and adaptation research and  science assessments (including regional and sectoral  assessments), and capacity-building and awareness  raising efforts (particularly among vulnerable  populations and professional groups).  Building from existing efforts and past successes,  Canada will continue to play a leadership role  through measures such as strategic investments in  adaptation that focus on priority areas. In addition,  Canada’s adaptation efforts will continue to take a  risk management approach, based on the principles  of collaboration and mainstreaming. To date, this  approach has enabled implementation of adaptation  measures across jurisdictions and economic sectors  in Canada.  References 1 Canada. National Round Table on the Environment and the   Economy. 2011. Paying the Price: The Economic Impacts of   Climate Change for Canada. Available online at: http://   collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives2/20130322143115/http:/  nrtee-trnee.ca/climate/climate-prosperity/the-economic-   impacts-of-climate-change-for-canada/paying-the-price  2 Lemmen, D.S.,Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E., editors.   2008. From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing   Climate 2007; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 448 p.   Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/   climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132  3 IPCC, 2007a: Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report.   Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth   Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate   Change [Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K and Reisinger, A.   (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 104 p.  4 Canada. National Round Table on the Environment and   the Economy. 2011. Paying the Price: The Economic Impacts   of Climate Change for Canada. Available online at: http://  collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives2/20130322143115/http:/  nrtee-trnee.ca/climate/climate-prosperity/the-economic-   impacts-of-climate-change-for-canada/paying-the-price  5 Climate Trends and Variations Bulletin—Annual 2012.   [Webpage]. 2013. Environment Canada. [Revised 2013–07–24;   Cited 2013–09–03]. Available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/  adsc-cmda/default.asp?lang=En&n=77842065-1  6 Ibid  7 Ibid  8 Ibid  9 Ibid  10 Lemmen, D.S.,Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E., editors.   2008. From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing   Climate 2007; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 448 p.   Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/   climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132  11 Insurance Bureau of Canada [PDF]. Facts of the Property &   Casualty Insurance Industry in Canada 2013. Available online at   http://www.ibc.ca/en/need_more_info/facts_book/documents/  ibc-facts-2013.pdf  12 Insurance Bureau of Canada. [Webpage]. 2013. Media Release   2013. [Published 2013–08–14; Cited 2013–08–6]. Available online   at: http://www.ibc.ca/en/Media_Centre/News_Releases/2013/  Preliminary_insured_losses_released_in_the_most_expensive_  natural_disaster_in_Ontario_history.asp  13 Davison, Janet and Powers, Lucas. [Webpage]. 2013. Why   Alberta’s floods hit so hard and fast. CBC News Online.   [Published 2013–06–22; Cited 2013–07–17]. Available online at:   http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/story/2013/06/21/   f-alberta-floods.html  14 The Canadian Press. [Webpage]. 2013. Premier estimates Alberta   flood costs to top $5B. [Published 2013–08–20; Cited 2013–08–  22]. Available online at: http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/   calgary/story/2013/08/20/calgary-flood-numbers-alberta-w.html  15 Ice Coverage Records, Canadian Ice Service. [Webpage]. 2013.   Environment Canada. [Revised 2013–07–23; cited 2013–07–30].   Available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/glaces-ice/default.  asp?lang=En&n=250D8C8E-1; Canadian Arctic Sea Ice Reached   Record Low in Summer 2012, Canadian Ice Service. [Webpage].   2013. Environment Canada. [Revised 2013–07–22; cited    2013–07–30]. Available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/   glaces-ice/?lang=En&n=765F63E4-1  16 Lemmen et al., 2008; Prowse, T.D., Furgal, C., Chouinard, R.,   Melling, H., Milburn, D., and Smith, S.L. 2009. Implications   http://collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives2/20130322143115/http:/nrtee-trnee.ca/climate/climate-prosperity/the-economic-impacts-of-climate-change-for-canada/paying-the-price http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132 http://www.ec.gc.ca/adsc-cmda/default.asp?lang=En&n=77842065-1 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132 http://collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives2/20130322143115/http:/nrtee-trnee.ca/climate/climate-prosperity/the-economic-impacts-of-climate-change-for-canada/paying-the-price http://www.ibc.ca/en/need_more_info/facts_book/documents/ibc-facts-2013.pdf http://www.ibc.ca/en/Media_Centre/News_Releases/2013/Preliminary_insured_losses_released_in_the_most_expensive_natural_disaster_in_Ontario_history.asp http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/story/2013/06/21/f-alberta-floods.html http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/story/2013/08/20/calgary-flood-numbers-alberta-w.html http://www.ec.gc.ca/glaces-ice/default.asp?lang=En&n=250D8C8E-1; http://www.ec.gc.ca/glaces-ice/?lang=En&n=765F63E4-1   138  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  of Climate Change for Economic Development in Northern   Canada: Energy, Resource, and Transportation Sectors;    AMBIO: A Journal of the Human Environment, Vol. 38, Issue 5,   pp. 272–281.; Pearce, T. D., Ford, J. D., Prno, J., Duerden, F.,   Pittman, J., Beaumier, M., Smit, B. 2011. Climate change and   mining in Canada. Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies for   Global Change, 16(3), 347–368.; National Roundtable on the   Environment and the Economy. 2012. Facing the Elements:   Building Business Resilience in a Changing Climate (Case   Studies). Ottawa, Ontario. Available online at: http://   collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives2/20130322140744/http://  nrtee-trnee.ca/facing_the_elements  17 United Nations Environment Programme, Global Environment   Outlook 5 (GEO-5): Environment for the future we want, 2012,   36 p.  18 Thibault, S. and Payette, S. 2009. Recent permafrost    degradation in bogs of the James Bay area, northern Quebec,   Canada. Permafrost and Periglacial Processes 20: 383–389.  19 Hallegatte, Stephane, Green, Colin, Nicholls, Robert J., and Jan   Corfee-Morlot. 2013. Future flood losses in major coastal cities.   Nature Climate Change (3): 802–806.  20 Pg. xix Lemmen, D.S.,Warren, F.J., editors. 2004. Climate Change   Impacts and Adaptation: A Canadian Perspective; Government   of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 201 p. Available online at: http://www.  nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/products-services/publications/cli-  mate-change/climate-change-impacts-adaptation/356  21 Archived—Impacts on Agriculture. [Webpage]. 2007. Natural   Resources Canada. [Revised 2007-10-02; Cited 2013-09-03].   Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/  products-services/publications/climate-change/climate-   change-impacts-adaptation/818  22 Ibid  23 Ibid  24 Lemmen, D.S.,Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E., editors.   2008. From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing   Climate 2007; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 448 p.   Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/   climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132  25 Impacts and Adaptation Assessments. [Webpage]. 2013. Natural   Resources Canada. [Revised 2013–01–16; Cited 2013–07–29].   Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/   climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/417  26 Pg. 9, Office of the Auditor General. 2010. Report of   the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable   Development to the House of Commons—Chapter 3—  Adapting to Climate Impacts. Ottawa (ON): Public Works and   Government Services Canada.  27 Aquatic Climate Change Adaptation Services Program.   [Webpage]. 2013. Fisheries and Oceans Canada. [Revised   2013–08–20; Cited 2013–08–22] Available online at: http://www.  dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Science/oceanography-oceanographie/accasp/  index-eng.html  28 Flood Plan Reduces Risk for Vulnerable Communities.   [Webpage]. 2013. Department of Environment, Nova Scotia.   [Published 2013–04–05; Cited 2013–07–22]. Available online at:   http://novascotia.ca/news/release/?id=20130405009  29 Yukon Permafrost Network. [Webpage]. 2011. [Cited 2013–07–  22]. Available online at: http://permafrost.gov.yk.ca  30 Pg. 32, Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. (2012). Land use    planning tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa,   Ont.: Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://  publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0  31 Climate Change Adaptation Framework. [Webpage].   2010. Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Resource   Development, Alberta. [Published 2010–07–05; Cited   2013–07–22]. Available online at: http://www.srd.  alberta.ca/MapsPhotosPublications/Publications/  ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx  32 7 Steps to Assess Climate Change Vulnerability in Your   Community. [Webpage]. 2012. Government of Newfoundland   and Labrador. [Cited 2013–07–22] Available online at: http://  atlanticadaptation.ca/vulnerability-assessment  33 Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://   publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0  34 Pajot, M. 2013. Assessing Health Vulnerability to Climate   Change in the Region of Peel. Region of Peel. Available   online at: www.tophc.ca/Documents/TOPHC%202013%20  Presentations/16d-%20Mark%20Pajot%20TOPHC_  April_3_2013_FINAL.pdf  35 DPRA, Environ, Beacon Environment. 2010. Adaptation   Background Report: Peel Climate Change Strategy. Available   online at: http://www.peelregion.ca/planning/climatechange/  reports/aug132010-adaptation.htm  http://collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives2/20130322140744/http://nrtee-trnee.ca/facing_the_elements http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/products-services/publications/climate-change/climate-change-impacts-adaptation/356 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/products-services/publications/climate-change/climate-change-impacts-adaptation/818 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/417 http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/Science/oceanography-oceanographie/accasp/index-eng.html http://novascotia.ca/news/release/?id=20130405009 http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0 http://www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsPhotosPublications/Publications/ClimateChangeAdaptationFramework.aspx http://atlanticadaptation.ca/vulnerability-assessment http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0 http://www.tophc.ca/Documents/TOPHC%202013%20Presentations/16d-%20Mark%20Pajot%20TOPHC_April_3_2013_FINAL.pdf http://www.peelregion.ca/planning/climatechange/reports/aug132010-adaptation.htm   139  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  36 Hennessey, R., Love, N., Kinnear, L. and Duerden, F., 2011. Atlin   Climate Change Adaptation Plan.  37 Backgrounder: Canada’s Ongoing Commitment to Climate   Change Adaptation. [Webpage]. 2013. Environment Canada.   [Revised 2013–08–02; Cited 2013–08–07] Available online at:   http://ec.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=2D1D6FA7-1&news=   B67A7995-A1CA-4DE3-89D2-E4E3C0E24BFB  38 Helping Canadians Adapt to Climate Change. [Webpage]. 2012.   Government of Canada. [Revised 2012–10–01; Cited 2013–08–16].   Available online at: http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/default.  asp?lang=En&n=2B2A953E-1  39 Chapter 9 Update report to From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada   in a Changing Climate. In press. Natural Resources Canada.  40 Québec in Action! [Webpage]. 2013. Développement durable,   Environnement, Faune et Parcs Québec. [Cited 2013–08–01]   Available online at: http://www.mddefp.gouv.qc.ca/   changements/plan_action/index-en.htm  41 Ibid, p. 53.  42 Ibid, p. 54.  43 Pg. 13, Finances Quebec. 2012. Budget 2012–2013 Québec and   Climate Change: A Greener Environment. Gouvernement du   Québec. Available online at: www.budget.finances.gouv.qc.ca/  Budget/2012-2013/en/documents/climate.pdf  44 Climate Ready: Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan   2011–2014. 2011. Ontario Ministry of the Environment. Available   online at: http://www.ene.gov.on.ca/environment/en/resources/  STDPROD_081665.html  45 Ibid  46 Biodiversity in Ontario: Protecting What Sustains Us.   [Webpage]. 2013. Ministry of Natural Resources, Ontario.   [Revised 2013–04–09; Cited 2013–07–26]. Available online at:   http://www.mnr.gov.on.ca/en/business/biodiversity/index.html  47 Gleeson, J., Gray, P., Douglas, A., Lemieux, C.J., and Nielsen, G.   2011. A Practitioner’s Guide to Climate Change Adaptation in   Ontario’s Ecosystems. Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and   Adaptation Resources, Sudbury, Ontario. 74 p.  48 Manitoba Conservation and Water Stewardship. 2012.   Manitoba’s Green Plan. Government of Manitoba. Available   online at: www.gov.mb.ca/conservation/tomorrownowgreen   plan/pdf/tomorrowNowBook.pdf  49 Preparing for Climate Change: British Columbia’s Adaptation   Strategy. 2010. British Columbia, Ministry of Environment.   Available online at: http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/  50 Carlson, Deborah. October 2012. Preparing for Climate Change:   An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British   Columbia. Vancouver (BC): National Library of Canada. 110 p.  51 Plan2Adapt. [Webpage]. 2013. Pacific Climate Impacts   Consortium. [Cited 2013–08–30]. Available online at: http://  pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt  52 Pan-Territorial Adaptation Strategy. 2011. Government of the   Northwest Territories, Government of Nunavut, Government   of Yukon. Available online at: http://www.anorthernvision.ca/  strategy/  53 Lemmen et al., 2008; Field, C.B., L.D. Mortsch, M. Brklacich,   D.L. Forbes, P. Kovacs, J.A. Patz, S.W. Running and M.J.   Scott, 2007: North America. Climate Change 2007: Impacts,   Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II   to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel   on Climate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof,   P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, Eds., Cambridge University   Press, Cambridge, UK, 617–652  54 Chapter 9 Update report to From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada   in a Changing Climate. In press. Natural Resources Canada.  55 Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. [Webpage]. 2012. City of   Vancouver. [Revised 2012–11–07; Cited 2013–07–31]. Available   online at: http://vancouver.ca/green-vancouver/climate-change-   adaptation-strategy.aspx  56 Urban Forest Management Plan. 2012. City of Edmonton.   Available online at: http://www.edmonton.ca/environmental/  documents/Urban_Forest_Management_Plan.pdf  57 Pg. 7 Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://   publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0  58 City of Iqaluit. 2010. City of Iqaluit General Plan. By-law 703.   Iqaluit, NU. Available online at: htpp://www.city.iqaluit.  nu.ca/i18n/English/pdf/GeneralPlanOctober2010Eng.pdf;   Pg. 4 Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://www.  nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-   adaptation/12003  59 City of Ottawa Official Plan, Section 2.4—Maintaining   Environmental Integrity. Available online at: http://ottawa.ca/  en/official-plan-0/24-maintaining-environmental-integrity  http://ec.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=2D1D6FA7-1&news=B67A7995-A1CA-4DE3-89D2-E4E3C0E24BFB http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=2B2A953E-1 http://www.mddefp.gouv.qc.ca/changements/plan_action/index-en.htm www.budget.finances.gouv.qc.ca/Budget/2012-2013/en/documents/climate.pdf http://www.ene.gov.on.ca/environment/en/resources/STDPROD_081665.html http://www.mnr.gov.on.ca/en/business/biodiversity/index.html http://www.gov.mb.ca/conservation/tomorrownowgreenplan/pdf/tomorrowNowBook.pdf http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/ http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt http://www.anorthernvision.ca/strategy/ http://vancouver.ca/green-vancouver/climate-change-adaptation-strategy.aspx http://www.edmonton.ca/environmental/documents/Urban_Forest_Management_Plan.pdf http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0 http://www.city.iqaluit.nu.ca/i18n/English/pdf/GeneralPlanOctober2010Eng.pdf http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/12003 http://ottawa.ca/en/official-plan-0/24-maintaining-environmental-integrity   140  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  60 Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://   publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0  61 Regional Adaptation Collaboratives. [Webpage]. 2011. Natural   Resources Canada. [Revised 2011-10-14; Cited 2013-07-22].   Available online at: https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/  impacts-adaptation/regional-initiatives/10631  62 Adaptation Platform. [Webpage]. 2012. Natural Resources   Canada. [Revised 2012–09–14; Cited 2013–07–22]. Available   online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/impacts-   adaptation/adaptation-platform/10027  63 Adaptation Platform. [Webpage]. 2012. Natural Resources   Canada. [Revised 2012–09–14; Cited 2013–09–20]. Available   online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/impacts-   adaptation/adaptation-platform/10027  64 Climate Change Adaptation Community of Practice. [Webpage].   2013. [Cited 2013–07–23]. Available online at: https://   www.ccadaptation.ca/en/landing  65 Canadian Parks Council Climate Change Working Group.   2013. Canadian Parks and Protected Areas: Helping Canada   Weather Climate Change. Parks Canada Agency on behalf of   the Canadian Parks Council. 52 pp. Available online at: http://  www.parks-parcs.ca/english/CPC%20Climate%20Change%20  Report%20FINAL%20engLR.pdf  66 Chapter 7 Update report to From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada   in a Changing Climate. In press. Natural Resources Canada.  67 Projects Supported by the Go Green Fund. [Webpage]. Date   unknown. Go Green, Government of Saskatchewan. [Published   2013; Cited 2013–09–03]. Available online at: http://www.   environment.gov.sk.ca/go-green/fund/supported-projects  68 Parks and Protected Areas. [Webpage]. 2013. Department of   Environment, Nova Scotia. [Revised 2012–04–24; Cited 2013–08–  06]. Available online at: http://www.gov.ns.ca/parksandprotec   tedareas/  69 Backgrounder: Weather and Marine Services in the Arctic.   [Webpage]. 2013. Environment Canada. [Revised 2013–06–26;   Cited 2013–07–26] Available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/  default.asp?lang=En&n=714D9AAE-1&news=3FCC5F0F-01C6-  4EC6-99A6-20E2D1973F08  70 Adaptation. [Webpage]. 2013. Natural Resources Canada.   [Revised 2013–07–10; Cited 2013–07–17]. Available online at:   http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pages/35  71 Climate Change. [Webpage]. 2013. Canadian Council of Forest   Ministers. [Cited 2013–07–17]. Available online at: http://www.  ccfm.org/english/coreproducts-cc.asp  72 IMG Golder Corporation. 2012. Good Environmental Practices   for Northern Mining and Necessary Infrastructure. Nunavut   Regional Adaptation Collaborative. Government of Nunavut.   Available online at: www.nwtclimatechange.ca/sites/default/  files/Northern_Mining_Environmental_Practices.pdf  73 International Institute for Sustainable Development, 2013.  74 ADAPTool Instructions. [Webpage]. 2013. International Institute   for Sustainable Development. [Cited 2013–07–17]. Available   online at: http://www.iisd.org/foresightgroup/howto.aspx  75 Pg. 91 Canada. National Round Table on the Environment and   the Economy. 2012. Facing the Elements: Building Business   Resilience in a Changing Climate (Case Studies). Available   online at: http://collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives   2/20130322140744/http://nrtee-trnee.ca/facing_the_elements  76 Water and Climate Adaptation. [Webpage]. 2013. Natural   Resources Canada. [Cited 2013–08–08]. Available online at:   http://waterandclimate.ca/wp/  77 Centre d’expertise hydrique du Québec. 2013. Atlas    hydroclimatique du Québec méridional—Impact des    changements climatiques sur les régimes de crue, d’étiage et   d’hydraulicité à l’horizon 2050. Québec, 2013, 51 p.  78 Kennedy, Gavin W. 2012. Development of a GIS-Based Approach   for the Assessment of Relative Seawater Intrusion Vulnerability   in Nova Scotia, Canada. International Association of   Hydrogeologists Congress 2012. Available online at: http://www.  xcdtech.com/iah2012/iah2012/Papers/Paper661.pdf  79 Alberta Water Demands and Indicators. [Webpage]. 2013.   Alberta Water Portal. [Published 2013; Cited 2013–09–03].   Available online at: http://www.albertawater.com/index.php/  water-facts-info/water-demand  80 Nelitz, Marc, Boardley, Samantha, and Russell Smith. 2013. Tools   for Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments for Watersheds.   Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. Available   online at: http://www.ccme.ca/ourwork/water.html  81 Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. 2011.   Selected Tools To Evaluate Water Monitoring Networks For   Climate Change Adaptation. Available online at: http://www.  ccme.ca/ourwork/water.html  82 WorleyParsons Canada Ltd., Economics for the Environment   Consultancy Ltd. 2010. Water Valuation Guidance Document.   http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0 https://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/impacts-adaptation/regional-initiatives/10631 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/impacts-adaptation/adaptation-platform/10027 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/environment/impacts-adaptation/adaptation-platform/10027 https://www.ccadaptation.ca/en/landing http://www.parks-parcs.ca/english/CPC%20Climate%20Change%20Report%20FINAL%20engLR.pdf http://www.environment.gov.sk.ca/go-green/fund/supported-projects http://www.gov.ns.ca/parksandprotectedareas/ http://www.ec.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=714D9AAE-1&news=3FCC5F0F-01C6-4EC6-99A6-20E2D1973F08 http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pages/35 http://www.ccfm.org/english/coreproducts-cc.asp www.nwtclimatechange.ca/sites/default/files/Northern_Mining_Environmental_Practices.pdf http://www.iisd.org/foresightgroup/howto.aspx http://collectionscanada.gc.ca/webarchives2/20130322140744/http://nrtee-trnee.ca/facing_the_elements http://waterandclimate.ca/wp/ http://www.xcdtech.com/iah2012/iah2012/Papers/Paper661.pdf http://www.albertawater.com/index.php/water-facts-info/water-demand http://www.ccme.ca/ourwork/water.html http://www.ccme.ca/ourwork/water.html   141  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. Available   online at: http://www.ccme.ca/ourwork/water.html  83 Prairies Regional Adaptation Collaborative. [Webpage]. Date   unknown. [Cited 2013–07–17]. Available online at: http://www.  parc.ca/rac/  84 Synthesis Report. [Webpage]. Date unknown. Prairies Regional   Adaptation Collaborative. [Cited 2013–07–17]. Available online   at: http://www.parc.ca/rac/index.php?page=synthesisButton  85 Pg. 5 J. H. Archibald Consulting. 2011. Review of Alberta Climate   Change Adaptation Projects within the Prairies Regional   Adaptation Collaborative (PRAC) and Recommendations   for Future Action on Climate Change Adaptation in Alberta.   32 p. Available online at: http://www.parc.ca/rac/index.  php?page=synthesisButton  86 Yukon. 2013. Hydroelectricity. Climate Change Adaptation   Information Notes. Whitehorse, Yukon. Available online at:   http://www.env.gov.yk.ca/air-water-waste/Climate-Change-  Adaptation-Information.php  87 Chapter 8 Update report to From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada   in a Changing Climate. In press. Natural Resources Canada.  88 Ibid  89 Schneckenberger, R.B., Farrell, A.C., Senior, M. 2009. Economic   assessment of climate change scenarios on drainage infrastruc-  ture design. Transportation Association of Canada Annual   Meeting, Vancouver.  90 Adaptation of Buildings and Infrastructures. [Webpage]. Date   unknown. Ouranos, ND. [Cited 2013–09–09]. Available online at:   http://adaptation.ouranos.ca/en/adaptation/vulnerabilities-   impacts/environment/south/adaptation-buildings-   infrastructure/  91 Tides, Currents, and Water Levels. [Webpage]. Date unknown.   Fisheries and Oceans Canada. [Cited 2013-09-03]. Available   online at: http://tides.gc.ca/eng  92 Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://www.  nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-   adaptation/12003  93 Pg. 26, Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://   publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0  94 Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning. [Webpage].   Available online at: http://calp.forestry.ubc.ca/  95 Delta RAC Sea Level Rise Adaptation. [Webpage]. Date   unknown. Natural Resources Canada. [Revised 2012–04–23;   Cited 2013–09–03]. Available online at: http://www.delta-   adaptation-bc.ca/  96 Bernatchez, P., Fraser, C., Friesinger, S., Jolivet, Y., Dugas, S.,   Drejza, S. et Morissette, A., 2008. Sensibilité des côtes et    vulnérabilité des communautés du golfe du Saint-Laurent   aux impacts des changements climatiques. Laboratoire de   dynamique et de gestion intégrée des zones côtières, Université   du Québec à Rimouski. Rapport de recherche remis au   Consortium OURANOS et au FACC, 256 p.  97 Adaptation. [Webpage]. Date unknown. British Columbia,   Ministry of Environment. [Cited 2013–07–17]. Available online at:   http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/  98 Irvine, M. 2013. Coastal Monitoring In Newfoundland and   Labrador: 2012 Update. Geological Survey. Report 13–1, pages   43–54. Available online at: www.nr.gov.nl.ca/nr/mines/   geoscience/publications/currentresearch/2013/Irvine_2013.pdf  99 King Tide Photo Initiative. [Webpage]. Date unknown. British   Columbia. [Cited 2013–07–18]. Available online at: http://www.  livesmartbc.ca/connect/kingtidephotos/  100 Canadian Institute of Planners. Preparing for Climate Change   [Webpage]. Available online at: http://www.planning   forclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/index.cfm; and Public   Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee (PIEVC)   Engineering Protocol [Webpage]. 2013. Available online at:   http://www.pievc.ca/e/index_.cfm  101 Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee   (PIEVC) Engineering Protocol [Webpage]. 2013. [Cited   2013–10–03]. Available online at: http://www.pievc.ca/e/doc_list.  cfm?dsid=43  102 Climate Change Adaptation. [Webpage]. 2013. Federation of   Canadian Municipalities. [Revised 2013–07–11; Cited 2013–09–  03]. Available online at: http://www.fcm.ca/home/issues/   environment/climate-change-adaptation.htm  103 Changing Climate, Changing Communities. [Webpage]. Date   unknown. International Council for Local Environmental   Initiatives Canada. [Cited 2013–08–17]. Available online at:   http://www.icleicanada.org/resources/item/3-changing-   climate-changing-communities  http://www.ccme.ca/ourwork/water.html http://www.parc.ca/rac/ http://www.parc.ca/rac/index.php?page=synthesisButton http://www.parc.ca/rac/index.php?page=synthesisButton http://www.env.gov.yk.ca/air-water-waste/Climate-Change-Adaptation-Information.php http://adaptation.ouranos.ca/en/adaptation/vulnerabilitiesimpacts/environment/south/adaptation-buildings-infrastructure/ http://tides.gc.ca/eng http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/12003 http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0 http://calp.forestry.ubc.ca/ http://www.delta-adaptation-bc.ca/ http://www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/ http://www.nr.gov.nl.ca/nr/mines/ http://www.livesmartbc.ca/connect/kingtidephotos/ http://www.planningforclimatechange.ca/wwwroot/index.cfm http://www.pievc.ca/e/index_.cfm http://www.pievc.ca/e/doc_list.cfm?dsid=43 http://www.fcm.ca/home/issues/environment/climate-change-adaptation.htm http://www.icleicanada.org/resources/item/3-changing-climate-changing-communities   142  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  104 About Our Resources. [Webpage]. Date unknown. International   Council for Local Environmental Initiatives Canada. [Cited   2013–08–17]. Available online at: http://www.icleicanada.org/  resources  105 Building Adaptive and Resilient Communities. [Webpage].   Date unknown. International Council for Local Environmental   Initiatives Canada. [Cited 2013–08–17]. Available online at:   http://www.icleicanada.org/programs/adaptation  106 Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://   publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0  107 Davison, Janet and Powers, Lucas. [Webpage]. 2013. Why   Alberta’s floods hit so hard and fast. CBC News Online.   [Published 2013–06–22; Cited 2013–07–17]. Available online at:   http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/story/2013/06/21/   f-alberta-floods.html  108 Mills, Carys. 2013. Toronto’s July flood listed as Ontario’s most   costly natural disaster. The Toronto Star. [Published 2013–08–14;   Cited 2013–08–16]. Available online at: http://www.thestar.com/   business/2013/08/14/july_flood_ontarios_most_costly_   natural_disaster.html  109 Lemmen, D.S.,Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E., editors.   2008. From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing   Climate 2007; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 448 p.   Available online at: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/   climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132  110 Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative. [Webpage].   2013. Standards Council of Canada. [Cited 2013–07–19]. Available   online at: http://www.scc.ca/en/stakeholder-participation/   roadmaps-and-standardization-solutions/northern-   Infrastructure-standardization-initiative  111 Champalle, Clara, Tudge, Pamela, Sparling, Erik, Riedlsperger,   Rudolf, Ford, Dr. James and Dr. Trevor Bell. 2013. Adapting   the Built Environment in a Changing Northern Climate.   Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 181 p.  112 Regional Adaptation Collaborative—Quebec. [Webpage]. 2011.   Natural Resources Canada. [Revised 2011–03–25; Cited    2013–09–04].  113 Adaptation Guidelines for the National Energy Code of Canada   for Buildings 2011. [Webpage]. 2013. National Research Council   of Canada. [Revised 2013–06–05; Cited 2013–09–06]. Available   online at: http://www.nationalcodes.nrc.gc.ca/eng/necb/  114 Growing Forward 2. [Webpage]. 2013. Agriculture and Agri-Food   Canada. [Revised 2013-07-23; Cited 2013–07–26]. Available online   at: http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/key-departmental-   initiatives/growing-forward-2/?id=1294780620963  115 The AgriInnovation Program. [Webpage]. 2013. Agriculture and   Agri-Food Canada. [Revised 2013–07–19; Cited 2013–07–26].   Available online at: http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/key-   departmental-initiatives/growing-forward-2/the-agriinnova   tion-program/?id=1354832113390  116 The AgriCompetitiveness Program. [Webpage]. 2013. Agriculture   and Agri-Food Canada. [Revised 2013–06–19; Cited 2013–07–26].   Available online at: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. [Revised   2013–07–23; Cited 2013–07–26]. Available online at: http://www.  agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/key-departmental-initiatives/grow   ing-forward-2/the-agricompetitiveness-program/?id=   1354828824914  117 The AgriMarketing Program. [Webpage]. 2013. Agriculture and   Agri-Food Canada. [Revised 2013–06–19; Cited 2013–07–26].   Available online at http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/key-   departmental-initiatives/growing-forward-2/the-agrimarket   ing-program/?id=1354829572443  118 Atlas agroclimatique du Québec. [Webpage]. 2012. Agrométéo   Québec. [Published 2012; Cited 2013–09–03]. Available online at:   http://dev.agrometeo.org/atlas/index/true  119 Impact and Adaptation: Agriculture. [Webpage]. Date unknown.   Ouranos. [Cited 2013–08–08]. Available online at: http://www.  ouranos.ca/en/scientific-program/impacts-adaptation/   agriculture.php  120 Self-Assessment Tool. [Webpage]. Date unknown. SaskAdapt.   [Cited 2013–08–12]. Available online at: http://www.parc.ca/  saskadapt/self-assessment-tool  121 Pilot Infectious Disease Impact and Response Systems.   [Webpage]. 2013. Public Health Agency of Canada. [Revised   2013–02–15; Cited 2013–09–03]. Available online at: http://www.  phac-aspc.gc.ca/chn-rcs/e-pidirs-eng.php  122 Health Canada. 2011. Communicating the Health Risks of   Extreme Heat Events: Toolkit for Public Health and Emergency   Management Officials; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON,   60 p.  123 Health Canada. 2012. Heat Alert and Response Systems to   Protect Health: Best Practices Guidebook; Government of   Canada, Ontario, ON, 92 p.  http://www.icleicanada.org/resources http://www.icleicanada.org/programs/adaptation http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0 http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/calgary/story/2013/06/21/f-alberta-floods.html http://www.thestar.com/business/2013/08/14/july_flood_ontarios_most_costly_natural_disaster.html http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/assessments/132 http://www.scc.ca/en/stakeholder-participation/roadmaps-and-standardization-solutions/northern-Infrastructure-standardization-initiative http://www.nationalcodes.nrc.gc.ca/eng/necb/ http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/key-departmental-initiatives/growing-forward-2/?id=1294780620963 http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/key-departmental-initiatives/growing-forward-2/the-agriinnovation-program/?id=1354832113390 http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/key-departmental-initiatives/growing-forward-2/the-agricompetitiveness-program/?id=1354828824914 http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/keydepartmental-initiatives/growing-forward-2/the-agrimarketing-program/?id=1354829572443 http://dev.agrometeo.org/atlas/index/true http://www.ouranos.ca/en/scientific-program/impacts-adaptation/agriculture.php http://www.parc.ca/saskadapt/self-assessment-tool http://www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/chn-rcs/e-pidirs-eng.php   143  6 VULNERABILITy ASSESSMENT, CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS AND ADAPTATION MEASURES  ]  124 Pg. 9, Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. 2012. Land use planning   tools for local adaptation to climate change. Ottawa, Ont.:   Government of Canada, 38 p. Available online at: http://   publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0  125 Ilots de chaleur/fraicheur urbains et température de surface.   [Webpage]. 2013. Gouvernement de Québec. [Cited 2013–08–19].   Available online at: http://geoegl.msp.gouv.qc.ca/inspq_icu/  donneesouvertes.html  126 The Heat Alert System. [Webpage]. The City of Toronto.   [Revised 2013–06; Cited 2013–09–02]. Available online at: http://  www.toronto.ca/health/heatalerts/alertsystem.htm  127 International Development Assistance Commitments.   [Webpage]. 2013. Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development   Canada. [Revised 2013–03–13; Cited 2013–07–24]. Available   online at: http://www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/acdi-cida/acdi-cida.nsf/  eng/CAR-616141241-PD4  128 Ibid  129 Canadian International Development Agency. 1992. CIDA’s   Policy for Environmental Sustainability. Available online   at: www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/INET/IMAGES.NSF/vLUImages/  Policy2/$file/ENV-nophotos-E.pdf  130 Pg. 5 Canada, Canadian International Development Agency.   2009. 2012-2013 Report on Plans and Priorities. Ottawa: Queen’s   Printer. Available online at: www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/rpp/2010-2011/  inst/ida/ida01-eng.asp  131 Fast-Start Financing for Adaptation Projects and Initiatives.   [Webpage]. 2012. Government of Canada. [Revised 2012–08–10;   Cited 2013–09–02]. Available online at: http://www.climate   change.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=B7AD7EEA-1  http://publications.gc.ca/pub?id=429706&sl=0 http://geoegl.msp.gouv.qc.ca/inspq_icu/donneesouvertes.html http://www.toronto.ca/health/heatalerts/alertsystem.htm http://www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/acdi-cida/acdi-cida.nsf/eng/CAR-616141241-PD4 http://www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/INET/IMAGES.NSF/vLUImages/Policy2/$file/ENV-nophotos-E.pdf http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/rpp/2010-2011/inst/ida/ida01-eng.asp http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=B7AD7EEA-1   144  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  7 Financial Resources and Transfer of Technology 7.1 introduction  Canada provides a variety of support to efforts that  address climate change in developing countries,  delivered through a wide range of multilateral, bilateral  and partnership channels.  In line with its commitments under the Copenhagen  Accord and the Cancun Agreements, Canada  significantly scaled-up its financial support to address  climate change during the fast-start financing period,  which is covered by this report. Canada’s contribution  to, and collaboration with, bilateral, multilateral,  private sector and non-governmental partners has  generated significant environmental benefits and is  paving the way for continued progress within, and  outside the United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (UNFCCC). The financial resources  section of this chapter (7.2) highlights some key  initiatives the Government of Canada has supported  since the 5th National Communications to the  UNFCCC. Table 7.2 and 7.3 also present a summary of  Canadian climate finance delivered from 2009–2010   to 2012–2013.  The Government of Canada is actively engaged  in the development and deployment of clean  technologies through a range of multilateral and  bilateral channels: efforts are focused on areas  including developing technical tools to support clean  energy innovation, supporting energy efficiency,  sustainable forest management and carbon capture  and storage. Section 7.3 of this chapter highlights key  examples of Canada’s recent efforts to advance clean  technology globally.  7.2 Financial Resources  This section presents a summary of the financial  support provided by Canada since its last National  Communication to the UNFCCC and highlights some of  the key initiatives that received support from Canada.  It focusses on all initiatives supported by Canada that  have had as objective or result the achievement of  climate benefits and have contributed significantly  to the advancement of the UNFCCC’s ultimate goals.  Where known, private financing mobilized by this  support is indicated.   Over the last four fiscal years (2009–2010 to 2012– 2013), Canada provided over $1.54 billion1 to support  climate change projects through a variety of channels  and programs (see figure 7.1). This amount includes  $1.2 billion in fast-start financing delivered over the last  three fiscal years (2010–2011 to 2012–2013), as well as  $350 million2 of international assistance projects with a  direct or a significant focus on climate change.   The $1.54 billion we are reporting on includes  $55.35 million of fast-start financing that was used to  increase our contribution to the Global Environment  Facility (GEF), bringing Canada’s total contribution  to the GEF to over $204 million over the last four  years (See table 7.2). The amounts for Canada’s GEF  contribution have not been further broken down by  focal area due to the complexity of doing so within  the broader GEF trust fund. Detailed information  on Canada’s support to the GEF can be found at  section 7.2.4.  7.2.1 new and additional Resources Canada’s provision and mobilization of financial  support is in line with its obligation under the UNFCCC  to provide new and additional resources as part of its  overall support to help developing countries implement  actions to address climate change.     145  7 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGy  ]  Figure 7.1 Canadian Climate Finance Programming for Fiscal Years  2009–2010 to 2012–2013 (Not including contributions to the Global  Environment Facility)  Canada’s fast-start financing effort is the prime example  of Canadian support that is fully new and additional.  Canada provided $1.2 billion in support to projects that  were above and beyond what was planned prior to the  Copenhagen Accord.   Over the past four years, Canada also responded  to priorities identified by bilateral partners in the  context of ongoing and long-standing development  partnerships that include addressing climate change  issues as part of objectives set by its partners. For  this support, it is not possible to determine a simple  definition under which this programming is new and  additional or not, nor is it necessary to do so given the  importance of seeking to mainstream climate change  results in country-driven programming.   7.2.2  Geographic Distribution  The geographic distribution of Canada’s climate finance  support over the reporting period has been estimated  (see Figure 7.2). However, these estimates could evolve  over the next years as financing provided to multilateral  banks rolls out at the project level.   It is currently estimated that, over the period covered by  fiscal years 2009/10–2012/13, 33% of Canadian climate  finance flowed to sub-Saharan Africa, 29% to Latin  America and the Caribbean, 15% to South Asia, 9% to  East Asia and the Pacific, 2% to the Middle East and  North Africa, and 2% to developing countries in Central  Asia and Eastern Europe. 10% was allocated to global  programs for which it is not possible to estimate a  geographic distribution at this time.   Figure 7.2 Canadian Climate Finance by Region    146  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Figure 7.3 canadian climate Finance by Priority area (estimated  total)  East Asia and the Pacific, 2% to the Middle East and  North Africa, and 2% to developing countries in Central  Asia and Eastern Europe. 10% was allocated to global  programs for which it is not possible to estimate a  geographic distribution at this time.   Over 60 developing countries are benefiting directly  from funding delivered through Canada’s bilateral  channels and Canadian facilities at multilateral  institutions, and this number will grow as these facilities  continue to make project commitments with available  Canadian fast-start funds. A much larger number of  countries will also benefit from contributions made by  Canada to multilateral trust funds such as the GEF and  the Least Developed Country Fund.  7.2.3 sectorial distribution  Canada’s support is primarily focused on three broad  areas: adaptation by the poorest and most vulnerable  countries, clean energy, and forests and agriculture.   As shown by Figure 7.3, it is currently estimated that  52% of Canada’s climate finance delivered over the  reporting period will support clean energy projects  and initiatives, 32% will go to adaptation projects,  9% for projects related to forests and agriculture,  and 7% for cross-cutting programming. Once again,  these estimates could change slightly over time  as multilateral institutions roll out our fast-start  financing contributions.   Table 7.1 Financial contributions to Multilateral institutions and Programmes  institution or Programme contribution (millions of cad)  adaptation by the Poorest and Most Vulnerable countries 2009–2010 2010–2011 2011–2012 2012–2013  caribbean development Bank—community disaster Risk Reduction Program† 10.00 4.50   international network for Bamboo and Rattan† 0.49  least developed countries Fund† 20.00  united nations development Programme—canadian climate adaptation Facility† 16.50  World Bank—Pilot Program for climate Resilience† 15.00  World Food Programme—MeReT—ethiopia† 15.00    Table 7.1 Financial contributions to Multilateral institutions and Programmes (continued)  147  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  institution or Programme contribution (millions of cad)  adaptation by the Poorest and Most Vulnerable countries 2009–2010 2010–2011 2011–2012 2012–2013  World Meteorological organization—global Framework for climate services† 6.14  World Meteorological organization—haiti Weather services† 6.50  World Bank – Productive safety net Programme—ethiopia* 34.00  World Food Programme—Food for asset Building—ethiopia* 3.00  World Food Programme—cambodia* 4.00  World Food Programme—Productive safety net Programme—ethiopia* 35.50 40.55 17.50  institution or Programme contribution (millions of cad)  clean energy 2009–2010 2010–2011 2011–2012 2012–2013  asian development Bank—canadian climate Fund for the Private sector in asia† 82.39  clean Technology Fund† 100.00 100.00  global alliance for clean cookstoves† 0.60 1.30  inter-american development Bank—canadian climate Fund for the Private sector in  the americas†  200.00 50.00  international Finance corporation—canada climate change Programmea† 276.83  14.72 #  60.28 #  united nations environment Programme—climate and clean air coalition† 13.00  institution or Programme contribution (millions of cad)  Forests and agriculture 2009–2010 2010–2011 2011–2012 2012–2013  cgiaR Research Program on climate change, agriculture and Food security†  5.50  congo Basin Forest Fund† 20.00  Forest carbon Partnership Facility—carbon Fund† 5.00  Forest carbon Partnership Facility—Readiness Fund† 40.00  international center for Tropical agriculture† 0.50  international Fund for agricultural development† 19.85  World Bank—Bio carbon Fund† 4.50    148  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  institution or Programme contribution (millions of cad)  cross-cutting 2009–2010 2010–2011 2011–2012 2012–2013  united nations development Programme—Mexico† 2.50  united nations environment Programme—climate Technology centre and network† 2.50  unFccc supplementary Fund† 0.65 1.00  unFccc Trust fund for Participation† 1.00  sub-total—contribution targeting the Rio conventions as a ‘principal objective’† 20.05 357.33 356.10 287.32  sub-total—contribution targeting the Rio conventions as a ‘significant objective’* 38.50 74.55 21.50 0.00  sub-total—other climate finance # 0.00 14.72 0.00 60.28  Total 58.55 446.60 377.60 347.60  legend: † Contribution targeting  the Rio Conventions as a  ‘principal objective’  * Contribution targeting  the Rio Conventions as a  ‘significant objective’  # Other climate finance  excluding official development  assistance   a  The initial commitment to the International Finance Corporation (IFC)-Canada Climate Change Program in fiscal year (FY) 2010–11 was $291.55 million.  In FY2012–13, $75 million was transferred to the Catalyst Fund and $60.28 million of new fast-start resources were contributed. These transactions  resulted in a final funding level of $271 million for the IFC-Canada Climate Change Program, and $75 million to the Catalyst Fund.  7.2.4  Financial support to the global  environment Facility  Canada continued to support climate change activities  through its assessed and regular contributions to the  Global Environment Facility (GEF). Canada also used  $18.5 million in each year of fast-start financing to  increase annual payments to the 5th replenishment of  the GEF, bringing total contributions over 2009–2010  to 2012–2013 to $204.6 million, and Canada’s total  contributions to the GEF’s 5th replenishment   (2010–2014) to $238 million, a more than 50% increase  over the 4th Replenishment. More information on  Canada’s GEF contribution is shown in 7.2 below.  Table 7.2 contributions to the global environment Facility   contribution (millions of cad)a  2009– 2010  2010– 2011  2011– 2012  2012– 2013  global environment Facility 33.94 58.58 54.75 57.29 a Canada  received a discount for accelerated payment for its    GEF-5 contribution. Thus, Canada’s GEF-5 paid-in contribution  (CAD $216.6 million) and recorded contribution (CAD  $238.4 million) slightly differ. This table displays paid- in contributions.  7.2.5  adaptation by the Poorest and Most  Vulnerable countries  Over the last four years, Canada has delivered on  its promise to scale up support for adaptation by  vulnerable countries by providing over $480 million  to bilateral and multilateral partners and to non- governmental organizations from 2009–2010 to  2012–2013. Canada’s adaptation support was delivered to  over 50 countries in Africa, Asia and Latin America and  the Caribbean.   For example, Canada and the United Nations  Development Programme (UNDP) worked  collaboratively to establish the Canadian Climate  Adaptation Facility, which will help local populations to  build more resilient agricultural practices, strengthen  their infrastructure, diversify their sources of livelihood  and improve their food security. The $16.5 million  Canadian facility at the UNDP is focusing on the  poorest and most vulnerable populations in six  countries in Africa, South East Asia and the Caribbean.  Canada has also provided support to the World  Meteorological Organization with a $13.6 million  contribution to projects aimed at enhancing the   Table 7.1 Financial contributions to Multilateral institutions and Programmes (continued)    149  7 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGy  ]  availability of modern weather services for vulnerable  countries. Of this amount, $6.5 million was disbursed to  support work in collaboration with other international  partners to rebuild a weather and climate warning  service in Haiti following the devastating earthquake  of 2010 that destroyed this capability. An additional  $7.1 million provided support for the Global Framework  for Climate Services, which aims to enhance resilience  in social, economic and environmental systems to  climate variability and climate change.  The Canada Fund for African Climate Resilience  delivered $23.2 million in partnership with non- governmental and educational organizations to  substantially improve and increase food security and  economic growth and reduce the impacts of climate  change through adaptation measures in Africa. The  support, focusing on projects in eight countries (Burkina  Faso, Cameroon, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ghana,  Ethiopia, Rwanda, Senegal and Tanzania), will prevent or  reduce the impact of climate change on future economic  growth and food security in these countries. More  information on projects that received support through  this fund can be found in table 7.3.   Canada’s International Development Research Centre  (IDRC) is one of the leading institutions worldwide that  supports research related to adaptation in developing  countries. Canada has provided over $80 million to  IDRC to support bilateral and global research on how  best to adapt to the impacts of climate change in  Africa, Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean.  In Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean,  research will contribute to solutions for managing  the water-related impacts of climate change such as  flooding, melting glaciers, rising sea-levels, and more  frequent and intense storms. In Africa, researchers  are investigating population health vulnerabilities to  vector-borne diseases, looking at how to manage scarce  water resources to safeguard agricultural production,  and assessing the feasibility of different adaptation  strategies to inform African governments’ response to  climate change.  7.2.6  Clean Energy Over the last four years, Canada has worked  collaboratively with a number of multilateral  organizations to diversify its support for clean energy in  developing countries.  For example, Canada made a $200 million contribution  to the Clean Technology Fund (CTF) of the World  Bank’s Clean Investment Funds to support the  demonstration, deployment and transfer of low carbon  technologies in developing countries. CTF investment  plans are tailored to a country’s needs so that they can  be integrated into national development objectives  and serve as programmatic organizing frameworks for  the activities of actors across institutions, stakeholder  groups, and sectors. The CTF Trust Fund Committee  committed these and other recent contributions to the  investment plans of Chile, India and Nigeria.   Canada has also made a $2.5 million fast-start financing  contribution to support the UNEP in implementing  the Climate Technology Centre and Network (CTCN).  The CTCN will provide tailored advice and technical  assistance to developing countries to support the  implementation of technology actions for mitigation  or adaptation objectives. Canada’s contribution will  support start-up costs of the Centre and specific  capacity-building activities, and facilitate private sector  engagement, given its important role in the technology  transfer process. With a seat on the CTCN advisory  board, Canada is taking an active interest in the  development of this key institution.  Canada, along with Bangladesh, Ghana, Mexico, Sweden,  the United States, and the United Nations Environment  Programme, launched the Climate and Clean Air  Coalition (CCAC) in February 2012. The CCAC is a new  international voluntary initiative seeking to reduce  Short-Lived Climate Pollutants. Canada has delivered  $13 million of its fast-start financing to support the  CCAC and its implementation of projects of benefit to  developing country Partners. Reducing emissions of  short-lived climate pollutants is part of Canada’s overall     150  7 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGy  ]  international climate change strategy, and provides an  opportunity to make near-term progress on climate  change while providing air quality and health benefits,  and reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.   The use of clean cook stove technologies can  prevent severe burns, premature deaths, while  avoiding deforestation and contribute to climate  change mitigation. This is why Canada has provided  $1.9 million of fast-start financing to support the Global  Alliance for Clean Cookstoves. Since its launch by the  U.S. in 2010, the Global Alliance has raised the visibility  of the issue of household energy pollution, and  mobilized hundreds of bilateral, non-profit, academic,  U.N., corporate, and foundation partners in pursuit of  an ambitious clean cooking agenda. The Global Alliance  has also conducted comprehensive clean cookstoves  and fuels market assessments in sixteen countries, and  raised millions of dollars to support critical life-saving  and life-changing initiatives in some of the globe’s  poorest countries.   Between 2007 and 2011, Canada also supported the Asia  Pacific Partnership on Clean Development and Climate  (APP). The APP enhanced partnerships between the  public and private sectors, promoted best practices and  technologies across a range of key sectors, and deepened  cooperation among its seven partner countries. Between  2008 and 2011, Canada invested $13.02 million in 35  APP projects within the energy-intensive energy supply  sectors, which offered the greatest potential to address  climate change and air pollution challenges. Canada’s  investment was matched by a $99.32 million investment  from public and private sector partners.  7.2.7  Forests and Agriculture Canada’s financial resources for climate change were  also delivered to a number of multilateral organizations  to support sustainable agriculture and forest  management in developing countries.  For example, the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  Readiness Fund supports capacity building and   technical assistance for developing countries. Canada’s  $40 million contribution to the Readiness Fund  supports countries in building national capacity  to address the problem of deforestation and forest  degradation. The Forest Carbon Partnership Facility  (FCPF) provides technical and financial assistance  to 36 developing countries engaged in Reduction  of Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation  (REDD+). As of June 2013, the FCPF has allocated  $121.6 million to REDD+ countries. This includes  grant agreements representing firm commitments of  approximately $42.5 million, out of which $9.7 million  have been disbursed in grant to countries.  The Congo Basin in Central Africa is home to one- quarter of the world’s tropical forests. This vast area  is critical for regional and global ecological services  as it acts as a carbon sink and catchment basin.  The Congo Basin countries are the home to nearly  100 million people, of which some of the world’s poorest  people, many of whom depend on the forest for their  livelihoods. As such, sustainable management of the  Congo Basin is key to improving living conditions  while minimizing the impact on the local and global  environment. Canada committed $20 million to the  African Development Bank as the Administrator of the  Congo Basin Forest Fund to help local communities in  forest zones secure sustainable livelihoods and reduce  GHG emissions, therefore alleviating poverty while  maximizing carbon storage. Canada also provided  $2 million to the Congo Basin Forest Partnership to  support technical assistance to working groups on  climate change, forestry governance, biodiversity, and  desertification in the Congo basin region.  Canada made a $19.85 million contribution to the  International Fund for Agricultural Development- Adaptation for Smallholder Agriculture Program.  Launched in 2012, the program is working with  developing countries to increase knowledge and  investments in climate-smart agriculture. For example,  to cope with recurrent flooding in Bangladesh,  the program will contribute to the development of     151  7 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGy  ]  integrated food production systems with alternative  rice varieties in rehabilitated swamp forests, and to the  development of the capacity of rural institutions to  manage climate risk.   Canada has also provided $4.5 million fast-start  financing to the BioCarbon Fund of the World Bank.  This fund is dedicated to helping developing countries  take part in the Clean Development Mechanism’s  Afforestation/Reforestation activities, and to opening  the Clean Development Mechanism by contributing  to an assessment of how carbon assets from forestry  can be formed by developing methodologies and  capacity building.  7.2.8  Mobilising Private Sector Investments The majority of financing for climate change will come  from private sector sources, scaled up climate-focused  investment will be a key part of scaled up action on  climate change. There are a number of potential  barriers to facilitating sufficient private investment,  and therefore Canada is actively contributing to  international efforts to better understand opportunities  for mobilizing private investment.   A large portion of Canada’s climate financing over  the reporting period was provided to multilateral   organizations such as the International Finance  Corporation, the Inter-American Development Bank  and the Asian Development Bank for the establishment  of Canadian facilities targeting the mobilization of  climate friendly private-sector investment in developing  countries. The first two facilities, at the International  Finance Corporation and Inter-American Development  Bank, are fully operational and are showing results on  the ground.   Projects supported by these Canadian facilities are  expected to generate significant environmental benefits  and contributed to leveraging investment from the  public and private sectors. As of September 2013, out  of the $684 million provided to multilateral financial  institutions through our fast-start financing, direct  project investments using approximately $110 million  of the Canadian funding provided has been approved,  helping to mobilize over $1050 million of public and  private sector investment and contributing to achieving  annual GHG emission reductions of over 675 kilotonnes  carbon dioxide equivalent (Kt CO2 eq). These facilities  achieve an incremental benefit by providing support  to projects with measurable, positive climate impacts  that require some financing on concessional terms to  be viable.     152  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions  Fiscal Year 2009–2010  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy  other  Vulnerability  assessments  capacity  Building  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  africa, asia, latin  america and the  caribbean, and the  Middle east*  Support for the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  0.18  africa* Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through  the International Model  Forest Network.  1.41  africa, asia* Support to IDRC for adapation  and climate resilience research  7.75  asia Pacific# Support for clean energy  projects through the Asia  Pacific Partnership.   11.80  Bolivia* Building capacities in  community-based eco- development and environmental  health in connection with water  and sanitation.  0.25  caribbean countries* Supporting natural disasters  management capacities in  national governments and  local communities.   1.28  costa Rica, dominican  Republic, honduras*  Helping communities restore  degraded forests and addressing  livelihood issues of local  landowners in areas with high  levels of rural poverty.   0.15  ethiopia, Philippines,  Jamaica*  Advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions.   0.23  haiti* Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed.  2.03  honduras* Promoting sustainable  agriculture and natural resource  management practices.   0.17  indonesia* Enhancing the livelihood security  and well-being of vulnerable  coastal communities.   0.50  latin america* Support for the Latin American  Energy Organization.  0.50  nigeria† Supporting effective climate  change governance.  1.52  Peru* Supporting the development of  sustainable management policies  and programs.   0.10    153  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy  other  Vulnerability  assessments  capacity  Building  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  Philippines† Supporting the improvement of  enabling policies and strategic  environment for disaster  risk reduction.  1.00  Western africa* Support for climate change  adaptation and capacity building.   0.01  senegal, Tanzania,  south africa*  Increasing the capacity  of local communities to  develop integrated long-term  sustainability plans.  0.13   legend: † Contribution targeting the Rio  Conventions as a ‘principal  objective’  * Contribution targeting  the Rio Conventions as a  ‘significant objective’  # Other climate finance excluding  official development assistance  (ODA)  Fiscal Year 2010–2011  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  africa, asia, latin  america and the  caribbean, and the  Middle east*  Support for the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  7.04  africa* Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through  the International Model  Forest Network.  1.75  africa† African Adaptation Research  Centers Program support (launch  costs, communications, research  information service to partners,  institutional risk assessments,  economic analysis training,  adaptation finance consultancy).  1.25  africa, asia* Support to the International  Development Research Centre for  adaptation and climate resilience  research.  8.28  asia Pacific# Support for clean energy  projects through the Asia  Pacific Partnership.  1.20  Benin† Strengthening economic  skills and climate change  adaptive capacity.   0.78     154  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  Benin, Bolivia, Burkina  Faso, ethiopia,  honduras, Mali, nepal,  senegal, east Timor*  Support for the Unitarian Service  Committee Seeds of Survival  Programme (2010–2015).  1.53  Bolivia* Building capacities in  community-based eco- development and environmental  health in connection with water  and sanitation.  0.13  Burkina-Faso† Irrigation and  climate information.   1.28  caribbean countries* Supporting natural disasters  management capacities in  national governments and  local communities.  1.60  congo Basin Region* Supporting a fair and sustainable  management of natural resources  in Congo Basin countries.   0.29  costa Rica, dominican  Republic, honduras*  Helping communities restore  degraded forests and addressing  livelihood issues of local  landowners in areas with high  levels of rural poverty.   0.04  cuba* Enhancing municipal  environmental management  practices and the quality of life of  the communities in coastal zones.   0.10  egypt† Establishing the Alexandria  Research Centre for Adaptation  to Climate Change.   1.16  ethiopia† Reduce population health  vulnerability and increase  resilience to vector-borne  tropical diseases.   7.35  ethiopia, Kenya,  sudan, Tanzania†  Enhancing climate change  adaptation in agriculture and  water resources in the Greater  Horn of Africa.   1.34  ethiopia, Philippines,  Jamaica*  Advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions, consistent  with the countries’ national  development agendas.   0.68  ghana† Climate change adaptation  research and capacity  development in Ghana.   1.40  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)    155  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)  haiti† Supporting the improvement  of local response to climate  change impacts, and reducing  vulnerability to natural disasters.  4.90  haiti* Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed.  1.90  honduras* Enhancing food security  through improved agricultural  productivity, diversity and the  promotion of sustainable natural  resource management practices.   5.93  indonesia* Enhancing the livelihood security  and well-being of vulnerable  coastal communities on the west  coast of South Sulawesi.   0.99  Kenya† Enhancing climate change  adaptation research capacity in  Kenya’s agriculture sector.   1.12  latin america* Support for the Latin America  Energy Organization.  0.03  lesotho, Malawi,  swaziland†  From research to policy: linking  climate change adaptation  to sustainable agriculture in  southern Africa.   1.50  Mali* Supporting the development and  rehabilitation of the agricultural  irrigation infrastructure.  0.50  nigeria† Supporting effective climate  change governance.  1.17  Peru* Supporting the development of  sustainable management policies  and programs.   0.04  Philippines* Improving the investment climate  for sustainable economic growth.  1.40  Vietnam† Supporting the implementation  of the National Target Program  on climate change.   4.45  Western africa* Support for climate change  adaptation and capacity building.  0.06  legend: † Contribution targeting the Rio  Conventions as a ‘principal  objective’  * Contribution targeting  the Rio Conventions as a  ‘significant objective’  # Other climate finance excluding  ODA    156  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Fiscal Year 2011–2012  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  africa, asia, latin  america and the  caribbean, and the  Middle east*  Support for the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  12.23  africa* Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through  the International Model  Forest Network.  2.72  africa, asia* Support to the International  Development Research Center for  adaptation and climate resilience  research  16.10  asia, latin america,  and the caribbean†   Adaptation Research initiatives  support (launch costs,  communications, research  information services to partners,  institutional risk assessments,  economic analysis training,  adaptation finance consultancy)   1.34  argentina† Adapting to water stress in  Comahue Region of Argentina.   1.26  Barbados, Trinidad  and Tobago, Jamaica,  guyana, grenada†  Sustainable water management  under climate change in small  island states of the Caribbean.   1.50  Benin, Bolivia, Burkina  Faso, ethiopia,  honduras, Mali, nepal,  senegal, east Timor*  Support for the Unitarian Service  Committee—Seeds of Survival  Programme (2010–2015).  2.09  Bolivia† Strengthening local capacity for  adaptation to climate change in  the Bolivian Altiplano.   1.08  Bolivia* Building capacities in community- based eco-development  and environmental health  in connection with water  and sanitation.  0.43  cambodia† Improving water governance  and climate change adaptation  in Cambodia.   1.50  cambodia, ghana,  Kenya, Mozambique,  Zimbabwe*  Providing improved food  and economic security for  communities who are among  the poorest and most vulnerable  people in their societies.  1.38  caribbean countries* Supporting natural disasters  management capacities in  national governments and  local communities.  2.04  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)    157  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  chile† Vulnerability and adaptation to  climate variability and change in  the Maipo Basin, central Chile.   1.30  chile, colombia,  dominican Republic,  Mexico†  Supporting the development of  policy frameworks and projects  for waste management, including  a series of measures for the whole  waste stream that will reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants such as black carbon  and methane.   0.45  china† Water resources and adaptation  to climate change in North China  Plains and Poyang Lake Region  in China.   1.50  china, nepal,  Pakistan†  Building effective water  governance in the  Asian Highlands.   1.53  colombia, Mexico† Providing technical advice to  countries to help them flesh  out establish implementable  mitigation actions in the oil and  gas sector, including actions  that will significantly reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants, notably black carbon  and methane.  1.10  congo Basin Region* Supporting a fair and sustainable  management of natural resources  in Congo Basin countries.   0.50  congo Basin Region† Support for the Congo Basin  Forest Partnership.   0.14  costa Rica, dominican  Republic, honduras*  Helping communities restore  degraded forests and addressing  livelihood issues of local  landowners in areas with high  levels of rural poverty.    0.05  costa Rica,  guatemala,  nicaragua†  Adapting community-based water  supply in Central America to a  changing climate.   1.48  cuba* Enhancing municipal  environmental management  practices and the quality of life of  the communities in coastal zones.   0.07  dominican Republic,  guatemala†  Water security and climate  change in Central America and  the Caribbean.   1.49  ethiopia* Increasing agricultural  productivity for  smallholder farmers.  1.50  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)    158  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  ethiopia, Philippines,  Jamaica*  Advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions, consistent  with the countries’ national  development agendas.   1.44  haiti† Support for climate change  adaptation and local  risks management.  2.93  haiti* Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed.  0.19  honduras† Building capacity to assess  infrastructure vulnerability.   0.15  honduras* Enhancing food security  through improved agricultural  productivity, diversity and the  promotion of sustainable natural  resource management practices.    4.59 0.11  india† Adapting to climate change in  urbanizing watersheds .  1.50  indonesia* Enhancing the livelihood security  and well-being of vulnerable  coastal communities on the west  coast of South Sulawesi.   1.30  latin america and the  caribbean*  Improving capacities for energy  planning and regulation across  countries in the region.  0.21  Mali* Supporting the development and  rehabilitation of the agricultural  irrigation infrastructure.  0.04  Mexico* Commission for Environmental  Cooperation.   0.34  nicaragua* Supporting sustainable economic  growth in rural areas and increase  access to safe, nutritious food for  poor communities.  1.10  nigeria† Supporting effective climate  change governance.  0.61  Peru, costa Rica,  Mexico†  Providing technical advice to  countries to help them flesh out  implementable mitigation actions  in the housing sector.  0.50  Philippines* Improving the investment climate  for sustainable economic growth.  0.70  Thailand† Supporting inland aquaculture  and climate change adaptation.  1.23  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)    159  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  Thailand† Improving flood management  planning.  1.43  legend: † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions  as a ‘principal objective’  * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as  a ‘significant objective’  Fiscal Year 2012–2013  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  africa, asia, latin  america and the  caribbean, and the  Middle east*  Support for the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  10.08  africa* Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through  the International Model  Forest Network.  3.16  africa, asia* Support to the International  Development Research Centre for  adaptation and climate resilience  research.  16.05  africa, latin america  and the caribbean*  Support to the World Resources  Institute for capacity building in  tracking climate finance.  0.15  Benin, Bolivia, Burkina  Faso, ethiopia,  honduras, Mali,  nepal, senegal,  east Timor*  Support for the Unitarian Service  Committee Seeds of Survival  Programme (2010–2015).  2.21  Bolivia* Building capacities in community- based eco-development and  environmental health in  connection with water and  sanitation.  0.71  Burkina Faso† Improving food security through  the sustainable development of  agriculture.   2.50  cambodia,  Mozambique, ghana,  Kenya, Zimbabwe*  Providing improved food  and economic security for  communities who are among  the poorest and most vulnerable  people in their societies.  0.73  caribbean countries* Supporting natural disasters  management capacities in  national governments and local  communities.  2.10  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)    160  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  cameroon† Increasing the access to sufficient,  nutritious and safe food, and the  economic well-being of produces  in model forests and improving  climate resilience capacities.  2.72  chile† Supporting the development  of a nationally appropriate  mitigation action proposal based  on atmospheric carbon capture by  soils and support for research on  climate change adaptation.  0.33  chile, colombia,  Mexico, dominican  Republic†  Supporting the development of  policy frameworks and projects  for waste management, including  a series of measures for the whole  waste stream that will reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants such as black carbon  and methane.  2.70  chile, Kenya, Mexico† Building the capacity of protected- area agencies to enhance the  resilience to climate change of  ecosystems and local communities  that depend on them.  3.30  colombia† Implementation of an  environmental education program  for risk management to support  climate change adaptation.  0.32  colombia, Mexico† Providing technical advice to  countries to help them flesh  out establish implementable  mitigation actions in the Oil and  Gas sector, including actions  that will significantly reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants, notably black carbon  and methane.  1.90  congo Basin  countries†  Capacity building in 10 countries  located in the Congo Basin Region  to help identify and develop  nationally appropriate mitigation  actions.  0.78  congo Basin Region† Support for the Congo Basin Forest  Partnership  1.86  congo Basin  countries*  Supporting a fair and sustainable  management of natural resources  in Congo Basin countries.    0.5  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)    161  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)  cuba* Enhancing municipal  environmental management  practices and the quality of life  of the communities in coastal  zones and strengthening local  capacities to implement industrial  agricultural techniques that reduce  the need for imported energy and  resources.   0.60 0.04  democratic Republic  of congo†  Reducing poverty and increasing  food self-sufficiency.   1.75   ethiopia† Increasing economic, social and  ecological resilience of smallholder  Ethiopian farmers to climate  change and increasing the food  security of Ethiopian households.   1.81 1.87  ethiopia* Increasing agricultural  productivity for smallholder  farmers and supporting market- led approach to development for  increased food consumption and  higher incomes.  5.34  ethiopia, Bolivia, Mali,  ghana*  Improving livelihood security and  resilience.   1.11  ethiopia, Philippines,  Jamaica*  Advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions, consistent with the  countries’ national development  agendas.   0.87  ghana† Implementing measures to ensure  sustainable access to food and  livelihoods.  2.08  ghana† Increasing resilience of the  vulnerable households to climate  change.  2.10  ghana* Supporting climate resilient  agriculture capacity building for  smallholder farmers.   1.00  guatemala† Reducing socio-environmental  vulnerability to climate change.  0.66  haiti† Strengthening adaptive capacities  to address climate change threats.   0.50  haiti* Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed in  the border zone between Haiti and  the Dominican Republic.  0.48    162  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Recipient country description  Funding area (in millions of cad)  energy capacity  Building  other  Vulnerability  assessments  coastal Zone  Management Forestry agriculture  Table 7.3 Bilateral and Regional Financial contributions (continued)  honduras† Building capacity to assess  infrastructure vulnerability.  0.60  honduras* Enhancing food security through  improved agricultural productivity,  diversity and the promotion of  sustainable natural resource  management practices.   2.74 0.13  indonesia* Enhancing the livelihood security  and well-being of vulnerable  coastal communities on the west  coast of South Sulawesi.   1.33  indonesia, cambodia,  laos, Philippines,  Thailand, Vietnam*  Reducing the impact of disasters  on vulnerable populations in  Southeast Asia by providing  support to governments and civil  society to manage and reduce  disaster risk.  2.61  latin america and the  caribbean*  Improving capacities for energy  planning and regulation across  countries in the region.   0.17  Mexico† Providing technical support for  GHG emission inventory.  0.13  nicaragua* Supporting sustainable economic  growth in rural areas and increase  access to safe, nutritious food for  poor communities.  2.05  Peru† Climate change adaptation  integration in the poorest  communities.  0.30  Peru, costa Rica,  Mexico†  Providing technical advice to  countries to help them flesh out  implementable mitigation actions  in the Housing sector.  3.00  Rwanda† Increasing access to sufficient,  nutritious and safe food among  those most vulnerable to climate  change.   2.24  senegal† Reducing poverty by improving the  ability to adapt to climate change.  3.02  Tanzania† Improving market-led agricultural  production and market and  processing knowledge.   3.11  legend: † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions  as a ‘principal objective’  * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as  a ‘significant objective’    163  7 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGy  ]  7.3 Transfer of Technology  Clean technologies are critical to achieving long-term  low-carbon growth, particularly in emerging economies  that are projected to be the source of large GHG increases  into the future. Canada is committed to a broad range of  actions to advance clean technologies globally, including  support for domestic research and development, science  and technology (S&T) cooperation with international  partners and building capacity in developing countries.  Some examples are outlined below.  7.3.1   Developing and Sharing Knowledge  and Tools  Canada is leading the way in developing software tools  for innovative clean energy project analysis, modelling  and simulation. The RETScreen Clean Energy Project  Analysis Software is the world’s foremost clean energy  decision-making software. It can be used worldwide  to evaluate the effects of various types of renewable- energy and energy-efficient technologies. Used by more  than 377,000 people around the world, RETScreen has  been directly responsible for over $8 billion in user  savings globally. By virtue of enabling clean energy,  the software indirectly contributes to a substantial  reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, a reduction  conservatively estimated at 20 megatonnes (Mt)  CO2 eq per annum. It is also estimated that RETScreen  has facilitated the installation of at least 24 gigawatts  of installed clean energy capacity worldwide with a  value of approximately $41 billion. Canada continues  to enhance and strengthen the RETScreen software.  A number of new resources have been added over  the last four years, including: the RETScreen Plus  Energy Performance Analysis Module to help users  monitor, analyse, and report key energy performance  data to facility operators; and the RETScreen Clean  Energy Policy Toolkit to practically assist countries in  developing clean energy policies.  Canada has also developed the Carbon Budget Model  of the Canadian Forest Sector (CBM-CFS3). This forest  carbon accounting software, developed by the Canadian   Forest Service, helps forest managers meet criteria and  indicator reporting requirements for sustainable forest  management and forest certification, and understand  how their actions affect the net carbon balance of  their forest estate. It is a stand and landscape-level  modeling framework that simulates the dynamics of all  forest carbon stocks required under the UNFCCC and  can be applied to assess carbon emission implications  of REDD+ strategies. Canada makes the CBM-CFS3  available free of charge, and has run training workshops  in Canada that included forest managers from Russia,  Madagascar, Uganda, Thailand, Philippines, Mexico,  China and Korea. Preliminary versions of the model  interface and documentation are available in French,  Spanish and Russian, and bilateral projects with forest  management agencies are also ongoing with Russia,  Mexico, Poland, Korea, and China. The Joint Research  Centre of the European Union has applied the model to  25 E.U. countries, while worldwide over 1000 people in  57 countries have used the software.  The Department of Natural Resources has supported  Engineers Canada to lead the development of  a standardized methodology tool to assess the  engineering vulnerability of infrastructure in a  changing climate in Canada. After testing in Canada,  the tool was introduced at a regional workshop in Brazil  in 2010. Since then, it has been successfully applied in  two infrastructure risk assessments: the City of Limon  sewage collection and treatment system in Costa Rica,  and an assessment of highway bridges in Honduras. The  successful application of the tool in Limon led to an  agreement with Costa Rica’s College of Architecture and  Engineering to licence use of the tool in that country.   With four large-scale demonstration projects either  operational or proceeding with construction, Canada  remains a global leader in the research, development,  and demonstration of carbon capture and storage (CCS)  technologies. These projects include the Shell Quest  project at an oil sands upgrader in Alberta ($120 million  in federal funding, $745 million from the Government  of Alberta); the SaskPower Boundary Dam project at a     164  7 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGy  ]  coal-fired power plant in Saskatchewan ($240 million  in federal funding, $1 billion from SaskPower—a utility  owned by the Government of Saskatchewan), the  Enhance Energy Alberta Carbon Trunk Line project in  Alberta ($63.2 million in federal funding, $495 million  from the Government of Alberta); and the existing  Weyburn-Midale commercial enhanced oil recovery  operations run by Cenovus Energy and Apache Canada.  In addition to investing heavily in CCS, Canada is  also an active member in a number of multilateral  initiatives focused on advancing CCS development  and deployment such as the Carbon Sequestration  Leadership Forum, the Carbon Capture Use and  Storage Action Group of the Clean Energy Ministerial,  the Global CCS Institute, and the Canada-U.S. Clean  Energy Dialogue.   7.3.2  Engaging Multilaterally The International Energy Agency is a key platform  through which Canada works with international partners  to facilitate clean technology cooperation. Canada  participates in 27 of the Agency’s 40 implementing  agreements to encourage technology collaboration.  These agreements form the framework for facilitating  initiation, implementation, monitoring and review of  collaborative Research and Development (R&D) between  developed and emerging economies in renewable energy,  energy end use, buildings, transportation, fossil fuels,  and nuclear fusion. Canada provides over $1 million  annually to the International Energy Agency, with  additional funds for targeted agreements.  Canada supports the work of the Climate Technology  Initiative (CTI), which operates as an Implementing  Agreement under the International Energy Agency,  bringing countries together to foster international  co-operation in the accelerated development and  diffusion of climate-friendly and environmentally  sound technologies and practices. Through the CTI,  Canada also supports the CTI’s Private Financing  Advisory Network (PFAN). CTI–PFAN uses limited  public funds to mobilize private sector investment in  clean technologies in developing countries, thereby   helping to bridge the gap between investments and  clean energy businesses.   The Clean Energy Ministerial is a high-level process  focused on clean technology to address climate  change. Canada works through the Clean Energy  Ministerial with 22 other governments, including  major emerging economies, with the goal of  facilitating the transition to a global clean energy  economy. The Ministerial advances this goal through  high-level dialogue, technical cooperation through  clean energy initiatives, and engagement with the  private sector. Its focus on collaboration, including  with the private sector, makes it a valuable forum  through which Canada pursues its capacity building  and technology transfer objectives.   Canada is an active participant in four of the  Clean Energy Ministerial technical initiatives: the  Carbon Capture, Use and Storage Action Group; the  International Smart Grids Action Network; the Global  Superior Energy Performance Partnership (GSEP);  and the Super-Efficient Equipment and Appliance  Deployment Initiative (SEAD). Canada’s participation  in these initiatives, and its provision of expertise  and in-kind support to their work, will contribute  to global GHG reductions through energy efficiency  improvements or promoting clean energy supply.   Both GSEP and SEAD are also initiatives under the  International Partnership for Energy Efficiency  Cooperation (IPEEC). IPEEC provides a forum for  dialogue and action between key global energy users on  energy efficiency, and promotes information exchange  on best practices. Beyond its participation in GSEP and  SEAD, Canada participates in IPEEC’s Executive and  Policy Committees and has been the Policy Committee  Chair since May 2012.  The Generation IV International Forum is an  international treaty-supported R&D collaboration  that is working to develop and promote advanced  generation (Generation IV) nuclear-based clean     165  7 FINANCIAL RESOURCES AND TRANSFER OF TECHNOLOGy  ]  energy systems. Canada’s participation in collaborative  R&D through the Forum facilitates the development  of leading edge technology and knowledge through  sharing of confidential and protected data, resources  and infrastructure, shared training of highly qualified  people, and through the undertaking of collaborative  research. Canada provides funding of approximately  $4 million annually to support its contributions to the  Generation IV International Forum collaborative R&D,  as well as in-kind support from Canadian national labs  and participating university partners.  The International Model Forest Network is a global  learning network of 60 member Model Forests around  the world, which together cover more than 100 million  hectares. Canada has hosted the International Model  Forest Network Secretariat since its inception in 1995,  and works with international partners to advance the  sustainable management of forest-based landscapes  through the Model Forest approach. Since 2010 Canada  has provided targeted support for climate change  initiatives in Model Forests which focused on: forest  management through reforestation and applied research  on climate change impacts on forests; capacity building  through research extension and communications  activities to increase awareness of the need to adapt to  the impacts of climate change; and the development  and ground-truthing of policy options based on  research conducted in Model Forests. Canada’s financial  contribution to the Network since 2010 totalled more  than $15 million, the bulk of which was provided in the  form of contributions to African recipients.  Canada led the development of the Global Early  Warning System for Wildland Fire under the Global  Observation of Forest Cover and Landcover Dynamics  Fire Implementation Team. Operational since May 2011,  early warning information is produced daily and made  available through the Global Fire Monitoring Centre.  This system contributes to the Global Multi-Hazard  Early Warning System evolving under the auspices of  the United Nations International Strategy for Disaster  Reduction. Canada is collaborating with the European   Commission’s Joint Research Centre to enhance the  current system. Regional early warning products  using more detailed local data are also in development  through collaboration with partner agencies in Africa  and Southeast Asia.  7.3.3  Working with Bilateral Partners  Bilateral cooperation with key international partners  forms a central part of Canada’s efforts to advance clean  technology. Selected details of key partnerships with  emerging economies are outlined below.  Canada and China engage and collaborate on climate  change through the Canada–China Climate Change  Working Group, which is supported by a Memorandum  of Understanding on Climate Change Cooperation  signed in 2009. The Canada–China Climate Change  Working Group meets annually to discuss areas of  mutual interest and explore knowledge exchange  opportunities. In 2012 Canada hosted a successful  adaptation workshop in Vancouver through the Working  Group, which focused on knowledge exchange to  enhance China’s capacity to address adaptation issues.   Canada has an S&T agreement with China, which  is an important platform to accelerate research in  priority areas, including clean energy technologies.  In addition, Canada’s Department of Foreign Affairs,  Trade and Development, in partnership with key  stakeholders in Canada and China, launched a joint  funding opportunity in 2013 to support industrial- academic collaborative R&D in the domain of clean  automobile transportation.   Canada has an S&T Agreement with India to facilitate  cooperative S&T activities between the two countries  in fields of common interest, including alternate  energy and sustainable environmental technologies.  Canada and India have also signed a Joint Statement  recognizing the importance of environmental  management and sustainable development and  also cooperate through the India–Canada Forum on  Environmental Cooperation.     166  7 F i n a n c i a l  R e s o u R c e s  a n d  T R a n s F e R  o F  T e c h n o lo g y   ]  Canada supports technology transfer and capacity  building activities with Mexico through practical  cooperation on climate change, notably including the  Canada–Mexico Partnership. Through its fast-start  financing, Canada has also been able to partner with  Mexico to build capacity in emissions reporting, as well  as to develop long-term sectoral mitigation strategies  that support national priorities in three industrial  sectors—waste management, oil and gas, and housing.  Canada and Mexico are currently working to support  the reduction of climate change vulnerability and  the adaptation of vulnerable populations in Mexico  ($2.5 million). An additional project ($1 million) is  aimed at climate change adaptation and supporting the  restoration of protected areas in Mexico.  More specifically, Canada and Mexico work together on  Carbon Budget Modeling. The collaboration seeks to  improve the capacity for GHG reporting and to develop  policy-relevant analyses of the implications of various  REDD+ strategies on future forest carbon balances  and GHG emissions. The partnership has resulted in  joint research on the application, testing and advances  to the scientific and technical development of the  CBM-CFS3 to Mexico (referred to in Section 7.3.1),  and in capacity-building activities such as training  of Mexican scientists. In addition to this support  for Mexico, Canada also provided over $9 million in  fast-start finance to support sector specific mitigation  projects in Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean.   These innovative projects provided an opportunity  for developing countries to develop and adopt  climate mitigation actions appropriate to their own  circumstances. For example, $3.5 million was disbursed  to support Mexico, Costa Rica and Peru in developing  an approach to implement Nationally Appropriate  Mitigation Actions in the housing sector. Low-carbon  housing roadmaps are now being developed in these  countries. Canada also provided $2.6 million to support  Mexico, Colombia, Chile and the Dominican Republic  in the development and implementation of mitigation  actions in the solid waste sector.  References 1 All figures are in Canadian dollars unless otherwise stated.  2 Including over $100 million of contributions made to projects   with a primary focus on climate change [i.e., marked as   targeting the Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ under the   Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development,   Development Assistance Committee (OECD/DAC) Rio   markers], and over $236 million to projects that included a   significant climate change component (i.e. marked as targeting   the Conventions as a ‘significant objective’ under the OECD/  DAC Rio markers). Canada has not included every contribution   reported as targeting the Conventions as a ‘significant objective’   under the OECD/DAC Rio markers to ensure this report focusses   on the most relevant contributions to climate action. For    example, core contributions made to multilateral organizations   are not reported on in this report.    167  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  8 Research and Systematic Observation of Climate Change 8.1 Introduction  In Canada, climate system research and observation  is a joint effort that is implemented through core  government programs, academic institutions, and  collaborative research networks. Collectively, these  efforts improve our understanding of the global climate  system and the influence of natural forces and human  activities on climate change and variability. This enables  better recognition of the potential impacts on global  ecosystems and human society. Climate system research  and monitoring in Canada provides the foundational  scientific basis to guide Canadian decisions on  climate change mitigation and adaptation. Chapter 6:  Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change Impacts and  Adaptation Measures presents a discussion of research  and other activities in Canada related to climate change  impacts, adaptation, and vulnerabilities.  This chapter presents a summary of research and  systematic observation activities of climate change  in Canada. Moreover, it outlines specific changes and  progress subsequent to the 2010 publication of Canada’s  5th National Communication on Climate Change.  The emphasis of this chapter is on long-term research  and monitoring programs within Canada, which are  typically led by Government of Canada departments.  However, recognising the vast and collaborative  nature of climate research and monitoring in Canada,  various examples of academic and consortium-based  programs, as well as cooperative research networks, are  also presented.  8.2 Funding and Priorities  8.2.1  Overview In Canada the essential infrastructure for climate  system research and systematic observations programs  is provided, in large part, by the federal government.  Integrated research teams within the federal   government provide the climate-related scientific  information needed to serve Canadians. This includes  providing direct information through published  research results, data, and climate services, and through  sound advice to policy makers. Federal government  research and observation activities are complemented  by those of the Canadian academic community,  which has a stronger focus on enquiry driven science.  Productive partnerships have been established between  the two communities and both continue to make  substantial contributions to Canadian and international  programs. The following sections highlight some of the  key organisational and funding mechanisms for climate  research and systematic observations within Canada.  8.2.2   Funding within the Government of  Canada  Research and systematic observation of the climate  system is the shared responsibility of multiple  departments within the Government of Canada. As  such, funding for these programs is embedded within  annual departmental budget allocations. In addition  to these core programs (such as Environment Canada’s  climate research program), the Government of Canada  funds targeted initiatives to enhance climate-related  research and monitoring beyond the core programs and  to initiate specific projects (see examples in 8.2.3).   8.2.2.1 Clean Air Agenda In March 2007, the Government of Canada  implemented the Clean Air Agenda and in 2011, funding  was renewed through to 2016. The aim of the Clean Air  Agenda is to address climate change and air pollutants  at the domestic, continental, and international level.  Programs across 11 Government of Canada departments  and agencies are organized around five themes: the  Clean Air Regulatory Agenda, Clean Energy, Clean  Transportation, International Actions, and Adaptation.  Of these, the Clean Air Regulatory Agenda and     168  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  Adaptation themes are most directly aligned with  climate system research and monitoring.  The Clean Air Regulatory Agenda supports the scientific  research, monitoring, and atmospheric modelling  necessary to assess and develop Canada’s regulatory  approach to reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.  The Adaptation theme is designed to help Canadians  adapt to climate change. Programs under this theme  provide a wide breadth of outcomes, from providing  scientific knowledge on the climate system (through  research, monitoring, and modelling) to targeted  regional and sector-based adaptation programs.  8.2.2.2 Canadian Space Agency Programs Government Related Initiatives Program The Canadian Space Agency contributes to  environmental monitoring and science by coordinating  space programs and policies of the Government of  Canada. The Government Related Initiatives Program  assists federal departments in integrating space- borne Earth Observation data in their operations.  The Program is organised around three themes:  Environment; Resources and Land Use Management;  and Security and Foreign Policy.  Initiatives under the Environment theme include  developing and deploying technologies and  applications that provide information about the  current state and evolution of the climate, the quality  of the air and the water, as well as the biodiversity of  the country and the planet. Space-based observations  are particularly useful for monitoring changes in the  physical, chemical, and biological aspects of the Earth  and for supporting climate research because of the  global nature of the climate system.  Earth Observation Application Development  Program The Earth Observation Application Development  Program (EOADP) addresses the needs of the industry.  Projects supported under the Environment theme  of the Earth Observation Application Development   Program are focused on enhancing the understanding  and monitoring of key parameters and processes of the  Earth, atmosphere, oceans, cryosphere, and biosphere  systems and how these are inter-related. A specific  focus of recent projects has been the demonstration  of new capabilities and monitoring applications  using data from the RADARSAT-2 satellite, which was  launched in 2007.  8.2.2.3  Program of Energy Research and  Development  The Program of Energy Research and Development  is a federal program managed by Natural Resources  Canada and involves the participation of 13 federal  departments and agencies. Funding is provided to  federal departments and agencies to deliver programs  targeted toward sustainable energy research and  development. Government of Canada departments  and agencies collaborate with universities, the private  sector, provincial and municipal governments, and  international organisations to deliver their respective  research and development programs under this  initiative. While the Program covers a broad range  of sustainable energy-related research projects,  certain departments focus on research related to  environmental and climate-related implications. For  example, Environment Canada manages funding for  projects that look at the environmental aspects of  energy production and use and Natural Resources  Canada, in collaboration with the University of Ottawa,  re-activated a series of permafrost monitoring stations  with funding support from this Program.    8.2.3   Research Granting Agencies and  Funded Initiatives in Canada  In Canada there are three main granting agencies  that administer funding to a wide variety of programs  among Canadian universities. These are the Natural  Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC),  the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the  Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council.  NSERC is concerned with administering funds to  most science-based projects and therefore, is the     169  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  most closely-linked of the three granting agencies  to climate research programs. Its core role is to  support university research and training in the fields  of science and engineering. The Council fulfills its  mission by awarding scholarships and research grants  through peer-reviewed competition, and by building  partnerships among universities, colleges, governments,  and the private sector. A number of climate-related  research initiatives and networks in Canada are funded  by NSERC.  8.2.3.1  Climate Change and Atmospheric Research  Grants  NSERC’s Climate Change and Atmospheric Research  initiative was announced in 2012. Research projects  funded through the Climate Change and Atmospheric  Research grants involve interpreting Earth  system processes; advancing weather, climate and  environmental prediction; and understanding recent  changes in the Arctic and cold region environments.  In 2013, seven research teams were awarded grants  totalling more than $32 million over five years to  support climate change and atmospheric research at  Canadian post-secondary institutions. The teams are  comprised of university and government researchers,  and partner organisations. Through such collaboration  the teams will undertake seven projects: • Network on Climate and Aerosols: Addressing Key   Uncertainties in Remote Canadian Environments • Research related to the Polar Environment   Atmospheric Research Laboratory: Probing the  Atmosphere of the High Arctic  • Canadian Arctic GEOTRACES Program:  Biogeochemical and Tracer Study of a Rapidly  Changing Arctic Ocean  • Canadian Sea Ice and Snow Evolution Network • Ventilation, Interactions and Transports Across the   Labrador Sea • Canadian Network for Regional Climate and   Weather Processes • Changing Cold Regions Network  8.2.3.2 Networks of Centers of Excellence Created in 1989, the Networks of Centers of Excellence  program is an integral part of the Government of  Canada’s Innovation Strategy. It connects nation- wide and multidisciplinary research partnerships  with industrial expertise and strategic investment.  All programs funded by this initiative are large-scale,  academic-led, virtual research centres that bring  together multi-disciplinary partners from academia,  industry, government, and not-for-profit organisations.  The Networks of Centers of Excellence initiative  is supported by the three major Canadian federal  granting agencies, as well as by two government  departments: Health Canada and Industry Canada.  There are currently two Networks of Centers of  Excellence initiatives that are directly related to  climate research and monitoring: ArcticNet and the  Marine Environmental Observation Prediction and  Response Network.  ArcticNet The first two phases of ArcticNet took place from  2003–2011, and were discussed in the 5th National  Communication report. Since 2011, the third phase of  ArcticNet was launched, which focuses on four main  themes: coastal marine ecosystems, coastal terrestrial  ecosystems, Inuit health and adaptation, and industrial  development in the North. This integrated research  offers a unique multi-disciplinary and cross-sectorial  environment to train specialists. To date, there are  over 145 ArcticNet researchers from 30 Canadian  universities, 8 federal and 11 provincial agencies and  departments collaborate with research teams in  various countries.  Marine Environmental Observation Prediction  and Response Network  Established in 2012, the Marine Environmental  Observation Prediction and Response (MEOPAR)  Network aims to address issues related to human  activity in marine environments and the effects that  marine hazards have on human activities in coastal  areas. With funding of approximately $25 million from     170  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  2012–2017, the team of Canadian researchers involved  in this network use research and observations to help  reduce Canada’s vulnerability and exposure to hazards  and enable quicker response times in cases of marine  emergencies. The long term objective is to develop  disaster and risk reduction tools and put forward  adaptation measures for Canada to better manage  ocean influences on coastal environments. This is  achieved through both new and existing partnerships  with organisations including academia, governmental  departments, non-governmental departments, and  industries such as insurance and oil and gas.  8.2.3.3 Canada Research Chairs The Canada Research Chair program aims to achieve  research excellence in engineering and the natural  sciences, health sciences, humanities, and social  sciences by funding academic positions at universities  in Canada. The Program is funded by NSERC of Canada  and managed by a steering committee that reports to  the Minister of Industry. Funding of Tier I and Tier II  Chairs supports established and emerging researchers  in faculty positions at Canadian universities. The  Program spans a wide range of research areas and as  of July 2013, there were four Canada Research Chairs  contributing directly to climate research in Canada;  one each at the Université du Québec à Montréal,  the University of Toronto, McGill University, and the  University of British Columbia.  8.2.3.4 Canada Excellence Research Chairs The Canada Excellence Research Chair Program was  launched in 2008, with the first group of Canada  Excellence Research Chairs announced in May 2010.  Supported by Canada’s three major federal granting  agencies, the Program funds world-renowned  researchers to establish research programs at Canadian  universities with up to $10 million over seven years.  Canada Excellence Research Chairs are selected  through a rigorous multi-level peer review process.  Four priority research areas have been identified, which  align with the Government of Canada’s Science and  Technology Strategy:  • Environmental Sciences and Technologies; • Natural Resources and Energy; • Health and Related Life Sciences and Technologies;   and • Information and Communications Technologies.  Among the first group of Canada Excellence Research  Chairs, there are three positions that directly support  academic research related to the climate system; one  each at the University of Saskatchewan, the University  of Manitoba, and Dalhousie University. Another  Canada Excellence Research Chairs competition is  expected to launch in 2015.  8.2.4  Other Initiatives 8.2.4.1 International Polar Year International Polar Year was a large, international  research campaign organised by the World Metrological  Organisation (WMO) and the International Council  for Science. It involved thousands of researchers from  62 countries whose research focused on the Arctic  and Antarctic. Canada played a significant role in  the International Polar Year and Canadian research  focused on two important scientific challenges for  Canada’s northern regions: climate change impacts  and adaptation and the health and well-being of  northern communities. Canada’s participation  included 52 projects involving Canadian government  and university researchers, students, and community  partners from Canada’s North. As part of its  commitment to the International Polar Year initiative,  the Government of Canada provided $156 million in  funding over five years (2006–2011) to implement an  innovative Arctic program for scientific research, data  collection and management, northern training and  capacity building, and public education opportunities.  In the intervening years since the field research  campaigns concluded, the extensive International  Polar Year data has continued to generate new scientific  publications and led to new scientific knowledge on the  Arctic climate. In April 2012, Canada hosted the final  International Polar Year conference in Montreal. The     171  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  five day conference brought together over 2,000 people  to review and assess the research results from  International Polar Year projects. The journal Climatic  Change published a special issue1 in 2012 of Canadian  science results from International Polar Year projects.  8.2.4.2  Beaufort Regional Environmental  Assessment  The Beaufort Regional Environmental Assessment,  launched in 2011, is a four year, multi-stakeholder  initiative that is sponsoring regional environmental  and socio-economic research to assist in preparing the  federal government and local communities to respond  to new investments in oil and gas in the Beaufort Sea.  The parties supporting this proposal are partners from  the Inuvialuit Settlement Region, territorial and federal  governments, the oil and gas sector, and academia. This  program will help ensure governments, Inuvialuit, and  industry are better prepared for oil and gas exploration  and development in the offshore by building upon the  regional information base for the Beaufort Sea.   This is done through the implementation of a research  program and groups addressing key regional issues  including cumulative effects assessment, information  management, regional waste management, oil spill  preparedness and response, socio-economic indicators,  and climate change. This will support effective and  efficient regulatory decision-making by providing the  necessary scientific and socio-economic information to  all stakeholders.  8.2.4.3  Canadian Foundation for Climate and  Atmospheric Sciences  The Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric  Sciences was established in 2000 with funding from  the Government of Canada. The Foundation operated  as an autonomous granting agency until 2012, during  which time it acted as the main funding body in  Canada for university-based research on climate and  atmospheric sciences. Nine major research networks  funded by the Foundation completed their activities  in 2011 and published final reports to document   new scientific understanding, legacy data sets, and  modelling capabilities generated from the research  investments. During the last year of the Foundation’s  federal mandate in 2011–2012, grants were awarded to  12 projects and research consortia to build on previous  achievements. In 2010, the Foundation published  The Sky’s the Limit, Ten Years of Achievements,  which highlighted the scientific achievements of the  Foundation-supported research networks and projects.2  Many of the projects and initiatives started under the  Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric  Sciences program have found new funding sources  to continue the work, most notably under NSERC’s  Climate Change and Atmospheric Research initiative.  8.3 Systematic Observation  8.3.1  Overview Systematic climate observations are essential for  understanding the mean states of various climate  components over time, the natural variability around  these means, detecting changes in the means and  extremes, and attributing these changes to specific  causes. Observations can also help elucidate the  processes by which components of the climate system  interact and the sensitivity of these processes to  natural and anthropogenic forcing. Climate research  incorporates observations into climate system models  through mathematical equations, thus making the  prediction of changes and the long-term projections of  future climates possible.  The long-term systematic collection, quality  assurance, and dissemination of climate system data  in Canada is primarily the responsibility of the federal  government, and arises from a broad spectrum of  program obligations. Through Canada’s involvement  in international organisations, agreements, and  commitments, climate data is collected, quality  controlled, and disseminated according to  international standards.    172  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  Canada is a significant contributor to the Global  Climate Observing System, the Global Ocean  Observing System, and the Global Terrestrial Observing  System. Canada is a member of the Group on Earth  Observations, which seeks to coordinate international  efforts to build a Global Earth Observation System of  Systems. The Canadian Group on Earth Observations  has identified several specific national priorities  for such observations, including soil moisture  monitoring, modelling and forecasts; integrated  planning of monitoring networks and environmental  data; and sustained Arctic monitoring programs. The  Global Climate Observing System contributes the  climate component to the Global Earth Observation  System of Systems. Canada is also a participant  in the international Sustaining Arctic Observing  Networks initiative.   8.3.2  Monitoring Networks 8.3.2.1 Atmosphere  Surface Weather and Climate Environment Canada’s national ground-based  weather, climate, upper air, and meteorological  marine observation networks follow well-defined  operating standards and procedures in accordance  with the climate monitoring principles and standards  of the Global Climate Observing System and related  programs. Network spatial densities and station  distributions are relatively stable, with lower densities  in the sparsely populated northern regions. To address  these spatial gaps, Environment Canada is making  it a strategic priority to transform its monitoring  capabilities in collaboration with other federal  departments and levels of government in Canada,  as well as the private sector. This Canadian Network  of Networks initiative will address the diverse needs  of public and private sector groups for high quality  weather, water, and climate data that are managed  on a foundation that is efficient, collaborative,  and sustainable.  The Surface Weather Network involves approximately  808 fully automated stations. Canada also contributes   to the international Voluntary Observing Ship Climate  Project through its Automated Volunteer Observing  Ships. The Canadian moored buoy network, with  52 buoys located in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans  and in inland waters, contributes hourly observations  to the Global Telecommunication System, following  Data Buoy Cooperation Panel and WMO guidelines. In  addition to these networks, the Environment Canada  drifter buoy network provides marine observations  from most of the data sparse areas in the Arctic, north  Atlantic, and north Pacific oceans. In 2012, under  the Environment Canada Arctic METAREA service  expansion, the drifter buoy network was expanded  through Environment Canada’s deployment of  23 drifter buoys in the Arctic. Environment Canada also  contributes to the Global Drifter Program by upgrading  approximately 20 drifter buoys with barometers  every year.  Within this broader atmospheric monitoring program,  Environment Canada operates two climate change  surface networks—the Canadian Reference Climate  Stations Network and the daily Climatological Network.  The Canadian Reference Climate Stations Network  consists of approximately 300 stations, of which 86 are  included in the Global Surface Network. In addition  to monitoring the Global Climate Observing System  Surface Essential Climate Variables, the Canadian  Global Surface Network stations also measure and  report atmospheric pressure, wind speed and direction,  humidity, and snow on ground on hourly and synoptic  reporting frequencies. The Reference Climate Stations  Network is primarily intended for determining climate  trends on regional and national scales. It was initially  established by identifying and designating stations  with continuous high quality observations of 30 plus  years in duration. The resulting network was a mixture  of automated stations, human-based aviation weather  observing sites, and daily temperature and precipitation  climatological stations operated by volunteers and co- operating agencies. Since 2000, Environment Canada  has been converting about 10% of these stations per  year to a standardised auto-station configuration.    173  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  Environment Canada and the U.S. National Oceanic  and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) have  a bilateral agreement to coordinate standards,  procedures, equipment, and measurement programs  between the Canadian Reference Climate Stations and  the U.S. Climate Reference Network. The objective is to  establish and maintain an integrated North American  climate reference network.   The daily Climatological Network currently consists  of approximately 480 sites where observations of  temperature (minimum and maximum), precipitation  (rainfall or snowfall), and snow depth are recorded once  or twice daily. Ongoing modernisation of automated  data collection and quality assurance/quality control  protocols continues to improve data quality and  collection efficiency. For example, Environment Canada  has developed data entry systems (one internet-based  and one telecommunications-based) to allow observers  to submit their observations in near real-time.  Upper Air Networks  Canada maintains 31 of the approximately 1,300 upper  air radiosonde stations and five of the estimated  171 Global Climate Observing System Upper Air  Network (GUAN) stations operating under the global  World Weather Watch/Global Observing System  program. The Canadian GUAN stations are located  at Alert, Goose Bay, Moosonee, Fort Smith, and  Cambridge Bay.  At the radiosonde stations, balloon borne radiosondes  are released twice daily to measure and simultaneously  transmit data on temperature, humidity, and pressure  to automated ground systems. Wind direction and  speed are determined by using Global Positioning  System technology to track the radio signal transmitted  by the radiosonde.   Upper air observations from the Canadian upper  air radiosonde network are supplemented through  initiatives such as the Canadian Aircraft Meteorological  Data Relay program. About 10,000 observations of   wind and temperature are generated daily by a fleet  of about 27 aircraft operated by a contract air carrier  in Canada. These observations translate into roughly  1,400 soundings per week from 30 Canadian airports.  Nav Canada also provides the Canadian Aircraft  Meteorological Data Relay program data from two  unscheduled aircraft used for flight inspection that visit  each of the Canadian terminals one to two times per  year. The quality of the data is monitored in near-real- time by the Canadian Meteorological Centre before  the data are used in the Canadian Meteorological  Centre’s national data assimilation system and  distributed internationally.   Atmospheric Composition Environment Canada operates the long term  observations network for atmospheric measurements  of CO2 and other GHGs (CH4, CO, N2O, and SF6).  The stations are located to provide regional scale  information on GHG emissions from local and regional  natural (forests, wetlands) and non-natural (coal, oil  and gas, agriculture, waste) sources. As of July 2013,  there were 15 measurement sites located in coastal,  interior, and Arctic regions in Canada. A major focus of  the GHG measurement program since the 5th National  Communication has been to enhance the regional  coverage in Canada’s North. This includes the addition  of three monitoring sites in the Northwest Territories  and Nunavut to complement the long-term observation  record at Alert, Nunavut. Environment Canada’s Global  Atmosphere Watch Observatory at Alert is one of three  WMO Global GHG inter-comparison sites.  Measurements of aerosol chemistry and microphysics  are conducted at four sites in Canada. The Alert and  Whistler sites are more comprehensively instrumented  for aerosol measurements (particle size distributions,  light scattering and absorption, refractory black carbon  concentrations, near real-time submicron particle  chemistry, filters for inorganics and elemental carbon  and organic carbon). Aerosol instrumentation at  the East Trout Lake and Egbert sites consists of light  scattering and absorption as well as filters for inorganics     174  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  and elemental carbon/organic carbon ratios. Aerosol  observations contribute to improved understanding of  biogenic and biomass source influences, trans-Pacific  and Arctic atmospheric transport behaviour, and  industrial/urban influences on regional scales.  Stratospheric ozone measurements support Canada’s  international obligations, as it is party to the Montreal  Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer,  and is also party to the Vienna Convention on the  protection of the ozone layer. More specifically, total  ozone column measurements are being taken to study  ozone trends, monitor the recovery of the ozone layer as  well as polar ozone depletion events, such as those that  occur naturally over the Antarctic every spring time.  In addition, total ozone measurements by the Brewer  network are used by modellers to generate ultraviolet  forecasts, which are then validated by Brewer ultraviolet  measurements. Surface ozone measurements are also  made at 15 regionally-representative sites across Canada  by the Canadian Air and Precipitation Monitoring  Network, a regional-scale network that measures air  and precipitation chemistry across the country. The  data are collected and reported as hourly averages and  analysed to establish the status and trends of regional- scale surface ozone within Canada.  Environment Canada uses two main methods  to monitor stratospheric ozone, the Brewer  Spectrophotometer method measures the total  thickness of the ozone layer several times per hour  and the ozonesonde method measures the vertical  concentration profile of ozone in the troposphere  and the stratosphere on a weekly basis. There are ten  sites that monitor stratospheric ozone using Brewer  Spectrophotometers: Alert, Eureka, Resolute, Churchill,  Goose Bay, Edmonton, Kelowna, Saturna, Regina, and  Toronto. There are eight sites using ozonesondes: Alert,  Eureka, Resolute, Churchill, Goose Bay, Edmonton,  Yarmouth, and Kelowna. The majority of ozonesonde  stations are co-located with the Brewer stations.   Environment Canada operates the AEROCAN  (AEROsol CANada) network, a sun photometer and  sky-scanning radiometer network of 20 sites across  Canada as a part of the global AERONET (Aerosol  Robotic Network) network. The objective of AEROCAN  is to acquire data on aerosol optical properties, e.g.,  aerosol optical depth, and derive aerosol characteristics  such as size distribution and mass. Aerosol radiative  forcings are one of the largest uncertainties in climate  change studies. AEROCAN provides data that can be  used for aerosol optical depth trend analysis, optical  properties characterisation, and for validation of  satellite retrievals.  Data management among Environment Canada’s  atmospheric composition measurement networks  adheres to principles set out by the WMO Global  Atmosphere Watch Program. Ozone, GHG, and  aerosols data are reported to the relevant the WMO  World Data Centers. The World Ozone and Ultraviolet  Radiation Data Center is operated by Environment  Canada and located in the city of Toronto. GHG and  aerosols data are also archived in the Canadian National  Atmospheric Chemistry Database and Analysis  System. Canada’s participation in these national  and international data archives ensures open access  to the first-order data collected under the various  monitoring programs.  8.3.2.2 Oceans Fisheries and Oceans Canada is responsible for the  collection and management of data on the physical,  chemical, and biological variables describing the  climate of the oceans that surround Canada. This  includes the Northeast Pacific, Northwest Atlantic,  Hudson Bay, the Beaufort Sea, the Arctic Archipelago,  and the Labrador Sea. Observations are made  by ship, moored and floating buoys, and remote  sensing. The rescue of historical data has continued  to be a significant initiative over the past few years.  Collaborations are established with other government  departments and agencies to include oceanographic     175  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  activities for which the responsibility falls outside  Fisheries and Oceans Canada.  Canada’s Oceans Action Plan articulates a vision and  mission for Canadians focused on safe and accessible  waterways, healthy and productive aquatic ecosystems,  and sustainable fisheries and aquaculture. The Oceans  Action Plan is based on the principles of international  leadership, sovereignty and security, integrated oceans  management, health of the oceans, and advancements  in oceans science and technology. Ocean monitoring  is a crucial requirement for achieving the goals of  this Plan.   Pacific and Atlantic Ocean Monitoring The Atlantic Zone Monitoring Program includes a  network of six stations sampled bi-weekly, 13 seasonal  cross-shelf sections sampled one to two times annually,  and fisheries resource surveys. A section across the  Labrador Sea is sampled annually for temperature,  salinity, oxygen, nutrients, carbon system variables,  chlorofluorocarbons, and microbial, phytoplankton,  and zooplankton abundance and production. It is  an important ocean monitoring program for climate  research because each year it samples the water masses  that contribute to the Atlantic branch of the ocean’s  thermohaline circulation. Since 2006, a few stations  have been added to the offshore end of the Atlantic  Zone Monitoring Program Halifax section to provide  annual downstream sampling of these same variables.  Similarly, the Pacific Line, which is surveyed three times  per year for temperature, salinity, O2, CO2, chlorophyll,  nutrients, and zooplankton, is a cornerstone of long- term observations of the effects of climate variability  and change on ocean ecosystems.  Satellite data images are captured by Fisheries and  Oceans Canada at receiving stations at the Bedford  Institute of Oceanography—Atlantic Region and  the Institute of Ocean Sciences—Pacific Coast.  Sea-surface temperatures images are derived from  Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer on the   U.S. NOAA series of polar orbiting weather satellites  and at Resolute, Canada. Both the Pacific Coast and the  Resolute datasets are transmitted to L’Institue Maurice  Lamontagne for analysis. Chlorophyll concentration  images are produced from SeaWifs data collected on  the ORBView-2 satellites. Primary Production images  are derived from the semi-monthly composites of  chlorophyll concentration and temperature. On-line  archives of imagery are available from both institutes.  Fisheries and Oceans Canada’s Integrated Science Data  Management Branch acquires, archives, processes, and  disseminates all real-time surface drifter data that are  distributed on the Global Telecommunications System  as well as delayed mode data acquired from other  sources. The reports are processed to remove duplicates  and quality control routines are applied to the reported  measurements. As a designated Responsible National  Oceanographic Data Centre, Fisheries and Oceans  Canada partners with the Atlantic Oceanographic and  Meteorological Laboratory in the US to provide long  term archive facilities for the Global Drifter Center  data. Observed Essential Climate Variables are surface  and subsurface water temperatures, air pressure and  pressure tendency, surface and subsurface salinity, and  surface currents.  Canada also contributes to the international Argo  program, which now has over 3,000 profiling  submersible floats in the world’s oceans and provides  ongoing coverage of global ocean temperature and  salinity variability. The Argo Program also provides  a unique dataset for the development and testing  of assimilative ocean circulation models, modern  temperature–salinity climatology for the global  ocean, and time series of variability in heat and  freshwater storage and transports, used for analysis  of the dominant patterns and modes of coupled  atmosphere–ocean variability. Canada’s contribution  to the Argo program to date has included deployment  of over 250 ocean floats in the northwest Atlantic and  northeast Pacific Oceans.    176  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  Arctic Ocean Observations The Arctic Ocean observations programs include  through-flow monitoring in key straits of ocean current  through full depth, ice drift, temperature and salinity at  the seabed, and acoustic backscatter from zooplankton.  In addition, there is monitoring of the pack ice in the  Beaufort Sea by instruments on sub-sea moorings.   Sea Levels Fisheries and Oceans Canada also has responsibility  for monitoring sea levels through the use of the  Atlantic and Pacific National Sea Level Network of  coastal stations.   Ocean Observations Data Management National coordination and integrity across the various  Fisheries and Oceans Canada monitoring programs,  through the National Science Data Management  Committee, ensures common protocols for both  observation and data archiving. Integrated Science  Data Management manages and archives ocean data  collected by Fisheries and Oceans Canada, or acquired  through national and international programs in ocean  areas adjacent to Canada. The Integrated Science  Data Management also assembles, processes, quality  controls, and distributes large volumes of climate  related data, as a data centre for the major international  climate research programs. Systematic observation of  ecosystem state variables provides the data required to  test scientific conjectures on the propagation of climate  signals through linked components of the ocean’s biota  and physical environment.  8.3.2.3 Cryosphere Sea Ice Environment Canada’s Canadian Ice Service observes  sea ice conditions on a daily basis in the ice- encumbered waters within and adjacent to Canada’s  exclusive economic zone, including the Great Lakes  and Saint Lawrence River. The RADARSAT satellite  mission is the primary observing platform, with over  7,000 Synthetic Aperture Radar images analysed  annually. Radar data is augmented with visual and   infrared satellite images. Aircraft reconnaissance is  conducted in shipping areas for visual confirmation of  satellite observations. Along Canada’s east coast, these  also provide iceberg surveillance.  The sea ice information gathered through these  observations and analyses, in addition to improving the  safety of navigation, provide invaluable data for climate  studies. Environment Canada produces charts of sea  ice distribution on a weekly basis, which are used for  ice climate purposes. These charts have been digitised  back to 1968, and are available freely on the Canadian  Ice Service website. The weekly charts are also sent to  the World Data Center for Glaciology, which is co- located with the United States National Snow and Ice  Data Center in Boulder, Colorado. Environment Canada  produced three 30-year climatic ice atlases for Northern  Canada Waters, the East Coast of Canada, and the Great  Lakes. Each of these represents a statistical compilation  of regional ice charts for 1980–2010. The Canadian Ice  Chart Digital Archive and graphing tools available on  the Canadian Ice Service website can be used to analyse  sea ice variability, trends, and current departure from  normal. A data rescue project to digitise additional  sea ice cover charts from 1959 has been completed and  digitisation of the historical Polar Continental Shelf  Project ice charts is planned.  Environment Canada also produces daily charts of  iceberg distribution along the East Coast of Canada.  Fisheries and Oceans Canada programs include the  monitoring of sea ice draft and drift with moored buoys,  and the use of helicopter-borne sensors to collect sea  ice thickness data for use in joint research projects with  Environment Canada’s Canadian Ice Service. Iceberg  aerial reconnaissance is conducted over Canada’s east  coast waters in conjunction with the International Ice  Patrol. Flight frequency depends upon the area, with  the iceberg limit monitored weekly. Areas inside the  limit, up to southern Labrador, are monitored monthly.  Using a newly-developed ice tracking algorithm for  deriving ice motion from sequential RADARSAT     177  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  images, a series of studies examining ice fluxes through  the Canadian Arctic Archipelago have been undertaken  within Environment Canada. Environment Canada’s  ice chart data is also currently being used in the  development and validation of various sea ice and ice– atmosphere–ocean models.   An automated sea ice analysis system has been  running operationally since March 2011. The three- dimensional variational data assimilation system  provides an analysis of sea ice concentration on a  5 km grid every six hours. The analysis domain covers  all marine ice-covered areas of North America and  the two MET/NAVAREAS in the Arctic for which  Canada has responsibility. Assimilated data include  Environment Canada ice charts, lake ice manual  analyses, and ice concentrations derived from satellite  passive microwave observations and from scatterometer  satellite observations.   Lake and River Ice Dates of freeze-up and break-up of ice cover on lakes  and rivers are a useful indicator of climate change,  being well correlated with air temperature during the  transition seasons, and are an important ecological  indicator. There are Global Climate Observing System  requirements for daily observations of ice conditions  in spring and fall for selected large lakes and several  hundred medium-sized lakes distributed across middle  and high latitudes. There are also associated needs for  the selection of a set of the Global Climate Observing  System reference lakes for assessing long-term  variability, development of methods for merging in situ  and remotely sensed information on this parameter,  and for a central or several regional archive(s)  of information.  Canada has contributed significantly to the Global  Climate Observing System in this area. In situ  observations exist at several hundred Canadian  lake and river sites for various periods. A volunteer  “Icewatch” program provides lake and river ice reports  for about 85 locations across Canada. Thickness   measurements are now also being recorded at  65 weather stations across Canada. Satellite-based  methods have also demonstrated excellent potential  and monitoring for large Arctic lakes has already been  implemented using passive microwave observations.  This record is being extended back in time using the  available satellite record. Environment Canada began  weekly monitoring of ice extent on small lakes in 1995,  using the U.S.NOAA’s Advanced Very High Resolution  Radiometer and RADARSAT imagery, providing lake ice  coverage information for numerical weather prediction  models. Canadian researchers are currently working on  a project to develop an operational method for mapping  freeze-up and break-up dates over large areas of Canada  using Synthetic Aperture Radar and optical data from  the ENVISAT satellite.  Snow on Ground Canada’s national snow on ground in situ measurement  program involves a composite of inputs including  automatic and staffed stations that are part of  Environment Canada’s Reference Climate Stations,  surface weather, volunteer climate observing network,  and reports from contracted aviation service providers.  Effort is underway to improve measurement of snow  depth and derivation of snowfall from auto-stations.  Environment Canada produces a daily global snow  depth analysis based on real-time observations from  synoptic and hourly meteorological reports. Improving  the resolution of the analysis continues to be an area  of focus.   Environment Canada has made progress in developing  satellite passive microwave capabilities for deriving  snow water equivalent information over western and  sub-Arctic regions of Canada. Weekly satellite snow  water equivalent maps are generated each winter  for the Canadian Prairies region and provided to a  number of operational agencies in support of flood  forecasting, hydropower production, and other  water resource management activities. Environment  Canada has also developed capabilities to assimilate  satellite derived information on snow cover fraction     178  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  and water equivalent with the Canadian Land Data  Assimilation System in support of enhanced numerical  weather prediction. Natural Resources Canada has  produced daily snow cover derived from the U.S.  NOAA’s Advanced Very High Resolution Radiometer  observations since 1982.   Permafrost Permafrost monitoring is an important priority for  Canada; one third of the permafrost regions of the  northern hemisphere lie within Canada and 50% of  Canadian land mass is covered by the permafrost  zone. Through in situ observations, active layer and  permafrost thermal states are measured. At most  thermal sites, ground temperatures are measured to  a 20 meter depth. At active layer monitoring sites,  regular measurements are also taken of the depth of  the soil layer above the permafrost that freezes and  thaws annually.  The 5th National Communication provided a detailed  description of efforts led by Natural Resources Canada  between 2004 and 2011 to enhance the monitoring  network. Through new funding programs including  the Northern Energy Development Initiative for  the Mackenzie Valley and the federal government’s  International Polar Year program, this network has  now been increased to about 190 active layer and/or  thermal monitoring sites, with observation periods  ranging from a few to over 20 years. Maintenance of this  permafrost monitoring network continues to rely on  short term funding projects that involve many agencies  and institutions.  The collaborative Thermal State of Permafrost project  led by Natural Resources Canada, the University of  Ottawa, and Carleton University and supported by the  federal International Polar Year program was Canada’s  major permafrost contribution to International Polar  Year. Major achievements included establishment of  new monitoring sites in the Yukon Territory, northern  Manitoba, and in six communities in the Baffin  Region. Additional support received from Aboriginal   Affairs and Northern Development Canada facilitated  further site establishment in Nunavut communities  in collaboration with the Nunavut Government, to  address gaps in the western portion of the Territory.  Support from the Program for Energy Research and  Development and collaboration with University of  Ottawa facilitated re-activation of monitoring sites in  2011–2012 along the Alaska Highway Corridor that were  initially established in the late 1970s.  The approximately 190 thermal sites and eight  active layer monitoring sites now included in the  Canadian permafrost network contribute to the Global  Terrestrial Network for Permafrost, established by the  International Permafrost Association under the WMO  and the Global Climate Observing System. Natural  Resources Canada continues to play a leadership  role in the coordination of the Global Terrestrial  Network for Permafrost. Their website, through which  summary data and information are disseminated,  was originally established and maintained by  Natural Resources Canada but during 2013 it will be  transferred to European partners. Summary datasets  from 69 long-term Canadian sites are posted on the  website. Data from active layer sites are submitted  annually to the Circumpolar Active Layer Monitoring  Program within the Global Terrestrial Network for  Permafrost and posted on the website hosted by George  Washington University.   Glaciers  In Canada, some 200,000 km2 of glacier cover is  found in the Western Cordillera region and in the  Arctic Islands and exhibits a wide range of glacier- climate settings.  Canada’s Glacier–Climate Observing System is  delivered through a multi-lateral initiative of  collaborative monitoring and research coordinated by  Natural Resources Canada and involving other federal  departments and agencies, as well as universities.  Glacier–climate observations are derived from the in  situ measurements of a network of reference glaciers in     179  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  the Western and Northern Cordillera and the Canadian  Arctic Archipelago. Both aircraft and satellite-based  remote sensing are applied in a multi-scale/multi-mode  fashion to generate regional perspectives of land ice and  its responses to climate variations.  Mass balance measurements were initiated for some  glaciers and ice caps in Canada during the late 1950s  and early 1960s. Data and supporting metadata on  Canada’s reference glacier measurements are submitted  to the World Glacier Monitoring Service. Digital  data are stored in the World Glacier Inventory and  are accessible through a website located at the U.S.  National Snow and Ice Data Center. Records from  28 mass balance programs are archived internationally  at the National Snow and Ice Data Center and records  from 24 are archived at the World Glacier Monitoring  Service. These records are also maintained at Natural  Resources Canada.  Currently, 15 of the Canadian reference sites contribute  to the Global Climate Observing System Global  Terrestrial Network for Glaciers, with seven of these  reporting Essential Climate Variables at protocol  intervals to the World Glacier Monitoring Service.   In addition to the monitoring of reference glaciers,  work at various levels of frequency and intensity is  ongoing in various regions of the country. For example,  with the prospect of some of Canada’s smaller reference  glaciers in more southern mountainous regions   (e.g., the Peyto Glacier) becoming drastically reduced  in area, work was initiated in 2010 to augment existing  observing and assessment in the region to include  larger icefield settings such as the Columbia Icefield,  Wapta Icefield, and the Illecillewaet Neve and their  outlet glaciers.  Efforts to develop multi-agency hydrological  observatories are supported by an NSERC grant for  Canada’s initiative under the Climate Change and  Atmospheric Research—Changing Cold Regions  Network. An example of such an initiative has also been   developed within the Columbia River Basin to support  immediate water resource management needs. These  efforts are supported by the Columbia Basin Trust— Water, British Columbia Hydro, and an enhanced  observing period using a combination of academic,  government, and private sector capacity.   Overall, the current observing capacity with respect  to glaciers in Canada exhibits a basic level of regional,  thematic/stakeholder, and climatic coverage; noting  that the levels of effort and the frequency and types of  observations vary considerably from site to site.   8.3.2.4 Terrestrial Systems  Responsibility for systematic observation of the  terrestrial sector in Canada is shared among multiple  departments and programs. The work includes multiple  networks and involves both ground-based and satellite- based observing platforms.  Hydrometric Monitoring Environment Canada is responsible for the collection,  interpretation, and dissemination of standardised  water level and river discharge data and information  in Canada. The data are collected under a national  program jointly administered under federal–provincial  and federal–territorial cost-sharing agreements. It  operates over 2,400 hydrometric stations and publishes  the data annually in the national HYDAT archive  database. Station metadata are stored in the national  HYDEX database. The present network is fully digital  and over 1,600 stations transmit data in near real-time.  Similar to the ground-based national meteorological  networks, the hydrometric program is well established,  with defined standards and operating procedures. The  data are published annually and made available in  an online archive database. In support of the Global  Terrestrial Network for Rivers, Canada provides data  from discharge stations located at or near the mouth of  large rivers.  Most of the hydrometric stations are located in the  southern half of the country where the population     180  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  and economic activities are the greatest. As a result,  the adequacy of the hydrometric network to describe  hydrologic characteristics, both spatially and  temporally, decreases significantly in the north.   Modernisation of the hydrometric monitoring system  is ongoing. All stations are equipped with digital data  loggers and the goal of 100% near real-time reporting  is progressively being achieved. Hydroacoustic  technologies have been introduced to facilitate the  measurement of velocity profiles. In the previous few  years, the data acquisition and production components  have been modernised with the development and  implementation of the hydrometric workstation.  Forests  Natural Resources Canada’s National Forest Inventory  provides ongoing monitoring of Canada’s forests. The  National Forest Inventory is a collaborative effort of  federal, provincial, and territorial governments from  across Canada. The Inventory monitors a network  of 20,000 sampling points across Canada. A 20 km  by 20 km grid is used in southern Canada with less  intensive sampling in northern Canada. Detailed  ground measurements are taken at a subset of the  National Forest Inventory plots. The ongoing 10-year  re-measurement cycle provides a continuous record of  forest change. The re-measurement strategy is designed  for flexibility, alignment with jurisdictional inventory  activities, and integration with other relevant forest  information products.  The National Forest Inventory provides national  and regional scale estimates of above-ground forest  biomass. Since 2010, it has developed updated national  estimates and released new tools for calculating  biomass estimates for individual trees or for stands  of merchantable or non-merchantable size trees for  any species or forest type found in Canada. Updated  biomass estimation models are being embedded in  the Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian Forest  Sector. The Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian  Forest Sector and National Forest Inventory biomass   calculation tools are available through the National  Forest Information System.  Natural Resources Canada is engaged in several  research and development initiatives in partnership  with the Canadian Space Agency to develop improved  monitoring of forest biomass stocks and stock changes.  Special focus is being placed on improving mapping  and monitoring for Canada’s remote northern forests,  where traditional forest inventory techniques are  impractical or prohibitively expensive. New techniques  are being developed to use very high spatial resolution  satellite data and airborne Light Detection And Ranging  (LiDAR) to monitor forests. New techniques are also  being developed to produce plot-like datasets using  LiDAR that can be used to extend the relatively sparse  existing ground plot networks for linking with broader  coverage remote sensing products, such as Landsat, to  provide detailed, large area characterisations of forest  biomass and other forest attributes. At the national scale,  statistical imputation techniques are being developed to  combine the information from National Forest Inventory  photo-plots with information from remote sensing and  other geospatial datasets to produce maps at moderate  resolution of forest biomass and composition.   Agricultural Soils and Vegetation and Agroclimate Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and Environment  Canada are partners in the operation of a soil temperature  network of 28 stations. Agriculture and Agri-Food  Canada has played a leadership role in advancing soil  moisture monitoring by use of satellite microwave  data to assess surface moisture conditions and by the  development of a small in situ network to determine  rooting zone moisture conditions. The data is important  to Environment Canada’s land surface assimilation  modelling and the US National Aeronautics and Space  Administration’s (NASA) calibration and validation of  satellite moisture assessment systems. A broad spectrum  of other Canadian agricultural databases exists, ranging  from detailed characterisations of physical and chemical  properties of soil to the location and extent of various  land use activities and vegetation types.    181  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada has implemented  annual monitoring of agricultural land use, and is  developing land use change information from this land  use inventory. Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada is  also working with Environment Canada and Natural  Resources Canada to develop a terrestrial monitoring  framework for Canada.   Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada has developed new  tools and indices to enhance its monitoring of drought  conditions on Canada’s agricultural landscapes. A  system to automate reporting of agroclimate impacts  has become operational and is used to validate extent,  location, and severity of drought and other extreme  climate events on agriculture. Agriculture and Agri- Food Canada has also developed Canadian versions  of two important drought indices used by the U.S., in  order to increase homogeneity of drought assessment  across North America as part of Agriculture and Agri- Food Canada’s role as Canadian lead in the North  American Drought Monitor. Agriculture and Agri- Food Canada has contributed to the enhancement  of climate monitoring networks in the Prairies and  Atlantic Canada and, with Environment Canada and  the private sector, has helped establish the Community  Cooperative Rain, Hail, and Snow project in Canada to  increase community participation in monitoring.   8.3.3  Space-based Observations 8.3.3.1 Canadian Satellites and Missions SCISAT-1 Atmospheric Chemistry Experiment Launched in August 2003, the primary goals of the  SCISAT-1 Atmospheric Chemistry Experiment mission  include understanding chemical and dynamical  processes in the stratosphere and upper troposphere,  particularly in the Arctic; exploring the relationship  between atmospheric chemistry and climate change;  and measuring aerosols and clouds to reduce the  uncertainties in their effects on the global energy  balance. Data on the distribution and concentration of  a large number of ozone depleting substances, many of  which are powerful GHGs, provide valuable information  on the depletion/recovery of the ozone layer.  RADARSAT RADARSAT-1 was launched in 1995. Until March 2013, it  provided valuable information for use in environmental  monitoring and natural resource management,  particularly over the Canada’s North. Its successor,  RADARSAT-2, was launched in 2007. RADARSAT-2  provides a high resolution, enhanced repeat imaging  capacity, shortened programming and processing- delivery timelines, superior data storage and more  precise measurements than its predecessor.  RADARSAT Constellation Mission The Canadian Space Agency initiated the development  of the RADARSAT Constellation Mission to ensure  C-Band Synthetic Aperture Radar data continuity for  RADARSAT users. Once implemented, the RADARSAT  Constellation Mission will provide complete coverage  of Canada’s land and oceans, offering an average daily  revisit, as well as daily access to 95% of the world to  Canadian and international users. Government funding  for this mission was confirmed in January 2013 and  satellite launches are scheduled for 2018.  8.3.3.2  Canadian Instruments aboard International  Satellites and Missions  CLOUDSAT CLOUDSAT, launched in 2006, is a NASA satellite  to which the Canadian Space Agency contributed  important radar subsystems. CLOUDSAT uses a  Cloud Profiling Radar to provide three-dimensional  data of clouds, which contribute to improving our  understanding of how clouds influence the weather and  their effect on climate.   Measurements Of Pollution In The Troposphere  (MOPITT) Launched in December 1999 on board NASA’s  Terra satellite, the MOPITT instrument was funded  by the Canadian Space Agency. The instrument  continuously scans the Earth’s atmosphere to make  long-term measurements of CO concentrations.  The objectives of MOPITT are to extend the 13-year  record of tropospheric CO, show paths of transport for     182  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  atmospheric pollution, and provide a proxy to aid in  constraining the retrieval of tropospheric CO2.  Optical Spectrograph and InfraRed Imaging  System (OSIRIS) Launched in 2001, Canada’s OSIRIS instrument,  onboard the Swedish satellite Odin, captures detailed  vertical profile measurements of ozone concentration  and the formation of ozone holes over the poles.  This mission contributes to understanding of how  human activities and volcanic emissions affect the  atmospheric environment.  New InfraRed Sensor Technology (NIRST) NIRST is a demonstration instrument on board the  4th Argentinian science application satellite, which was  built and launched in 2011 in collaboration with NASA.  The instrument makes use of new Canadian thermal  detector technology and was developed to monitor  temperatures of the ocean surface and record high  temperature events such as forest fires and volcanic  eruptions. Such data are important for improving  estimates of emissions from biomass fires.  Surface Water and Ocean Topography Surface Water and Ocean Topography is a joint mission  of NASA and the Centre National d’Etudes Spatiales in  France, with a contribution from the Canadian Space  Agency. The main goal of the hydrological component  of the mission is to obtain the first global inventory of  freshwater storage and its change on a global spatial scale  and at sub-monthly, seasonal, and annual time scales.  The Canadian Space Agency contribution to the mission  is the provision of the Enhanced Interaction Klystron, a  critical component of the Ka-band Radar Interferometer  which is the core instrument on this mission.  8.3.3.3  Canadian Involvement in International  Missions  In addition to the Canadian initiatives listed sections  8.3.3.1 and 8.3.3.2, Canadian researchers are involved  in internationally-led Earth observation missions. As  a cooperating member of the European Space Agency   (ESA), Canada participates directly in ESA programs,  activities, and decision-making. Canada shares many  of ESA’s objectives for the Living Planet program,  which promotes the use of satellite data to broaden the  understanding, preservation, and management of the  Earth and its environment.   Canadian researchers sit on science advisory groups  for missions led by NASA, ESA, and the Japan  Aerospace Exploration Agency. They contribute  expertise and establish collaborations to make use of  international space activities for Canadian climate- related applications.  8.4 Research  8.4.1  Overview Within Canada, research on the climate system and  climate change involves different scientific disciplines  from a range of government and academic institutions.  The key federal departments involved in such research  are Environment Canada, Fisheries and Oceans  Canada, Natural Resources Canada, and Agriculture  and Agri-Food Canada. Environment Canada is  primarily responsible for providing the foundational  scientific understanding of the climate system, with  other federal departments carrying out discipline- specific research. Government activities are frequently  undertaken in close collaboration with other science- based institutions, primarily within the university  community. Many Canadian research programs are also  linked to larger international efforts. Climate research  in Canada contributes to increasing the understanding  of the carbon cycle (and other biogeochemical  cycles), analysis of climate trends and variability,  climate change detection and attribution studies,  understanding the physical processes that govern  climate system dynamics, and developing advanced  global and regional climate models to project future  climate change. Results inform assessment of past  and future climate change impacts on the Canadian  environment, economy, and society.    183  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  8.4.2  Trends and Variability Climate analysis makes use of climate observations  (physical and chemical), proxy data, and climate model  outputs over a variety of time and space scales in order  to investigate the past, present, and possible future  characteristics and behaviour of the climate system.  Topics of investigation include analysis of trends,  temporal and spatial variability, extremes, and the  detection and attribution of climate change. Long- term research on understanding Canadian climate  trends and variability is primarily shared among  multiple departments of the Government of Canada.  Paleoclimate analysis in Canada is primarily undertaken  by the academic research community.  8.4.2.1 Atmosphere Climate Data Analysis and Research Environment Canada maintains an active research  focus on climate trend and variability analysis on all  time and spatial scales. Research on the development  of statistical techniques is undertaken to produce  high quality homogenised historical climate data,  indices, and metadata bases for a wide range of climate  variables including gridded data products and marine  hindcast data bases. This includes the development  of statistical downscaling techniques, concentrating  on climate change detection and attribution research,  particularly for climate extremes (e.g., temperature  and precipitation). These data products are used in  climate trend and variability analyses and climate  impact studies.  The goal is to characterise and understand natural  climate variability and anthropogenic climate change  so past and future changes in the climate can be placed  in their proper context. This research is conducted  with both observed data (including extensive archives  of instrumental and analysed climate data) and  climate models of past, present, and future climates.  A related goal is to investigate the relationship  between atmospheric circulation and weather and  climate extremes. Particular attention is on assessing  and understanding trends in the Canadian and   global climate with respect to extreme events, and  investigation and explanation of climate anomalies.  Homogenised climate data analysis and research  includes the development of climate monitoring  products. Ongoing work to develop homogenised  monthly climate data for temperature, precipitation,  and wind has resulted in national gridded time series of  monthly climate anomalies (temperature, precipitation,  pressure, and wind) dating back to the early 1900s. These  data are also included in the collaborative production  of a North American gridded dataset for global and  regional climate model validation. Since 2010, these  time series have been updated and improved, using new  and better methods for data validation and correction.  Environment Canada’s methods and computer programs  for homogenisation of climate data and calculation of  extremes are freely available (provided via Environment  Canada’s climate research website) and have been widely  used around the world.   Expertise is also applied to the design of optimal  climate observing networks in Canada as well as to  develop guidance for proper consideration of climate  change in infrastructure design. Environment Canada’s  climate data analysis research provides specialised  climatic design information on climate extremes  (e.g., temperature, precipitation, wind, and waves) to  support development of building codes and standards.  This information is based on past and present  observed climate data and uses future climate scenario  information and statistical downscaling techniques  (for extremes) to guide development of infrastructure  codes and standards with respect to potential impacts  of future climate change.  The Climate Trends and Variations Bulletin is  an informational product based on adjusted and  homogenised Canadian climate data. Environment  Canada produces five Bulletins each year and provides  the product on its website. The bulletin summarises  recent national and regional climate information and  presents it in an historical context.    184  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  8.4.2.2 Oceans Marine Ecosystems The oceanography and climate science research  program of Fisheries and Oceans Canada encompasses  analysis, process, and modelling research of the oceans  and their marine ecosystems. This includes variability  in physical and chemical oceanographic properties  and in biological distributions and production from  bacterioplankton to fish. Ocean regions of interest are  the Northeast Pacific, Northwest Atlantic, Hudson Bay,  and the Arctic. Observations from Fisheries and Oceans  Canada monitoring programs, remote sensing, and  field programs are used to provide state-of-the-ocean  descriptions for these regions and historical ocean  climate variability. The field programs involve moored  measurements and annual surveys, and are carried out  with international programs such as the international  Arctic-Subarctic Ocean Flux program in the Arctic  Ocean. In recent years, Fisheries and Oceans Canada  has started Climate Change Science and Ecosystem  Research Initiatives to focus collaborative research on  issues such as ocean acidification and hypoxia, and on  regional ecosystems and climate change impacts.  Ocean Climate Interactions between the oceans, sea ice, snow pack,  and the atmosphere are a fundamental part of the  Earth’s global climate system. Understanding the role  of oceans in global climate and the impacts of climate  change on aquatic ecosystems is of critical importance  to Canada, which borders three inter-connected oceans.   Ocean temperatures can affect the growth and survival  of marine life and the availability of the preferred and  tolerated thermal habitats for various species. Changes  in climate may also affect stock productivity and the  sustainable harvest rates. Fishing could also exacerbate  the impacts of temperature changes by decreasing  stock resilience or increasing the variability in  abundance and, therefore, the risks of a stock collapse.  Consequently, knowledge of the physical state of  Canada’s oceans is the cornerstone of advice provided  by Fisheries and Oceans Canada.  Canada’s State of the Oceans Report 2012 presents  highlights from regional reports on five Large Ocean  Management Areas, which are geographic regions  within Canada’s three oceans. This research has  documented warming surface waters, changes to  O2 levels, and changes to freshwater inputs, all of which  are relevant to understanding aquatic ecosystem and  marine navigation impacts.  8.4.2.3 Cryosphere Environment Canada and Natural Resources Canada  share the lead within the federal government for  analysing the state of the Canadian cryosphere.  The Canadian Cryospheric Information Network is  a partnership among the Government of Canada,  Canadian academia, and the private sector to manage  research data and enhance awareness and access to  information and data on the Canadian cryosphere.  Snow and Ice In 2007, at Canada’s request, the WMO Congress  requested the Inter-commission Task Group on the  International Polar Year to establish an ad-hoc expert  group to explore the feasibility of creating a Global  Cryosphere Watch system to promote sustained  polar/cryosphere observations and the development  of an authoritative information database on past,  present, and future changes of our global snow and  ice resources. The initiative is now a full program  under the WMO. Canada continues to support the  implementation of the Global Cryosphere Watch  Program through participation of scientists in the  Program’s Working Groups and Expert Teams. In 2013,  Environment Canada hosted a workshop in support  of a proposed Snow Watch Group initiative under the  Global Cryosphere Watch Program.   Environment Canada carries out research on  variability and change in the physical processes  within the cryosphere and the role of these changing  processes in the climate system. This involves  reporting on trends and causes based on analysis  of existing data (collected both by Environment     185  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  Canada and other research partners). Additionally,  research focuses on making improvements to snow– ice surface/atmosphere processes in the Canadian  Land Surface Scheme model, which contributes to  global and regional climate model development.  Environment Canada’s research also contributes  to improved characterisation of solid precipitation  (snow/ice) for weather forecasting, climate analyses,  and characterisation of current and future water  availability in the Canadian Arctic and other regions  in Canada.  Permafrost Natural Resources Canada is the primary Government  of Canada department responsible for conducting  permafrost-related research. Data collected over the  last 20–30 years through the permafrost monitoring  network is used to characterise recent trends and  variability in permafrost conditions across the  Canadian Arctic.  A major achievement of the International Polar Year  project was an updated quantification of trends in  permafrost temperature across the Canadian North  for a range of ecoregions from the boreal forest to  the tundra and polar desert. Data collected and  analysed since the 5th National Communication  show that permafrost continues to warm across the  Canadian permafrost region. The rate of permafrost  warming varies regionally, ranging from less than  0.2°C per decade in the warm ice-rich permafrost  of the central and southern Mackenzie Valley  (in the Northwest Territories) to about 0.6°C per  decade in the cold permafrost at Alert, Nunavut.  Investigations of permafrost–climate linkages, as  part of the International Polar Year project, are  improving understanding of the factors affecting  the spatial variability of permafrost response to  a changing climate. This analysis effort is also  advancing understanding of the spatial and thermal  characteristics of mountain permafrost including  the role of vegetation and elevation in permafrost– climate relationships.  Glaciers Natural Resources Canada conducts research on  Canada’s glaciers and collaborates and partners with  researchers from other Canadian and international  government departments and universities. This  includes formal collaborative networks such as the  Changing Cold Regions Network (under the Climate  Change and Atmospheric Research initiative) and  the Canadian Rockies Hydrological Observatory.  Additionally, the private sector (e.g., hydro-power) is  also involved in this field of research.   In Canada, glaciers and ice caps are found in the  Western Cordillera region and in the Arctic Islands.  Formal mass balance studies in Western Canada  began in 1965 at the inception of the International  Hydrological Decade led by the United Nations  Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organisation.  These studies grew from a variety of casual and  professional observations dating back to as early as  1896. They were, and continue to be, centered on the  role of glaciers in the hydrological cycle and water  resources for human and natural systems. Recent  efforts have demonstrated that the role of glaciers in  regulating stream flow may be in decline as the result of  significant area-wide reductions in glacier cover fueled  by significantly negative mass balance forcing and even  signs of acceleration.   Research activities also address temporal context  through documenting or back-casting neo-glacial  variations for certain reference glacier mass balance  sites. The most notable examples of this are the Peyto  Glacier (modeled back to 1673) and the Castle Creek  Glacier (northern Canadian Rocky Mountains), which  has the longest reconstructed continuous record  of annually resolved glacier recession for a North  American glacier (1959–2007).   Glacier mass balance measurements in the Canadian  High Arctic began in 1959. These measurements are  used to investigate synoptic scale glacier mass balance  loss, which contributes to research on the hydrologic     186  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  processes by which these glaciers contribute to global  sea level rise.   The addition of remote sensing technologies in both  regions has enabled integration of aircraft and satellite  altimetry observations with in situ mass balance and  snow accumulation records to validate satellite-based  records and provide a more robust historical record. An  extensive database review is underway for the period  1995–present for reference site mass balance data to  distinguish a climate or reference mass balance from a  true or hydrological mass balance.   8.4.2.4 Forests Natural Resources Canada supports a comprehensive,  multidisciplinary, and growing climate change research  agenda that integrates the biophysical and social  sciences, links them to policy, and places a strong  emphasis on knowledge exchange. Natural Resources  Canada’s carbon and impacts and adaptation science  is delivered with the end goal of providing knowledge  and tools to members of Canada’s forest sector to  enable them to make informed adaptation and  mitigation decisions.  Ongoing research efforts are aimed at improving  the understanding of climate change impacts on  forest growth and mortality rates using long-term  data from permanent sample plots. Work is also  ongoing to improve the spatial detail and resolution  of national forest carbon monitoring and change  estimation procedures.  National Forest Inventory information is being used  together with other biophysical and socio-economic  data to generate indicators of climate change-related  forest change, an effort taking place under the Forest  Change initiative of Natural Resources Canada. These  indicators are selected on the basis of sensitivity to  climate change, relevance to decision support, and  feasibility of development and update, and are reported  through a web-based tracking system.  Natural Resources Canada’s carbon science research  agenda is designed to develop scientific knowledge,  modelling, reporting, and policy advice on the  management of forest carbon and GHG fluxes. This  work also makes a large contribution to improved  understanding and representation of the carbon  cycle in climate projections. Natural Resources  Canada develops scientific knowledge about the key  natural determinants of changes in forest carbon/ GHG balances across various scales and the impacts  of management. This knowledge contributes  to reducing uncertainty about the impact of  key natural influences on carbon dynamics and  estimates of carbon stock changes and GHG  emissions: natural disturbances, forest growth,  soils/decomposition, inter-annual variability, and  climate change.   A comprehensive review of assisted migration was  published as a five-paper special issue3 of the Forestry  Chronicle. Several jurisdictions and companies are  using this knowledge to evaluate and adjust their  current policies and practices, and guide future research  in this field.  The “Blueprint for Forest Carbon Science in Canada  2012–2020” document coordinated by Natural Resources  Canada is meant to serve as a guide for research and for  the tasks of coordination and integration of Canadian  forest carbon science. It discusses: • The overarching forest carbon policy issues that are   expected to be important for governments and the  forest sector to 2020;   • The forest carbon science questions, and the research  priorities to address these questions, that are expected  to be of greatest relevance for policy to 2020; and  • The science approaches, infrastructure, and  partnerships needed to make progress in addressing  these research priorities.   Canadian Wildland Fire Information System The Canadian Wildland Fire Information System  creates daily fire weather and fire behaviour maps     187  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  year-round and hot spot maps throughout the forest  fire season, generally between May and September.  The scientific basis for the Canadian Wildland Fire  Information System is the Canadian Forest Fire  Danger Rating System, which is a national system for  wildland fire danger developed by Natural Resources  Canada. The foundation of the Canadian Forest Fire  Danger Rating System is the Fire Weather Index,  which contains numerical rankings of relative wildland  fire potential, and the Fire Behaviour Prediction  system, which provides quantitative estimates of the  potential fire spread rate, fuel consumption, and fire  intensity under different conditions.   Fire Weather Index values are calculated using standard  weather measures. Currently Fire Weather Index values  are calculated using approximately 1,800 weather  stations. Other information that is collected and  maintained includes data on fire locations; both in  the form of satellite imagery derived hotspots and  calculated fire perimeters. The wealth of data on fire  weather, fire behaviour, and fire locations provides  an important source of information on how the  conditions in Canada’s forests have changed over the  last few decades.  Climate Impacts on Productivity and Health of  Aspen Trembling aspen (Populus tremuloides) is the most  abundant tree species in Canada’s boreal forest, where  it is important both ecologically and commercially.  Concerns about climate-related dieback of aspen  forests in the 1990s prompted the establishment  of Climate Impacts on Productivity and Health of  Aspen, a regional research and monitoring study that  includes a network of 180 plots across west-central  Canada. This study is aimed at understanding and  forecasting the effects of drought, insects, and other  factors on the productivity and health of aspen forests  under a changing climate. The work includes annual  assessments of damage by insects and diseases,  analyses of long-term changes in aspen growth from  tree rings and ground plots, and mapping of aspen   dieback through remote sensing. A key component of  this research is the development and application of  user-friendly indicators of soil moisture for historical  analyses and mapping of drought severity. Climate  Impacts on Productivity and Health of Aspen was  initiated by Natural Resources Canada in 2000 and has  continued through partnerships with collaborators  from provincial forest management agencies,  Environment Canada, university research groups, the  Canadian Carbon Program, and others.  8.4.3  Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks 8.4.3.1 Agricultural Ecosystems Since the 5th National Communication, Agriculture  and Agri-Food Canada has focused significant research  resources on environmental issues such as climate  change, and GHG mitigation and adaptation. Specific  research activities include: • Understanding nitrogen and carbon dynamics   in relation to GHG emissions and removals in  agricultural systems;  • Understanding and evaluating the influence of  agricultural land management on soil carbon  reservoirs, crop selection on N2O release, and animal  husbandry practices on CH4 release;  • Modelling climate impacts on crop biomass  production and net GHG emissions and removals;  • Modelling of global change impacts to understand  how various policy and biophysical drivers  will influence agricultural land use and land  management systems;  • Examining the impacts of climate change, climate  variability, and water resources on annual crop  production potential;  • Assessing water and nutrient management in an era  of scarce resources; and  • Identifying climate trends and their relationship to  changes in land use and land management.   Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada has continued  research and development of agri-environmental  indicators and associated metrics that measure the  environmental performance of the agriculture sector,     188  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  including annual GHG emissions and removals from  agriculture. This work is currently funded under the  Sustainable Science and Technology Advancement  initiative of Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada’s  Growing Forward 2 policy framework and builds on  work from the National Agri-Environment Health  Analysis and Reporting Program and the National  Carbon and Greenhouse Gas Accounting and  Verification System. Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada  is continuing to make improvements to Holos, a  farm-level software tool for estimating the mitigation  potential of changes in agricultural practices and  working with industry and provincial partners to ensure  it meets the needs of the sector.   Canada is one of the founding members of the Global  Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases,  an international network of more than 30 member- countries, devoted to collaboration in agricultural  research on GHG mitigation and beneficial  management practices for farmers in Canada and  around the world. At its launch, Canada announced  that it would invest $27 million towards the Global  Research Alliance.  The Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Program represents  Canada’s initial contribution to the Global Research  Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse Gases and will  provide Canadian farmers with technologies to manage  their land and livestock in a way that will mitigate GHG  emissions. This five year, $27 million federally funded  program runs from September 1, 2010 to August 31,  2015. The objective of the Agricultural Greenhouse  Gas Program is to enhance the understanding and  accessibility of agricultural technologies; Beneficial  Management Practices (agricultural practices aimed  at reducing the environmental impact of farming  activities on the landscape); and processes that can be  adopted by farmers to mitigate GHG emissions.  8.4.3.2 Forest Ecosystems Canada’s National Forest Carbon Monitoring  Accounting and Reporting System builds on   information in the National Forest Inventory and  on additional provincial and territorial forest  inventory information. Natural Resources Canada  developed and maintains the Carbon Budget Model  of the Canadian Forest Sector, a Tier 3 forest carbon  dynamics estimation tool fully compliant with the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  reporting guidelines. With the Carbon Budget Model  of the Canadian Forest Sector as its core model,  the System provides annual estimates of annual  GHG emissions and removals as affected by forest  management, natural disturbances, and land-use  change. Natural Resources Canada, in collaboration  with the Canadian Space Agency, uses remote sensing  and other data to monitor the area annually disturbed  by wildfires, and maintains a deforestation monitoring  program to estimate the area annually affected by  conversion of forest to non-forest land uses in both the  managed and unmanaged forest area.  Over 400 analysts have been trained in the use of  the model, and training workshops have included  participants from over 20 countries. Application of the  model has reduced the uncertainties regarding the net  carbon balance from the forest sector, and provided  a clear demonstration of the impacts of large-scale  natural disturbances, forest management, and land-use  change on GHG emissions and removals. In addition  to supporting the annual reporting of GHG balances  in Canada, the Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian  Forest Sector is also used in national-scale analyses  of mitigation options through measuring changes in  forest management and in the use of harvested wood  products for long-lived products or bioenergy.  8.4.3.3 Ocean systems  Fisheries and Oceans Canada’s research programs  seek an understanding of the processes that control  the flux of carbon into and out of ocean systems,  assessing the potential and verifiability of measures to  enhance oceanic carbon uptake. The primary objective  of this ocean processes climate research is “getting  the carbon right” by reducing the uncertainties. The     189  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  communication of such information to policy makers  is important as a scientific basis for the international  discussions regarding ocean based carbon sequestration  programs. The key scientific questions being addressed  are whether the oceans will continue to sequester CO2,  whether the oceans can sequester an even larger fraction  of CO2 emissions through purposeful fertilisation,  and the pathways to ocean acidification and the effect  acidification has on ocean life. Making progress in this  area requires the integrated approach of observations  and model development from local to global scales.   8.4.3.4  Observation-based Approaches to Carbon  Source Estimation  The increase in regional-scale GHG observations,  increasing availability of space-based GHG  observations, and application of atmospheric transport  models have enabled the development of inversion  methods to provide independent verification of  reported GHG emissions. These observations-based  estimates contribute to monitoring natural and  anthropogenic GHG sources and sinks. Canada is  building its capacity to monitor sources and sinks at  regional scales using atmospheric observations and  inverse modelling through two approaches. Work was  initiated in 2011 by Environment Canada on a Carbon  Assimilation System, working closely with researchers  at the University of Toronto and with funding support  from the Canadian Space Agency. Development work  is focused on CO2 at global scales, with the intention  to move to a regional domain and CH4 simulation.  The second approach is the development of methods  to integrate atmospheric models and surface in situ  GHG observations to characterise regional-scale source  influences on CH4.  8.4.4 Climate Processes Climate process research addresses both the physical  and chemical processes by which the climate system  functions. These issues include, but are not limited to  the role of clouds, oceans, sea ice, permafrost, and land  surface processes in the climate system, as well as the  function of forests, agriculture, wetlands, and oceans in   the global carbon, water, and energy cycles. Improved  understanding of these processes contributes to  development of higher resolution climate projections,  which are used to support climate adaptation. Expertise  in this area is concentrated primarily within universities  and Government of Canada departments where there  are collaborative research relationships with academia.  8.4.4.1 Land and Cryosphere Much of the research with respect to cryospheric  processes within the climate system has been led by  Environment Canada and Natural Resources Canada.  New satellite capabilities for retrieval of snow cover  information have been developed and validated  through intensive field campaigns in northern Canada  involving ground-based measurements and aircraft  remote sensing. Environment Canada’s cold climate  processes research has led to the implementation of  improved process information on energy and water  cycles in climate models through the development,  testing, and enhancement of the Canadian Land  Surface Scheme model. This includes research on snow  cover variability and evaluation of the simulation of  snow cover using regional climate models. Part of the  ongoing effort towards climate model development  within Environment Canada includes enhancing  the representation of snow, soil, and vegetation in  the Canadian Land Surface Scheme model, which  is being incorporated into Environment Canada’s  climate models.   Environment Canada is also involved in the generation  of snow cover change scenarios for the Canadian Arctic  and evaluation of the representation of Arctic snow in  the Canadian Regional Climate Model and Coupled  Model Inter-comparison Project—Phase 5 model runs.  This work is part of a project under ArcticNet, which is  being led by the Ouranos Climate Consortium.  Canadian universities are also active in climate process  research, with various programs having a particular  sector and/or geographic focus with respect to land  processes and biogeochemical cycling. For example,     190  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  researchers at McGill University study Earth System  science and land surface processes, including focus on  biogeochemistry and carbon cycling. The University  of Saskatchewan also has areas of study focused on  carbon and nitrogen cycling with a particular focus on  agricultural soils. A research group at the University  of British Columbia studies carbon cycling and energy  exchange with a particular focus on exchange between  the atmosphere and forest systems.  8.4.4.2 Oceans Research teams have been investigating the storage and  transport of heat, freshwater, and carbon in the North  Atlantic, North Pacific, and Arctic Oceans through  field expeditions, data analysis, and model simulations.  These studies have provided better knowledge of the  transports through the Canadian Arctic Archipelago in  recent decades, the production of intermediate-depth  water masses in the Labrador Sea, and the linkages of  these processes to the larger scale circulation in the  North Atlantic. This is important since Arctic outflows  and Labrador Sea water play important roles in the  strength of the global oceanic thermohaline circulation,  which is expected to be an important factor to climate  impacts in Canada and Europe. Researchers from  Fisheries and Oceans Canada are involved in three  of the seven network projects funded under NSERC’s  Climate Change and Atmospheric Research initiative.   8.4.4.3 Biophysical Sensitivities A subcomponent of climate process research seeks to  improve understanding of the biophysical sensitivities  of systems to climate and climate change. Research on  the biophysical aspects of sensitivity is one component  of determination of vulnerability, which is defined  as the degree to which a system is susceptible to, or  able to cope with the effects of climate, including  extremes. Research on the biophysical sensitivities of  both unmanaged and managed resources to changes  in climate is conducted mainly by federal departments  through a mixture of core funding and funding  from other programs such as the Lake Winnipeg   Basin Initiative and the Program of Energy Research  and Development.  Environment Canada’s Water and Climate Impact  Research Centre, jointly established with the University  of Victoria, conducts a national, interdisciplinary  program of ecosystem-based research in the aquatic  sciences, which includes research on hydrological  and ecosystem processes that contribute to our  understanding of the biophysical sensitivities and  vulnerabilities of freshwater systems to climate  variability and change. The program focuses on  identifying, quantifying, and modelling hydrologic  and ecological impacts of climate change and  variability. Major activities related to biophysical  sensitivities include: • Developing suitable indicators of hydrological and   ecological response;  • Detecting and predicting trends in key hydrologic   variables, water resources, and aquatic systems  sensitive to hydroclimatic extremes and variability; and  • Determining and modelling how climatic alterations  affect hydrologic, geochemical, and ecological  processes at local and regional scales.   A special focus is also placed on sensitive aquatic  systems, such as the bellwether systems identified  in the Arctic, or highly valued water resources  that are under increasing stress from synergistic  effects of resource extraction/consumption and  climate variability.  Much of the work on biophysical sensitivities to climate  variability and change conducted by Environment  Canada and its partners is regional in nature. In  northern and western Canada, researchers have  examined the sensitivity of transboundary waters to  changes in extreme events such as floods and low flows,  including an assessment of changes to the controlling  atmospheric circulation patterns. Researchers are  also examining past trends and variability in hydro- climatology and constructing future climatic scenarios     191  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  of hydroclimatic conditions from both global and  regional circulation models.   In the Athabasca River basin, the hydrology, hydro- climatology, sediment/bitumen transport, and hydro- ecological flow needs under both current and future  climate regimes are being addressed.   In the Prairies, past trends and variability in extreme  drought and excessive moisture conditions and their  impacts on Prairie lake levels and the water quality  of Lake Winnipeg have been examined. In addition,  hydrologists are monitoring water balances in wetlands  and generating hydrological models that can be used to  analyse and predict the impacts of climate change and  land use change.   Climate change impact studies are being conducted  in the Great Lakes, e.g., by examining the trends of  atmospheric and limnological variables and modelling  the impact of projected climate change scenarios on the  hydrodynamics and water quality in the Great Lakes.  Scenarios of future climate change also suggest lower  water levels in the future for the Great Lakes–Saint  Lawrence system—a consequence of particular concern  for coastal ecosystems such as wetlands, and human  activities such as recreation and shipping. Under the  International Joint Commission Upper Great Lakes  Study there are also several projects on coupled land,  lake, and atmosphere modelling. One of these, led by  Environment Canada, seeks to develop a fully coupled  hydrological land, lake, and atmospheric prediction  system, which makes it possible to simulate the Great  Lakes water level dynamics on daily to decadal time  scales, as well as forecast water levels on weekly to  seasonal time scales. This model will provide improved  numerical guidance for managing the levels of the  Great Lakes in a changing climate.   In the Arctic, Environment Canada has led an  assessment of climate change impacts on Arctic  freshwater ecosystems and hydrology, and on river flow  to the circumpolar Arctic Ocean. In the Mackenzie   Delta region specifically, scientists are analysing the role  of climate in catastrophic lake drainage, and analysing  peak spring water level to determine climate-related  variability and change in the spring breakup flood. They  are also working to improve models for climate change  impact prediction; establishing surface energy balance  over heterogeneous terrain and comparing with tower  and aircraft estimates; and conducting analysis of the  heat and mass exchanges of lakes.  8.4.4.4 Atmospheric Physics and Chemistry Environment Canada carries out research in  atmospheric physics and chemistry with the goal of  better representing these processes in climate models.  This involves a wide range of parameterisations,  particularly in terms of improving the representation  of clouds, aerosols, and radiation in Environment  Canada’s climate models. Atmospheric physics and  chemistry research includes both tropospheric and  stratospheric processes linking to other components of  the Earth system (e.g., land, ocean, cryosphere, and the  carbon cycle).   Researchers from Environment Canada and  Fisheries and Oceans Canada collaborate with  Canadian university partners on Climate Change  and Atmospheric Research network initiatives  related to atmospheric physics and chemistry: The  “Network on Climate and Aerosols: Addressing Key  Uncertainties in Remote Canadian Environments”  project studies the sources, sinks, and climatic  impacts of atmospheric aerosol particles in remote  Canadian environments. “Research related to the  Polar Environment Atmospheric Research Laboratory:  Probing the Atmosphere of the High Arctic” studies  the Canadian high Arctic atmospheric composition  using measurements from the Polar Environment  Atmospheric Research Laboratory at Eureka, Nunavut.  In the longer term, research will address the effects of  short-lived climate pollutants on climate and future  air quality by improving the accuracy of simulated  radiative forcings and climate on regional scales.     192  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  Parameterisations for chemistry, aerosols, and  clouds will be developed and tested by Environment  Canada. Atmospheric physics development will also  address the need for improved parameterisations of  subgrid-scale processes related to three-dimensional  inhomogeneities in layer and convective clouds since  they have important implications for calculations of  radiation, precipitation, and mixing in climate models.  8.4.5  Climate Modelling and Applications Climate modelling research in Canada is undertaken  in federal government research facilities, universities,  and by regional climate modelling consortia. Canadian  scientists are also extensively engaged in research  collaborations with international colleagues, working  on projects to improve the representation of various  physical processes in global and regional climate  models. For example, Canadian scientists play an  important leadership role in international climate  research coordination and assessment bodies, such as  the World Climate Research Program and the IPCC.  As part of the development and evaluation of climate  models, scientists gain insights and improved  understanding of the climate system and the influence  of human activities on climate. This is achieved through  application of global and regional models, individually  and as part of multi-model ensemble or model inter- comparison projects.  8.4.5.1 Ocean Modelling Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Environment Canada,  and National Defence Canada are collaborating  under the Canadian Operational Network of Coupled  Environmental PredicTion Systems Memorandum  of Understanding to develop an operational global  coupled atmosphere–ocean–ice data assimilation  and prediction system suitable for data reanalysis,  hindcasts, nowcasts, and forecasts. This will:  • Advance the effectiveness of marine–environmental   assessments;  • Lead to more effective observations, understanding,   and prediction of the marine system; and   • Improve ocean-observing and forecast products for  management and other clients, including in relation  to climate change.  This collaboration is based on the implementation and  improvement of the Nucleus for European Modelling  of the Ocean (NEMO) model. Future versions of  Environment Canada’s ocean model, for use in both  operational environmental prediction and climate  modelling, will be based on NEMO. This change  will enable Environment Canada to benefit from  the international development effort underpinning  NEMO, along with the related user support and  experiences of a global user community. In addition,  moving toward a unified ocean modelling framework  within Environment Canada will create synergies  across modelling applications. Collaboration with the  Canadian university community, under the Network of  Centers of Excellence project Marine Environmental  Observation Prediction and Response (MEOPAR) will  further promote coordinated ocean model development  and evaluation using the NEMO model.  8.4.5.2 Global Climate Models Global climate models are the primary tool for  making quantitative projections of future climate  change. These models are based on mathematical  representations of physical processes that include the  three-dimensional atmosphere and ocean, along with  sea ice and the land surface (and its vegetation). Global  climate models are used in two kinds of simulations:  The first is a long “control” run of the model with no  change in atmospheric composition or other external  forcing. This kind of simulation is used to understand  the processes involved in natural climate variability  and to estimate the magnitude of this variability for  climate change detection studies. The second kind of  simulation involves specified changes in forcing such  as GHG concentration and aerosol loading. This kind  of simulation is used to understand (and attribute)  historical climate change, and to make future climate  change projections.     193  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  The core Canadian global climate modelling effort  is housed within Environment Canada, where an  increasingly comprehensive progression of global  climate models has been developed since the  1970s. Environment Canada plays a central role in  collaborative climate research with Canadian university  partners and other government departments, notably  Fisheries and Oceans Canada, who contribute expertise  in ocean carbon cycle modelling. Environment  Canada scientists serve on a variety of national and  international steering committees and working groups  related to climate model development, evaluation,  and applications.  Model development at Environment Canada is based  on scientific innovations related to fundamental  improvements of the Earth System processes through  the individual model components (e.g., atmosphere,  ocean, land surface, etc.). New model versions  with improved atmosphere–ocean–land surface  coupling (including sea ice), and which incorporate  biogeochemical cycles for carbon and nitrogen,  aerosols, and ozone are the basis for generating new  historical and future climate scenario runs. Model  development combines these Earth system components  to regularly update Environment Canada’s suite of  climate models (e.g., the Canadian Earth System Model,  Canadian Global Climate Model, Canadian Regional  Climate Model, and the Canadian Seasonal to Inter- annual Prediction System). The end result of the model  development stream is the production of a new suite of  climate models every 18 months, which are well tested  and have known properties. These new versions of the  modelling infrastructure are implemented to exploit  new supercomputing systems.  Researchers in Environment Canada’s model  application stream undertake the execution of the  suite of climate models to provide information  on past, present, and future states of the climate.  Environment Canada’s participation in international  Model Inter-comparison Projects represents its largest  application commitment. A large number of Model   Inter-comparison Projects involve international efforts  to understand physical processes (e.g., convection,  clouds, aerosols, and their interactions) and their  parameterisation in climate models. Environment  Canada’s Canadian Earth System Model—Version 2  provided the Canadian contribution to the Coupled  Model Inter-comparison Project—Phase 5. The results  from these coordinated experiments constituted a  significant contribution by Canada to the IPCC 5th  Assessment Report.   Output from both the global and regional models  is available to the public via Environment Canada’s  Canadian Center for Climate Modelling and Analysis  website. This website allows a user to select specific  model variables, from all or part of the model domain,  and download it for use in climate change research and  impact assessments.   A large portion of climate modelling research is done  in collaboration under various national research  networks. With funding from NSERC under the  Climate Change and Atmospheric Research initiative, a  number of networks have recently been established that  investigate various aspects of the research necessary to  improve both the Canadian regional and global climate  models. Additionally, some Canadian universities are  also directly involved in climate model development  and future projections using these models. For  example, the University of Victoria’s climate modelling  group, within its School of Earth and Ocean Science,  has developed the University of Victoria Earth System  Climate Model. This Earth System model has been  used to analyse various aspects of the climate system  including response to future climate forcings. The  University of Toronto has a research program on climate  models and climate dynamics within its Center for  Global Change Science.  8.4.5.3 Regional Climate Modelling and Scenarios Climate change adaptation planning, impact  assessments, and policy development all require access  to scientifically-credible, quantitative information     194  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  about past and future climate change. Ideally this  information should be at the spatial scale required  for their particular application. Within Canada,  Environment Canada is responsible for the global  climate model development, which in turn forms the  basis for developing regional scale models and regional  scale climate model applications by Environment  Canada and regional climate modelling consortia  in Canada.  Environment Canada’s research in regional downscaling  has focused on the development of a new regional  climate model, the Canadian Regional Climate  Model—Version 4, which makes use of the Global  Environmental Multiscale model dynamical core  (developed for numerical weather prediction) and  the same physics package as the Canadian Earth  System Model—Version 2. Environment Canada uses  this regional climate model to undertake historical  simulations and future projections based on a range  of emission scenarios for regional- and local-scale  applications (e.g., North American, Arctic, and African  domains) at higher spatial resolution (0.44o and  0.22o resolution, approximately 50–25 km scale).  Climate change scenarios are provided by Environment  Canada to a broad range of users through the Canadian  Climate Change Scenarios Network website. The  scenarios are based on climate projections from  different climate models (i.e., models from a variety  of international modelling centres, in addition  to Canadian model results). These projections  are transformed into climate change scenarios by  superimposing model projections of climate change  onto observed historical climate, thereby reducing  issues related to local model bias and allowing multiple  model results to be compared on the same footing. The  system allows users to download data and to produce  graphs and maps for their particular region of interest.  It is currently being updated to provide output from  the latest Coupled Model Inter-comparison Project— Phase 5 model results.  The Ouranos Consortium was created in 2001 as a  joint initiative of the Government of Québec, Hydro- Québec, and Environment Canada, and funding from  Valorisation-Recherche-Québec. Ouranos fulfils an  integrated research mission to develop regional climate  projections and scenarios as well as carry out regional  and sector-specific impacts and adaptation research.  The focus of the Ouranos consortium is on developing  and implementing regional climate model projections  to identify the potential impacts of climate change in  the fields of public safety and infrastructure; energy  supply; water resources; health; sectors such as forestry,  agriculture, mining, tourism, and transportation  operations; and protecting the natural environment.  The Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium was  established in 2005 as a regional climate service center  on Canada’s west coast. Located at the University of  Victoria, the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium  carries out research and provides information on the  impacts of climate change and variability with a specific  focus on Canada’s Pacific and Yukon regions. The  Consortium’s work is centered around three research  themes: Climate analysis and monitoring, hydrologic  impacts, and regional climate impacts.  8.4.5.4 Seasonal to Inter-Annual Prediction Coupled global climate models are increasingly being  applied to seasonal prediction due to their ability to  represent ocean–atmosphere interactions that strongly  influence climate variations on seasonal and longer  time scales, leading for example to El Niño and La Niña  episodes having far-reaching global effects. Intensive  work has been conducted over the past several years  to adapt Environment Canada’s climate models to this  application. These efforts led to the implementation  in late 2011 of the Canadian Seasonal to Inter-annual  Prediction System, which produces Environment  Canada’s official forecasts of climate anomalies over  the coming 1–12 months. The Canadian Seasonal  to Inter-annual Prediction System is based on two  climate model versions, in order to take advantage of     195  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  the generally higher skill of multi-model (compared to  single-model) forecasts.  8.4.5.5  Detection and Attribution of Climate  Change  The comparison of observed climate change with  simulated climate change is central to understanding  the causes of climate change, validating climate  models, and constraining and improving projections  of future climate change. Environment Canada  continues research to improve understanding of  the causes of trends in a range of variables through  climate model applications. Regional detection and  attribution analysis using climate models is applied  to aid understanding of the causes of climate change  over Canada and North America. As the observational  record increases, and GHG concentrations continue  to increase it will gradually become possible to  identify inconsistencies in the rate of warming in  climate models and observations, and the analysis  of new atmospheric temperature data and climate  model output to test the consistency of simulated and  observed warming in a range of models.  8.5 Climate Science Assessment  Formal assessments of the state of scientific  understanding on environmental issues have become  an important mechanism to convey information to  decision-makers. Canada recognises the value of  such activities and continues to support Canadian  involvement in national and international assessments  related to climate.  Canada has supported the participation of Canadian  experts in the IPCC, including the regular Assessment  Reports and the Special Expert Reports. Environment  Canada assumed the lead financial responsibility for  supporting Canadian science experts in the IPCC 5th  Assessment Report, with substantial contributions to  Working Group I as Coordinating Lead Authors, Lead  Authors, and Review Editors. Canada also supported  the participation of experts in the Special Report of   Working Groups I and II, “Managing the Risks of  Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate  Change Adaptation” (SREX4).  Canada contributes to the annual State of the Climate  Report and Arctic Report Card. These annual reports  (led by the U.S. NOAA) incorporate contributions  from international researchers to provide updates  on the state and recent trends of various indicators  and Essential Climate Variables. Data from Canadian  observing networks as well as direct involvement of  Canadian researchers as report authors form Canada’s  annual contributions to these international climate  science assessments.  The Arctic Council’s Arctic Monitoring and Assessment  Programme (AMAP) involves Canadian input on  various levels. Government of Canada scientists  contribute as members, as well as being experts on  specific Technical Reports. For example, scientific  information and data from Canadian networks and  projects formed important contributions to the AMAP  report “Snow Water Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic,”  which was released in 2011–2012.5  Statistics Canada, in collaboration with other  Government of Canada departments, produces a series  of reports using environmental statistics to illustrate  topical environmental issues to a general audience.  While these reports cover a wide range of topics related  to the environment, the series includes climate change  indicators: Temperature, precipitation, snow cover, sea  ice, and glaciers.  Fisheries and Oceans Canada completed four Large  Aquatic Basin climate risk assessments, one for each  of Canada’s three oceans (Atlantic, Arctic, and Pacific  Oceans) and a freshwater assessment that encompasses  two of the nation’s largest inland watersheds (Lake  Winnipeg and the Great Lakes).  In addition to the climate science assessment activities  listed in this section, Canada is also involved in     196  8 RESEARCH AND SySTEMATIC OBSERVATION OF CLIMATE CHANGE   ]  assessments related to climate change adaptation.  For example, Natural Resources Canada manages  the federal Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation  Program, under which a new national-scale assessment  of climate change vulnerability, impacts, and  adaptation has been launched (for further details, see  Chapter 6: Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change  Impacts, and Adaptation Measures).   References 1 Special Issue: Science Results from the Canadian International   Polar Year 2007–2008 (2012), Climatic Change, 115 (1).  2 Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences   (2010), “The Sky’s the Limit, Ten Years of Achievements,”   http://www.climateforum.ca/about/cfcas-archives/ (accessed:   August 1, 2013).  3 Special Collection on Assisted Tree Migration and Climate   Change (2011), The Forestry Chronicle, 87 (6), 723–779.  4 IPCC (2012), “Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters   to Advance Climate Change Adaptation,” A Special Report of   Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on   Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, D.J.   Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner,   S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge   University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp.  5 AMAP (2011), “Snow, Water, Ice and Permafrost in the Arctic   (SWIPA): Climate Change and the Cryosphere,” Arctic   Monitoring and Assessment Programme (AMAP), Oslo, Norway,   xii + 538 pp.  Websites Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada: http://www.  aadnc-aandc.gc.ca/  AEROCAN: http://www.aerocanonline.com/   Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada: http://www.agr.gc.ca/  Arctic Ocean Acidification Assessment: http://www.innovation.ca/  sites/default/files/Rome2013/files/Arctic%20Council%20-%20  AMAP%20Report%20on%20Acidification.pdf   Bedford Institute of Oceanography: http://www.bio.gc.ca/   index-eng.php   Canada Centre for Remote Sensing: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/  earth-sciences/about/organization/organization-structure/   canada-centre-for-remote-sensing/11740   Canada’s National Forest Inventory: https://nfi.nfis.org/index.php   Canadian Centre for Climate Modelling and Analysis: http://www.  ccmac-cccma.ec.gc.ca  Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network: http://www.cccsn.  ec.gc.ca  Canadian Cryospheric Information Network: http://www.ccin.ca   Canadian Ice Service: http://ice-glaces.ec.gc.ca   Canadian Space Agency: http://www.asc-csa.gc.ca  Canadian Wildland Fire Information System: http://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.  gc.ca  Carbon Budget Model of the Canadian Forest Sector: http://cfs.nrcan.  gc.ca/pages/94   Clean Air Agenda: http://actionplan.gc.ca/en/initiative/clean-air-  agenda   Climate Trends and Variations Bulletin: http://www.ec.gc.ca/adsc-  cmda  Environment Canada: http://www.ec.gc.ca  Fisheries and Oceans Canada: http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca  Global Atmosphere Watch: http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/arep/  gaw/gaw_home_en.html   Global Climate Observing System: http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/  gcos/   Global Research Alliance: http://www.globalresearchalliance.org/   Global Sea Level Observing System: http://www.gloss-sealevel.org/   Global Terrestrial Network for Permafrost: www.gtnp.org   HYDAT and HYDEX Database: http://www.ec.gc.ca/rhc-wsc/default.  asp?lang=En&n=9018B5EC-1   Integrated Science Data Management Branch: http://www.meds-  sdmm.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/isdm-gdsi/index-eng.html   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change: http://www.ipcc.ch/   National Forest Information System: https://ca.nfis.org/index_eng.  html   National Oceanographic Data Centre: http://www.nodc.noaa.gov/   Natural Resources Canada: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/home   Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada:   http://www.nserc-crsng.gc.ca/index_eng.asp   Networks of Centers of Excellence: http://www.nce-rce.gc.ca  World Meteorological Organization: http://www.wmo.int/pages/  index_en.html  http://www.climateforum.ca/about/cfcas-archives/ http://www.aadnc-aandc.gc.ca http://www.aerocanonline.com/ http://www.agr.gc.ca/ http://www.innovation.ca/sites/default/files/Rome2013/files/Arctic%20Council%20-%20AMAP%20Report%20on%20Acidification.pdf http://www.bio.gc.ca/index-eng.php http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/about/organization/organization-structure/canada-centre-for-remote-sensing/11740 https://nfi.nfis.org/index.php http://www.ccmac-cccma.ec.gc.ca http://www.cccsn.ec.gc.ca http://www.ccin.ca http://ice-glaces.ec.gc.ca http://www.asc-csa.gc.ca http://cwfis.cfs.nrcan.gc.ca http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pages/94 http://actionplan.gc.ca/en/initiative/clean-air-agenda http://www.ec.gc.ca/adsc-cmda http://www.ec.gc.ca http://www.dfo-mpo.gc.ca http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/arep/gaw/gaw_home_en.html http://www.wmo.int/pages/prog/gcos/ http://www.globalresearchalliance.org/ http://www.gloss-sealevel.org/ http://www.gtnp.org http://www.ec.gc.ca/rhc-wsc/default.asp?lang=En&n=9018B5EC-1 http://www.medssdmm.dfo-mpo.gc.ca/isdm-gdsi/index-eng.html http://www.ipcc.ch/ https://ca.nfis.org/index_eng.html http://www.nodc.noaa.gov/ http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/home http://www.nserc-crsng.gc.ca/index_eng.asp http://www.nce-rce.gc.ca http://www.wmo.int/pages/index_en.html   197  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  9 Education, Training, and Public Awareness 9.1  General Policy Towards Education,   Training and Public Awareness   The Government of Canada recognizes that addressing  the challenge of climate change will require the  collective effort of governments, non-governmental  organizations, businesses and individual Canadians.  In Canada, all levels of government and numerous  non-governmental organizations have undertaken  a range of activities to broaden public awareness of  climate change. This includes supporting training and  education to build broad support for climate change  policies and encourage collective action on the part  of all Canadians. The education, training and public  awareness chapter provides key examples of these  initiatives in Canada.  9.2  Primary, Secondary and Post- secondary Education   9.2.1  Primary and Secondary Education Education in Canada is within provincial jurisdiction  and is generally divided into primary education,  followed by secondary education and post-secondary  education. Policy initiatives in a number of provinces  encourage or require the integration of environmental  education, including climate change. Climate change  is taught across a range of subjects and grades, but  is traditionally part of senior science and geography  studies. The study of climate change is treated  progressively more comprehensively starting from  grade 4, with studies in grades 10–12 exploring the more  complex nature of climate change including global  impacts and anthropogenic drivers.   Many organizations including environmental youth  groups, non-governmentalal organizations, and  government agencies have developed teachers’ guides  to assist educators in introducing climate change  to their students. Canada has several organizations   specifically focused on environmental education. These  organizations specialize in providing professional  development and training, educational resources,  and expertise to support educators both within  the formal school system and in other educational  facilities. A number of portals exist to help teachers to  easily access diverse resources and to allow teachers  to align teaching activities with required education  curriculum outcomes.   COOL 2.0 The GreenLearning Canada Foundation is one  of Canada’s leaders in energy and climate change  education. The organization provides teachers with  education programs and lesson plans that address  energy–environment topics in a wide range of subjects.  The Foundation’s COOL 2.0 site is a hub for education  resources on energy, environment and sustainability  with lesson plans, videos, research and data, and  collaborative projects for a variety of grades and  subjects. Teachers can search by keyword, grade level,  subject, province, language, and more. The education  resources have been contributed by teachers and by  GreenLearning and its partners. In the COOL 2.0  teacher space, teachers create and manage learning  experiences for students. The web 2.0 platform allows  teachers to create assignments, customize resources,  and integrate blogs, mapping, online discussions, and  media galleries for their classes.  9.2.2  Post-secondary Education  Delivery of post-secondary education in Canada is  also the responsibility of the provinces and territories.  Environmental programs figure quite heavily in most  Canadian universities with most providing a range  of courses of study in climate science and research  at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. An  increasing number of institutions emphasize the social  science aspect of environmental studies and many  of these programs afford students the opportunity to     198  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  study climate change. For example, the University of  Ottawa Environmental Sustainability Program aims to  provide students with the knowledge and skills needed  to analyze the economic, legal, policy and scientific  dimensions of environmental problems, and to develop  policy options for addressing those problems.  Within Canada, a number of partnerships exist between  government scientists and academia in the realm of  climate research. These partnerships and network  projects build synergy and leverage expertise and  resources to increase the efficiency and effectiveness  of climate research in Canada and contribute to the  training and experience of the next generation of  Canadian scientists and researchers.  Additional information on provincial/territorial  education initiatives is included below.  9.2.3  Networks of Centres of Excellence Networks of Centres of Excellence are virtual  research networks that combine expertise from  academia, industry, government, and not-for-profit  organizations. Canada’s Networks of Centres of  Excellence program has been in place since 1989 and  connects multidisciplinary research partnerships with  industrial expertise and strategic investment. The  networks are led by academia and perform research  and development in different fields. This work allows  Canadian researchers and students to work with  receptor communities to accelerate the creation and  application of knowledge. ArcticNet (centered at Laval  University) and the Marine Environmental Observation  Prediction and Response Network (centered at  Dalhousie University) are two Networks of Centres  of Excellence which are directly related to climate  research in Canada. (Further detail on these networks  is presented in Chapter 8: Research and Systematic  Observation of Climate Change).  9.2.4  Research Granting Agencies in Canada In Canada there are three federal granting councils  that sponsor academic research and related activities:   the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research  Council (NSERC), the Canadian Institutes of Health  Research, and the Social Sciences and Humanities  Research Council.   NSERC is the primary funding source for most  engineering and natural science-based projects and;  therefore, is the most closely-linked of the three federal  granting councils to climate research. Its core role  is to support university research and training in the  fields of science and engineering. NSERC fulfills its  mission by awarding scholarships and research grants  through peer-reviewed competition, and by building  partnerships among universities, colleges, governments,  and the private sector. The Council administers  the Climate Change and Atmospheric Research  initiative, which supports research at Canadian post- secondary institutions.   The Networks of Centres of Excellence program  and Canada Research Chairs program are jointly  administered by Canada’s three federal granting  councils, in partnership with Industry Canada and  Health Canada. The Canada Research Chairs program  also partners with the Canada Foundation for  Innovation to deliver on its mandate (further details  on the Canada Research Chairs and Climate Change  and Atmospheric Research initiatives are presented  in Chapter 8: Research and Systematic Observation of  Climate Change).  Canadian government scientists also contribute  to academia by holding adjunct professorships at  Canadian universities and co-supervising students. The  Government of Canada also participates in academic  fora, such as the Canadian Resource and Environmental  Economics Working Group and the Association des  Économistes Québécois, to tap into the knowledge and  research capacity that exists in Canadian universities.   Finally, the Government of Canada hires students  through co-operative education and other programs.  This affords students the opportunity to experience     199  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  “hands on” learning about environmental policy and  programs. Students may gain experience through co-op  programs and placements in both government and  private organizations studying climate change, as well  as graduate programs with field study components.  9.3 Public Access to Information   9.3.1  Web and Social Media  The web and social media are key channels that  the Government of Canada uses to deliver relevant  information about climate change and the Government  programs and initiatives that help address this  important challenge.  The website climatechange.gc.ca provides information  on actions that the Government has taken domestically  and internationally to address climate change, and up- to-date information on topics such as Canada’s sector- by-sector regulatory approach to reducing greenhouse  gas (GHG) emissions, climate change impacts and  adaptation, international climate change partnerships  and negotiations, and Canada’s international climate  change financing.  Environment Canada’s departmental website ec.gc. ca provides detailed information on Environment  Canada’s climate change science and research, and also  features key reports, such as the National Inventory  Report and Canada’s Emissions Trends, that provide  annual updates on Canada’s historical GHG emissions  and Canada’s progress in reducing GHG emissions.   Ministerial announcements related to the Government’s  domestic and international action on climate change  are also communicated to the public via Environment  Canada’s website.   Environment Canada actively promotes climate change  awareness through its social media channels. Its Twitter,  Facebook and Flickr accounts are used to highlight  Government of Canada climate change initiatives and  to promote national and international events such as   Environment Week, Clean Air Day, World Water Day  and Earth Hour. Environment Canada’s Twitter account  is a particularly important channel for communicating  to the public as it had close to 80,000 followers as of  November 2013.   9.3.2  Conferences and Trade Shows The Government of Canada participates in a number of  national and international conferences and trade shows  to share Canada’s best practices and gain knowledge of  new cutting-edge technology, scientific advancements,  and commercial opportunities related to sustainable  development and addressing climate change. These  events include Americana, Globe, and the Global  Methane Expo, all of which focus on finding new and  innovative solutions to help build a sustainable future.   9.4 Resource and Information Centres  Numerous organizations in Canada act as climate  change resource or information centres for Canadians,  governments and businesses. These can include federal  government departments (e.g., Environment Canada,  Transport Canada, and Health Canada), provincial and  municipal governments, utilities (e.g., Ontario Hydro,  BC Hydro), and climate focused non-governmental  organizations such as Climate Change Central. Further  examples are provided in the provincial and territorial  activities section of this chapter and in various chapters  throughout this report.  An example of a Government of Canada information  resource for Canadian consumers and businesses is  Natural Resources Canada’s (NRCan) Office of Energy  Efficiency (OEE), established in 1998. The OEE  partners with a variety of stakeholders to promote  energy efficiency including provincial and territorial  governments, municipal governments, utilities,  industries, non-governmental organizations, other  countries and international organizations. NRCan’s  energy efficiency and alternative transportation fuels  programs are coordinated through this branch of  the department.     200  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  The Government’s energy efficiency initiatives play  an important role in contributing to Canada’s climate  change objective by reducing energy use and associated  GHG emissions.  9.4.1  Providing Energy Efficiency Information Accessibility of information is an important  consideration to enable Canadians to make energy  efficient choices. The OEE provides Canadians with  a variety of energy efficiency resources including  statistics and analysis, reports and other documents,  information directories, and tools. Energy management  information is accessible from the OEE’s website:   http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/efficiency  The OEE gathers and publishes a wide range of energy  efficiency data such as trends in Canadian energy  use and makes this information available to public  and private sector organizations and the Canadian  public. This raw data forms the basis for energy use,  energy efficiency, and GHG calculations for climate  change studies and reports, and materials intended for  the public.   The OEE maintains online information directories such  as the Directory of Energy Efficiency and Alternative  Energy Programs in Canada. This directory is an  inventory of the energy efficiency and alternative  energy programs offered by the Government of Canada,   provincial and territorial governments, major Canadian  municipalities, and major electric and gas utilities  and companies.  Other OEE publications include comprehensive reports  and documents which are available online such as the  Fuel Consumption Guide, which provides information  that can be used to compare the fuel consumption of  different vehicle models and help Canadians to select  the most fuel-efficient vehicle that meets their needs.  As well, the EnerGuide Appliance Directory provides  energy consumption information for major electrical  household appliances, a method of calculating the  operating costs of comparable electrical appliances, and  tips for saving energy. The EnerGuide Rating System  for houses provides customized energy upgrade reports  for home owners to guide them to smart home energy  renovation actions.   The OEE also offers a wide range of tools to make  energy efficiency information more easily accessible.  For example, OEE is leading the development of a  national building energy benchmarking tool based on  the United States Environmental Protection Agency’s  ENERGY STAR Portfolio Manager. The tool will enable  building owners and facility managers to compare their  building’s energy performance, which is a key first step  to understanding and making decisions about how to  save energy and reduce a building’s carbon footprint.  Energy Efficiency Labelling Programs The OEE supports two major labelling programs  to promote consumer awareness—EnerGuide and  ENERGY STAR. EnerGuide is a Government of  Canada initiative that rates the energy consumption  and efficiency of household appliances, heating,  cooling and ventilating equipment, new and existing  houses and personal vehicles. EnerGuide labels,  which can be affixed to the product alone or be part  of its price label, have a standardized design and  provide a measurement of energy performance.  For new and existing houses, the EnerGuide rating  label shows useful information about the home’s   energy use and provides the name and address of an  EnerGuide energy advisor. For vehicles, the current  EnerGuide label details a vehicle’s city and highway  fuel-consumption rating, and the cost of fuelling the  vehicle each year.   The international ENERGY STAR symbol takes the  EnerGuide concept one step further and identifies  specific models that meet or exceed premium levels of  energy efficiency. Work to strengthen ENERGY STAR  labelling for equipment and appliances has focused  on introducing the “Most Efficient” designation to  recognize the most efficient products each year in the   http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/efficiency   201  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  Canadian marketplace. Most Efficient ENERGY STAR  criteria for nine products were adopted in 2013 and  promoted through ENERGY STAR participants.  In the residential sector, the ENERGY STAR for New  Homes initiative promotes construction of new homes   that are more energy-efficient than those built to  minimum building code requirements. The increased  efficiency of these homes translates into reduced energy  costs for homeowners.  9.5 Training Programs   Climate change training programs in Canada can cover  a wide range of activities from improving fleet and  building operations, to best practices for businesses  (e.g., corporate social reporting, carbon neutral options),  to adaptation planning for municipalities. Groups  such as non-governmental organizations, educational  institutions, government agencies and specialist groups  are involved in offering training programs that help meet  business and educational objectives and also contribute  to Canada’s climate change goals.   Information on provincial and territorial training  activities is included in the provincial and territorial  activities section of this chapter and in other chapters of  this report. For example, the Government of Quebec’s  Climate Change Action Plan includes training activities  for healthcare professionals, municipalities, the tourism  industry, and community organizations. The Alberta- based Climate Change Central organization provides  information and training to help governments and  businesses become more sustainable across Canada.  The Government of Canada offers training for Canadian  consumers and businesses on the skills they need to  improve energy use through NRCan’s OEE initiatives.   Since 1997, more than 23,000 representatives of industrial,  commercial and institutional organizations from across  Canada have enrolled in Dollars to $ense workshops  offered by the OEE. These workshops provide energy- saving tips, so that industry and commercial entities can  lower operating and production costs, improve economic  competitiveness, reduce GHGs, increase operational  efficiency, and create a better work environment.   In the residential sector, OEE training efforts focus on  the R-2000 standard1 and the EnerGuide rating service.  R-2000, which was developed in partnership with  Canada’s residential construction industry, promotes  the use of cost-effective, energy-efficient building  practices and technologies.   In the transportation sector, OEE training initiatives  include FleetSmart, Fuel Management 101, SmartDriver,  and Auto$mart.  • FleetSmart provides access to training and   educational tools and information that help owner- operators, commercial and institutional fleet  owners and managers improve the fuel efficiency of  their operations.   • Fuel Management 101 workshops give fleet managers  practical advice and tools to help them save money on  fuel and reduce GHGs.   • The SmartDriver suite of training activities promotes  energy efficiency as a cost-effective and responsible  way to reduce costs and the environmental impact of  fleet operations.   • Auto$mart provides driver educators with  information kits to teach students critical defensive  driving techniques, and relate road safety to fuel  efficiency and the mitigation of climate change  and other environmental concerns. In 2012/13,  a new Auto$mart curriculum that includes new  multimedia components for personal vehicle drivers  was completed and launched. The curriculums  for highway truck drivers and fleet owners were  also updated.    202  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  Municipal Training Workshops on Climate Change  Action In Canada, the International Council for Local  Environmental Initiatives (ICLEI)—Local Governments  for Sustainability, and the Federation of Canadian  Municipalities host training workshops on various  tools and mechanisms that can help local governments  manage their energy use and GHG emissions.  Participants learn about creating energy and emissions  inventories, choosing appropriate emissions reduction  targets, developing local climate change action plans,  and monitoring results. The workshops are offered as  part of the Partners for Climate Protection program  which is a network of Canadian municipal governments  that are committed to taking action on climate  change. The Partners for Climate Protection program  was initiated in 1994 and currently includes over  240 municipalities.  9.6  Public and Non-Governmental  Organizations   Non-governmental organizations play a central role in  providing information to Canadians, developing public  education and awareness campaigns, and encouraging  citizen action on climate change. A wide variety of  Canadian non-governmental organizations have  climate change programs ranging across a spectrum of  research and analysis, education and awareness, public  advocacy, and online and social media campaigns.  The goals of many of these organizations are to inform  Canadians about climate change and potential impacts,  advance the public policy debate, and encourage  collective action on climate change. These efforts have  made contributions towards broadening Canadian  public awareness of the significance of climate change.  Selection of climate change focused non- governmental organizations in Canada • David Suzuki Foundation   The David Suzuki Foundation is a national non- profit organization which works with government,  business and individuals to conserve the environment  by providing science-based research, education and  policy work. The organization provides analysis on  climate change and provides information and tools to  Canadians on how individual Canadians can reduce  their personal carbon footprint.  • International Institute for Sustainable Development  The International Institute for Sustainable  Development is a Canadian-based, international  public policy research institute for sustainable  development. The organization conducts policy  research, supports information exchange, and  contributes analysis and advocacy on climate change.  The organization’s work also includes analysis on  climate change adaptation and risk reduction to help   communities and governments in developed and  developing countries prepare for and respond to the  impacts of climate change.  • Pembina Institute  The Pembina Institute is a national non-profit think  tank focused on developing innovative sustainable  energy solutions through research, education,  consulting and advocacy. The Institute conducts  research and provides policy and technical analysis  to various levels of government, businesses and  other organizations.   • World Wildlife Fund for Nature  The World Wildlife Fund is Canada’s largest  international conservation organization. The  organization conducts research, provides educational  programs and materials, and leads Canadian  outreach events such as National Sweater Day, which  promotes the importance of energy conservation,  and Canada’s Earth Hour activities to support climate  change awareness.     203  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  9.7 Provincial and Territorial Activities  Public education and awareness are features of many  provincial and territorial climate change strategies.  Educational topics range from general information on  climate change to specific issues such as adaptation  activities. Most jurisdictions’ public awareness and  education activities include a web-based approach.  The Nunavut Climate Change Centre website both  disseminates information and invites community  members to share Inuit traditional knowledge with  respect to climate change. In 2012, Newfoundland and  Labrador launched an integrated public awareness  campaign with television, print and online components  called Turn Back the Tide. The goals of the campaign  are to help Canadians understand climate change and  how it affects them, and to promote ownership of the  issues and inspire citizens to do more. A website is  at the heart of the campaign. It is a comprehensive  source of information for homeowners, businesses,  and communities on ways to reduce GHGs, promote  energy efficiency and adapt to climate change. It also  features a range of innovative tools, including carbon  footprint calculators. Ontario has designed a number  of websites (“E-zone”, “Obviously.ca” and “Hop To  It”) which contain many tools to assist the public in  understanding environmental matters, including  climate change. These websites are specifically designed  for students and educators and include interactive tools  targeted at children.  Tools and resources have been developed for broad  public education and for targeted groups such as youth  and families. In the Northwest Territories, the Arctic  Energy Alliance raises awareness and provides technical  energy and climate change advice to residents. The  initiative is mainly funded by the territorial government  and is operated out of four regional offices as well as a  headquarters in Yellowknife. The Arctic Energy Alliance  hosts the annual Energy Actions Awards and conducts  energy audits to educate residents on how to reduce  home energy consumption. In Saskatchewan, broad  public awareness initiatives promoting knowledge   and understanding of climate change include those  supported by the Go Green Fund and the Climate  Change Foundation in Saskatchewan. In the Yukon, the  Climate Change Secretariat has engaged youth through  annual leadership forums on environmental and  climate awareness. Through the Family Eco-Challenge,  New Brunswick engaged 30 families in a step-by-step  program to reduce their environmental footprint,  including GHG emissions.   Climate change education for young people is promoted  through the formal education system in a number  of provinces and territories. The Green Schools  Initiative, introduced by the British Columbia Climate  Change Secretariat and the Ministry of Education,  provides teachers with material and strategies in order  to incorporate environmental sustainability in the  classroom, as well as games for students. Quebec’s  2013–2020 Climate Change Action Plan identifies the  assessment of teacher’s needs as one of its priorities  to ensure teachers have the appropriate tools to  communicate the reality of climate change to students.  The plan complements the numerous partnerships  that the government has developed with civil society  organizations to drive climate change-related  school activities.  Governments, businesses, and particular industries  are also targeted by education and outreach initiatives.  For instance, the Government of Quebec’s 2013–2020  Climate Change Action Plan aims to increase awareness,  mobilization, and training activities for healthcare  professionals, municipalities, the tourism industry, and  community organizations. A specialized website on  the impact of climate change on human health, Mon  climat, ma santé, has been developed to disseminate  knowledge, skills, and tools to healthcare professionals.  Launched in 2000 by the Government of Alberta, the  not-for-profit Climate Change Central has since become  an independent organization under the brand C3.  The organization helps governments and businesses  become more sustainable across Canada. In the  Yukon, the territorial government has partnered with     204  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  Yukon College’s Northern Climate ExChange to fund  the Climate Change Information and Mainstreaming  Program, which provides climate change courses and  technical project support to government departments.   Innovative tools have been developed to increase  awareness and facilitate climate change education in  all types of settings. Apps 4 Climate Action is the result  of a contest in 2010 designed by the British Columbia  Climate Action Secretariat, GeoBC, and the Ministry  of Citizens’ Services. These climate action applications  (apps) for individuals and businesses are available on  the government’s main climate change public awareness  website: LiveSmart BC.  Provincial and territorial governments also undertake  education and awareness in partnership with other  organizations. This is the case in Quebec, where  partnerships with Climate Reality Canada, l’EAUdyssée  de la Terre (for the theatre show “Un vent de  changement avec Rafale”) and Équiterre (Défi Climat),  for example, were developed to facilitate the reduction  of GHGs. The 2013–2020 Quebec Climate Change  Action Plan aims to pursue this type of partnership and  create new alliances, especially with regards to climate  change adaptation. The Province of New Brunswick has  fostered partnerships with municipalities, business and  environmental groups, and educational institutions to  raise awareness and understanding of climate change  issues and reduce GHG emissions. These partnerships  have included developing online tools such as  Emissions Tracking—Measuring Carbon Footprint  and Climate Change Indicators. In British Columbia,  the online Climate Action Toolkit, which includes  resources for local governments and communities,  was developed through a partnership between the  provincial government, the Union of British Columbia  Municipalities, and the Fraser Basin Council. In  Ontario, the Community Adaptation Initiative  implemented in 2010 is a partnership between the  Government of Ontario, the Clean Air Partnership, and  the Ontario Centre for Climate Impact and Adaptation  Resources. This two-year initiative provided local   communities with technical workshops, citizen forums,  videos, best practices, and case studies. These resources  continue to be available online.  Intergovernmental collaboration has been another  means to support climate change education and  awareness in Canada. For instance, NRCan’s Regional  Adaptation Collaborative (RAC) program in the Atlantic  provinces has developed resources and tools to advance  education, awareness and action in adapting to the  effects of Canada’s changing climate. Through the RAC  program, Ontario has also strengthened climate change  adaptation outreach and training across the province.  RAC partners, including government, academia, and  non-governmental organizations have developed  guidance tools and resources to advance knowledge and  action on adaptation at the local community level.  9.8  Participation in International  Activities  Canada engages in a number of collaborative  international initiatives that involve sharing  experiences, best-practices and working towards  common climate change goals:  • The Climate and Clean Air Coalition, where Canada is   one of the leading countries in a concerted action on  short-lived climate pollutants.  • The Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate,  an initiative that brings together the world’s 17 largest  emitters to advance key issues under consideration  in international climate change negotiations and  to advance the exploration of initiatives related to  clean technologies.  • The Global Methane Initiative, a voluntary initiative  that serves as an international framework to promote  cost-effective methane recovery and use as a clean  energy source. Canada co-hosted the third Global  Methane Initiative Partnership Expo, in collaboration  with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency in  March 2013.    205  9 EDUCATION, TRAINING, AND PUBLIC AWARENESS  ]  Canada is equally committed to working with  developing countries to help them achieve their GHG  emissions reduction goals and adapt to the adverse  impacts of climate change. Canada’s international  support is comprised of a wide range of programs  and initiatives that address mitigation, clean energy  technology, sustainable forestry and agriculture, and  adaptation to climate change by the world’s most  vulnerable countries and many of these include an  element of building capacity through the dissemination  of information and knowledge tools. These initiatives  include Canada’s fast-start climate financing  contribution of $1.2 billion, which is described  in Chapter 7: Financial Resources and Transfer  of Technology.   International Co-operation on Energy Efficiency  Initiatives  NRCan’s OEE co-operates with several international  organizations on energy efficiency and alternative  transportation fuels and supports co-operation in these  areas with countries and regions such as the United  States, China, the European Union, India, Mexico and  Russia. Canada benefits from this co-operation by: • Learning about improved ways of designing   and delivering energy efficiency and alternative  transportation fuels programs to meet policy  objectives  • Working with others on the harmonization of energy  efficiency tests and performance standards to reduce  barriers to trade in energy-using products  • Sharing Canadian tools and expertise with  other international partners to achieve common  environmental and energy security goals  Further information on Canada’s international activities  is included in other chapters of this report.  Reference  1 R-2000 is an official mark of Natural Resources Canada.     206  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Annex 1: Canada’s First Biennial Report  Section 1 Introduction  Canada is pleased to present its first Biennial Report  (BR), under decision 2/CP.17 of the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).  For 2014, Canada is presenting its BR as an Annex  to its 6th National Communication. While the BR   and National Communication are complementary  documents, Canada has designed them to be self- contained, with each responding to separate reporting  requirements mandated by the UNFCCC.  Section 2  Information on Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Trends   In 2011, Canada emitted about 702 megatonnes carbon  dioxide equivalent (Mt CO2 eq) of greenhouse gases  (GHG) to the atmosphere, excluding emissions/ removals from Land Use, Land-use Change, and  Forestry (LULUCF). Since 2005, total Canadian GHG  emissions have decreased by 35.7 Mt (4.8%).   The GHG emission and removal estimates contained  within Canada’s Inventory are developed using  methodologies consistent with the guidelines  prescribed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change (IPCC). The inventory estimates include the  gases CO2, methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), sulphur  hexafluoride (SF6), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and  hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), in the following six IPCC  sectors: Energy, Industrial Processes, Solvent and Other  Product Use, Agriculture, Waste and LULUCF.   The Common Tabular Format (CTF) Table 1 in Canada’s  1st Biennial Report contains the same information  as the Common Reporting Format (CRF) Table 10  in Canada’s 2013 National Inventory Submission to  the UNFCCC.   It should be noted that the LULUCF estimates in CTF  Table 1 include the impact of natural disturbances;  these figures are not used to evaluate Canada’s  progress towards its 2020 target. CTF Table 4(a)1 and  accompanying text explain how Canada incorporates  the LULUCF sector in assessing its progress towards its  2020 emission reduction target.  For a more elaborate analysis of recent historical GHG  emission and removal trends, please see Chapter 2 of  Canada’s 2013 National Inventory Report (NIR) entitled,  National Inventory Report: Greenhouse Gas Sources and  Sinks in Canada 1990–2011.1  National Inventory Arrangements The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA  1999) provides the legislative authority to designate  Environment Canada as the single national entity with  responsibility for the preparation and submission of the  National Inventory Submission to the UNFCCC and for  the establishment of a national system. Canada’s national  system covers the institutional arrangements for the  preparation of the inventory, including: • the roles and responsibilities of the inventory agency   and of the various players involved; • the processes for inventory preparation, data   collection and estimates development; • quality management of the inventory, and; • the procedures for official approval of the inventory.   Additional information on Canada’s national inventory  arrangements can be found in Chapter 1: Introduction  of Canada’s 2013 National Inventory Report and  Chapter 3: Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory of  Canada’s 6th National Communication.     207  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 1 Emission Trends—Summary  Year: 2011  Submission: 2013  Country: CANADA  GR EE  NH OU  SE  G  AS  EM  ISS IO  NS Ba  se  ye  ar  ( 1  99 0 )  19 91  19 92  19 93  19 94  19 95  19 96  19 97  19 98  19 99  Un it   CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  CO 2 (  Gg )  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  )  CO 2 e  mi ss  ion s i  nc lud  ing  ne  t C O 2   fr om   LU LU  CF 39  2,2 95  .43 40  5,8 59  .19 37  7,4 19  .22 44  2,7 35  .49 45  2,0 68  .10 65  4,3 03  .48 47  4,6 44  .43 45  2,4 90  .55 62  2,8 18  .73 54  9,0 56  .20  CO 2 e  mi ss  ion s e  xc lud  ing  ne  t C O 2   fr om   LU LU  CF 45  9,3 13  .03 45  0,3 93  .39 46  4,6 51  .68 46  4,0 63  .08 47  8,7 48  .17 49  1,1 16  .15 50  4,4 25  .38 51  7,2 54  .27 52  6,3 70  .72 54  1,5 72  .14  CH 4 e  mi ss  ion s i  nc lud  ing  C  H 4  fr  om  LU  LU CF  75 ,33  1.3 4  78 ,88  3.5 0  79 ,13  3.2 5  86 ,09  4.9 7  88 ,40  0.4 1  10 4,8  02 .77  93 ,63  1.4 4  92 ,51  1.9 7  10 6,8  78 .92  98 ,03  3.4 6  CH 4 e  mi ss  ion s e  xc lud  ing  C  H 4  fr  om  LU  LU CF  72 ,00  2.9 6  73 ,55  9.2 0  77 ,30  8.3 0  79 ,64  2.6 0  82 ,55  7.0 7  85 ,90  9.4 7  89 ,03  9.7 8  90 ,68  2.6 8  92 ,06  7.6 8  91 ,67  8.6 2  N 2 O   em iss  ion s i  nc lud  ing  N  2O  fr  om  LU  LU CF  51 ,12  6.2 5  51 ,06  3.6 6  49 ,59  0.6 1  53 ,43  1.5 1  56 ,54  7.6 7  65 ,47  5.9 2  59 ,14  9.3 3  56 ,20  5.8 1  60 ,19  9.4 3  52 ,73  4.0 5  N 2 O   em iss  ion s e  xc lud  ing  N  2O  fr  om  LU  LU CF  49 ,06  5.0 8  47 ,78  3.3 3  48 ,46  7.8 7  49 ,43  3.5 9  52 ,92  4.3 3  53 ,74  9.5 5  56 ,30  0.7 1  55 ,07  2.5 3  51 ,00  2.3 9  48 ,78  6.8 4  HF Cs  76 7.2  5 83  5.3 3  65 5.9  7 NA  ,N O  NA ,N  O 47  9.4 1  85 1.5  3 1,3  97 .69  1,9 34  .68 2,4  13 .69  PF Cs  6,5 38  .83 6,9  49 .98  6,5 56  .82 6,4  50 .32  5,9 65  .33 5,4  89 .59  5,6 22  .83 5,5  12 .71  5,6 01  .84 4,6  45 .28  SF 6  3,3 92  .20 3,8  73 .67  2,6 91  .12 2,4  98 .69  2,5 70  .18 2,3  95 .56  1,8 61  .25 1,9  23 .00  2,4 78  .26 2,5  34 .01  To tal   (in clu  din g L  UL UC  F) 52  9,4 51  .29 54  7,4 65  .33 51  6,0 46  .99 59  1,2 10  .98 60  5,5 51  .68 83  2,9 46  .73 63  5,7 60  .80 61  0,0 41  .74 79  9,9 11  .86 70  9, 4 16  .69 To  tal  (e  xc lud  ing  LU  LU CF  ) 59  1,0 79  .35 58  3,3 94  .90 60  0,3 31  .75 60  2,0 88  .28 62  2,7 65  .08 63  9,1 39  .72 65  8,1 01  .49 67  1,8 42  .89 67  9,4 55  .57 69  1,6 30  .58  GR EE  NH OU  SE  G  AS  SO  UR CE   AN D   SIN K   CA TE  GO RIE  S Ba  se  ye  ar  ( 1  99 0 )  19 91  19 92  19 93  19 94  19 95  19 96  19 97  19 98  19 99  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e qt   (G g)  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  CO 2 e  q ( Gg  ) CO  2 e q (  Gg )  1.   E  ne rgy    46  9,1 86  .20 46  0,0 63  .71 47  7,7 01  .94 47  7,9 48  .42 49  4,6 44  .59 50  8,7 88  .47 52  4,7 37  .56 53  9,0 53  .97 54  8,8 04  .37 56  3,8 80  .54 2.    In du  str ial   P roc  es se  s 55  ,97 8.4  9 57  ,41 5.9  5 55  ,22 9.8  8 55  ,03 4.2  0 56  ,95 5.0  1 57  ,47 2.5  4 59  ,08 9.2  8 58  ,52 3.3  4 55  ,36 9.9  0 52  ,05 2.9  3 3.    S olv  en t a  nd  O  the r P  rod uc  t U se  17 8.7  1 16  9.9 4  14 1.7  6 15  9.4 0  17 5.4  0 21  2.5 8  21 6.6  4 23  0.1 1  40 1.4  5 40  9.5 4  4.   A  gri cu  ltu re   46 ,72  8.5 0  46 ,37  8.9 0  47 ,63  4.6 8  49 ,06  3.1 7  50 ,98  8.9 9  52 ,66  9.6 9  54 ,22  8.7 7  54 ,05  3.3 8  54 ,61  1.4 4  55 ,02  0.1 2  5.   La  nd  U  se , L  an d-U  se  C  ha ng  e a nd   Fo res  try 1  -61 ,62  8.0 6  -35 ,92  9.5 7  -84 ,28  4.7 5  -10 ,87  7.3 0  -17 ,21  3.4 0  19 3,8  07 .01  -22 ,34  0.6 8  -61 ,80  1.1 5  12 0,4  56 .29  17 ,78  6.1 1  6.   W  as te   19 ,00  7.4 5  19 ,36  6.3 9  19 ,62  3.4 9  19 ,88  3.0 9  20 ,00  1.0 9  19 ,99  6.4 4  19 ,82  9.2 4  19 ,98  2.1 0  20 ,26  8.4 1  20 ,26  7.4 5  7.   O  the r  NA NA  NA NA  NA NA  NA NA  NA NA  To tal   (in clu  din g L  UL UC  F)1 52  9,4 51  .29 54  7,4 65  .33 51  6,0 46  .99 59  1,2 10  .98 60  5,5 51  .68 83  2,9 46  .73 63  5,7 60  .80 61  0,0 41  .74 79  9,9 11  .86 70  9,4 16  .69 A  bb re  vi at  io ns  : L U  LU C  F  =   La nd   U se  , L an  d- us  e  C  ha ng  e  an  d  Fo  re st  ry N  ot es   1:  In  cl ud  es  n  et  C  O 2,   C H  4 a nd   N 2O   fr om   L U  LU C  F    208  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 1 Emission Trends—Summary (continued)  Year: 2011  Submission: 2013  Country: CANADA  A bb  re vi  at io  ns : L  U LU  C F   =  La  nd  U  se , L  an d-  U se   C ha  ng e   an d   Fo re  st ry  N ot  es  1:   In cl  ud es   n et   C O  2,  C  H 4 a  nd  N  2O  fr  om  L  U LU  C F  G RE  EN HO  US E   G AS   E M  IS SI  O NS  Un it   CO 2   em iss  io ns   in clu  di ng   n et   C O  2  fro  m    LU LU  CF CO  2  em  iss io  ns  e  xc lud  ing  n  et  C  O 2   fro m    LU  LU CF  CH 4   em iss  io ns   in clu  di ng   C H4   fr om   L UL  UC F  CH 4   em iss  io ns   e xc  lud ing   C H4   fr om   L UL  UC F  N2 O   e m  iss io  ns  in  clu di  ng  N  2O  fr  om  L  UL UC  F  N2 O   e m  iss io  ns  e  xc lud  ing  N  2O  fr  om  L  UL UC  F  HF Cs  PF Cs  SF 6  To ta  l ( in  cl ud  in g   LU LU  CF )  To ta  l ( ex  cl ud  in g   LU LU  CF )  G RE  EN HO  US E   G AS   S O  UR CE   A ND   S IN  K  CA  TE G  O RI  ES  1.   E  ne rg  y   2.   I  nd us  tri al   P ro  ce ss  es  3.   S  ol ve  nt  a  nd  O  th er   P ro  du ct   U se  4.   A  gr icu  ltu re    5.    L an  d  Us  e,  L  an d-  Us e   Ch an  ge  a  nd    Fo re  st ry  1 6.    W as  te    7.   O  th er  To ta  l ( in  cl ud  in g   LU LU  CF )1  20 00  20 01  20 02  20 03  20 04  20 05  20 06  20 07  20 08  20 09  20 10  20 11  Ch an  ge  fr  om  b  as e   to  la  te st    re  po rte  d  ye  ar  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q(  G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  (% )  51 0,  01 5.  61 50  5, 08  7. 09  64 7,  99 0.  25 61  8, 79  7. 57  67 5,  93 7.  54 63  2, 44  8. 78  63 3,  56 9.  84 63  5, 94  2. 22  55 8,  64 2.  39 52  2, 14  9. 36  63 8,  05 0.  26 62  4, 30  8. 34  59 .1  4  56 4,  64 2.  46 55  9, 09  1. 55  56 5,  88 4.  09 58  2, 89  6. 04  58 4,  65 4.  92 57  8, 95  5. 01  57 1,  74 7.  40 59  4, 60  9. 51  57 6,  52 8.  04 54  2, 04  9. 92  55 4,  01 9.  16 55  5, 61  3. 97  20 .9  7  95 ,5  27 .3  7 98  ,2 66  .5 2  10 7,  12 8.  93 10  4, 64  8. 09  10 7,  55 4.  40 10  3, 75  7. 79  10 4,  76 4.  35 10  2, 79  6. 18  98 ,3  08 .7  6 97  ,1 47  .6 4  10 2,  22 2.  51 10  2, 01  8. 82  35 .4  3  94 ,0  25 .8  4 95  ,3 10  .4 4  95 ,4  10 .5  3 96  ,1 28  .7 1  97 ,8  43 .2  2 98  ,0 87  .8 1  98 ,0  38 .6  5 96  ,4 07  .1 9  94 ,0  98 .5  7 90  ,9 43  .1 9  90 ,4  00 .7  8 90  ,5 62  .5 4  25 .7  8  49 ,5  46 .1  9 48  ,7 05  .0 6  53 ,7  29 .7  9 54  ,0 79  .6 4  57 ,6  22 .2  8 53  ,8 29  .9 0  52 ,3  02 .0  0 53  ,3 40  .7 8  54 ,4  15 .4  8 51  ,0 19  .4 6  54 ,6  29 .2  1 53  ,3 38  .1 2  4. 33  48 ,6  13 .7  3 46  ,8 70  .8 3  46 ,4  50 .3  8 48  ,7 91  .0 0  51 ,5  92 .3  3 50  ,3 08  .1 5  48 ,1  24 .3  3 49  ,3 73  .8 8  51 ,8  02 .2  0 47  ,1 65  .7 0  47 ,2  87 .0  6 46  ,2 21  .7 0  -5 .8  0 2,  93 6.  12 3,  50 7.  83 3,  91 5.  58 4,  42 1.  71 4,  79 5.  35 5,  29 6.  47 5,  10 5.  86 5,  48 3.  71 5,  55 0.  65 6,  30 6.  34 7,  07 2.  55 7,  52 6.  83 88  1. 01  4, 31  1. 08  3, 50  0. 42  2, 99  4. 81  3, 01  9. 03  3, 04  6. 98  3, 31  7. 26  2, 58  3. 90  2, 19  3. 70  2, 25  2. 32  2, 17  1. 97  1, 60  7. 49  1, 45  0. 89  -7 7.  81 3,  05 1.  86 2,  68 8.  58 3,  16 9.  42 2,  78 7.  46 2,  45 6.  88 1,  49 2.  14 1,  59 5.  90 77  1. 98  68 3.  95 39  3. 06  46 2.  24 41  5. 29  -8 7.  76 66  5, 38  8. 23  66 1,  75 5.  50 81  8, 92  8. 79  78 7,  75 3.  49 85  1, 41  3. 42  80 0,  14 2.  33 79  9, 92  1. 85  80 0,  52 8.  58 71  9, 85  3. 55  67 9,  18 7.  83 80  4, 04  4. 25  78 9,  05 8.  29 49  .0 3  71 7,  58 1.  11 71  0, 96  9. 64  71 7,  82 4.  81 73  8, 04  3. 94  74 4,  38 9.  67 73  7, 45  6. 83  72 7,  19 6.  04 74  8, 83  9. 98  73 0,  91 5.  73 68  9, 03  0. 17  70 0,  84 9.  29 70  1, 79  1. 22  18 .7  3  20 00  20 01  20 02  20 03  20 04  20 05  20 06  20 07  20 08  20 09  20 10  20 11  Ch an  ge  fr  om  b  as e   to  la  te st    re  po rte  d  ye  ar  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  CO 2 e  q  (G  g) CO  2 e q   (G g)  (% )  58 9,  47 3.  78 58  5, 34  4. 44  59 1,  11 3.  12 60  6, 99  6. 65  60 3,  29 0.  51 59  7, 33  6. 61  58 6,  89 2.  94 60  9, 76  1. 78  59 2,  19 5.  74 56  0, 44  1. 65  57 0,  13 7.  09 57  1, 60  1. 41  21 .8  3  52 ,0  54 .2  6 50  ,5 23  .8 6  51 ,8  81 .1  6 53  ,5 86  .4 9  61 ,6  81 .0  5 60  ,4 61  .4 1  61 ,0  18 .7  0 59  ,7 87  .2 0  58 ,5  45 .8  0 50  ,8 05  .7 8  53 ,2  62 .1  3 54  ,2 71  .2 9  -3 .0  5  44 9.  60 41  9. 52  38 5.  55 44  5. 51  40 7.  41 37  8. 00  32 9.  36 32  6. 32  34 1.  62 26  0. 49  24 1.  97 24  7. 40  38 .4  4  55 ,6  50 .4  4 54  ,8 65  .0 1  54 ,2  24 .7  7 56  ,5 17  .4 8  58 ,1  40 .9  3 58  ,1 22  .9 2  57 ,3  45 .5  6 57  ,6 41  .8 4  58 ,6  02 .6  2 56  ,1 34  .7 1  55 ,6  12 .8  5 53  ,9 24  .9 9  15 .4  0  -5 2,  19 2.  87 -4  9, 21  4. 14  10 1,  10 3.  98 49  ,7 09  .5 5  10 7,  02 3.  75 62  ,6 85  .5 0  72 ,7  25 .8  0 51  ,6 88  .6 0  -1 1,  06 2.  19 -9  ,8 42  .3 4  10 3,  19 4.  97 87  ,2 67  .0 7  -2 41  .6 0  19 ,9  53 .0  2 19  ,8 16  .8 1  20 ,2  20 .2  0 20  ,4 97  .8 0  20 ,8  69 .7  7 21  ,1 57  .9 0  21 ,6  09 .4  8 21  ,3 22  .8 4  21 ,2  29 .9  4 21  ,3 87  .5 5  21 ,5  95 .2  5 21  ,7 46  .1 3  14 .4  1  NA NA  NA NA  NA NA  NA NA  NA NA  NA NA  0. 00  66 5,  38 8.  23 66  1, 75  5. 50  81 8,  92 8.  79 78  7, 75  3. 49  85 1,  41 3.  42 80  0, 14  2. 33  79 9,  92 1.  85 80  0, 52  8. 58  71 9,  85 3.  55 67  9, 18  7. 83  80 4,  04 4.  25 78  9, 05  8. 29  49 .0  3    209  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Section 3  Economy-wide Emission Reduction Target  Under the United Nations Framework Convention  on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Canada associated  with the Copenhagen Accord in January 2010 and  committed to reduce its greenhouse gas (GHG)  emissions to 17% below 2005 levels by 2020. In light  of strong economic growth, this could be challenging:  Canada’s economy is projected to be approximately 31%  larger (in real terms) in 2020 compared to 2005 levels.  The Government’s approach is to encourage strong  economic growth and job creation while achieving its  environmental objectives.  Table 2(a) Base Year  Base Year 2005  Emission reduction target (% of  base year)  17% below 2005  % of 1990 3.6% above 1990 levels, based on  the 2013 emission inventory for  historical data  Period for reaching target 2020  Canada’s GHG projections are derived using a  bottom-up macroeconomic model where energy  data is allocated to individual subsectors using the  North American Industrial Classification system,  as shown in Table 2 (b). These subsectors are then  aggregated into the Economic Sectors presented in  this report. Considering that gross domestic product  (GDP) and relative energy prices are a key driver of  GHG emissions in most sectors, macroeconomic  models are the primary tool for generating emissions  projections in Canada. This method of energy and  emissions allocation is essential for identifying possible  impacts from current and future policies and measures  implemented in a particular sector. For example,  using an economic sector aggregation for Emission- Intensive and Trade-Exposed (EITE) Industries and  the Building Sector allows for policy analysis of all  emissions generated from the sector such as stationary  combustion and industrial processes.  According to the National Communication reporting  guidelines, Parties have the flexibility to present their  policies and measures and projections according  to sectoral categories that are appropriate to their  own national circumstances. Canada has chosen  to use economic sectors in our Biennial Report and  National Communication as these categories more  accurately reflect the drivers of emissions than the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  activity based sectoral categories. Paragraph 17 of the  National Communication reporting guidelines provide  Parties the flexibility to report their sectors using a  categorization that they deem appropriate within the  policies and measures chapter. Paragraph 34 of the  guidelines clarifies that projections should be presented  using the same sectoral categorization as the policies  and measures chapter.   Table 2(b) Gases and Sectors Covered  Gases Covered Base Year for Each Gas (year)  CO 2  2005  CH 4  2005  N 2 O 2005  HFCs 2005  PFCs 2005  SF 6  2005  Se ct  o rs   C o  ve re  d  Oil and Gas Yes  Electricity Yes  Transportation Yes  Emissions-Intensive & Trade-Exposed Industries Yes  Buildings Yes  Agriculture Yes  Waste & Others Yes  LULUCF Yes* Abbreviation: LULUCF = Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry * LULUCF is not included in the base year for setting Canada’s  quantified economy-wide emission reduction target, but the  contribution to the LULUCF Sector will be applied to the target year  [see Biennial Report Table 2(d)].    210  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 2(c) Description of Quantified Economy-wide Emission  Reduction Target: Global Warming Potential (GWP) Values  Gases GWP Values  IPCC Second Assessment Report  CO 2  1  CH 4  21  N 2 O 310  HFCs As per GWPs for the range of HFCs in IPCC’s Second  Assessment Report  PFCs As per GWPs for the range of PFCs in IPCC’s Second  Assessment Report  SF 6  23,900  NF 3  — Abbreviations: IPCC = Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  Canada’s 2020 target range was set on the 100 year GWP  values in the IPCC Second Assessment Report, 1995, as  noted above.   GWP values from the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report  will be used starting in the 2015 National Inventory  Report, consistent with the revised UNFCCC Annex I  Inventory reporting guidelines adopted at COP 17  (December, 2011).  Table 2(d): the LULUCF Sector  The LULUCF Sector is a particularly important sector  for Canada given our vast land areas. 10% of the  world’s forests are in Canada. Our managed forest  covers 229 million hectares, more than the managed  forest of the entire European Union. Canada also has  65 million hectares of total farm area as reported in the  2011 Census of Agriculture.  Canada has opted for accounting approaches to GHG  emissions for each subsector that take into account  the unique structure of these forests and lands. These  accounting approaches are seen as a scientifically  credible way to measure improvements over time in this  complex sector. Under this approach, the contribution  of LULUCF in 2020 is estimated to be 28 Mt.   In a spring 2012 submission to the UNFCCC, Canada  stated its intent to include the LULUCF sector in its  accounting of GHG emissions towards its 2020 target,  noting that emissions and related removals resulting  from natural disturbances would be excluded from the  accounting. It was also indicated that a Reference Level  or comparison against a 2005 baseline would be used  for accounting.   Canada’s submission clarifying its economy-wide  emission reduction target under the Copenhagen  Accord is at http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2012/ awglca15/eng/misc01a02.pdf   Please see the LULUCF section of Chapter 5:  Projections and the Total Effect of Policies and  Measures of Canada’s 6th National Communication  report for details on LULUCF emissions projections and  accounting methodology.   Table 2(d) I Description of Quantified Economy-wide Emission  Reduction Target; Approach to Counting Emissions and Removals  from the LULUCF Sector  R o  le  o  f  LU  LU C  F  LULUCF  emissions  in base  year  Excluded  LULUCF  emissions  in 2020  Included • Forest Land Remaining Forest Land • Cropland Remaining Cropland  • Forest Land Converted to Other Land Categories • Other Land Categories Converted to Forest Land Excluded • Settlements • Wetlands • Grasslands Land-based approach: No Activity-based approach: No Other: Based on LULUCF Convention reporting  categories   Abbreviations LULUCF = Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Description of contribution of LULUCF calculations: Accounting approaches for all subsectors: Difference between 2005  and 2020 except Forestland remaining Forestland which is measured  against a Reference Level consistent with the Reference Level agreed  for Canada in the Durban agreement on LULUCF.* Further detail on  the LULUCF sector is presented in Table 2(d) II. * A technical correction to the Reference Level will be used, consistent  with the process allowed in the Durban agreement on LULUCF.  http://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2012/awglca15/eng/misc01a02.pdf   211  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 2(d) II Projected Emissions (+) or Removals (-) from the LULUCF  Sector in 2020  Category (in Mt of GHG   emissions/removals)  2020  Projected  Emissions/ Removals  2005  Estimate/ Reference   Level  Expected  Contribution   to 2020  Emissions   Forest Land  Remaining Forest  Land  2133 2107a 226  Cropland Remaining  Croplandb  29 210 1  Forest Land  Converted to Other  Land Categoriesc  15 18d 23.7  Land Converted to  Forest Land   20.4 20.9 0.6  Total 2128 2100 228 Numbers may not add up due to rounding  a  For Forest Land, Remaining Forest Land, a 2020 reference level is   used for determining the contribution. b  Cropland remaining Cropland includes residual emissions after   20 years from forest conversion to cropland. c  Includes all emissions from the conversion of Forest Land to other   categories, except residual emissions 20 years or more after the  forests are converted to cropland.  d  Differences between these values and those reported in the National  Inventory Report are due to the reallocation of emissions from  conversion of forest to cropland after 20 years or more.    212  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Section 4  Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide  Emission Reduction Targets and Relevant Information  4.A  Mitigation actions and their effects– Policies and Measures   Per the United Nations Framework Convention on  Climate Change (UNFCCC) guidelines, Biennial Report  Table 3 generally focuses on actions implemented  since Canada’s last National Communication. Priority  has been given to those policies and measures that  have the most significant impact in affecting Canada’s  greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions—notably regulations  being advanced under Canada’s sector-by-sector  approach. To provide additional context, information  is also included on key supporting and complementary  measures such as investments in clean energy  technologies and initiatives that may be of interest to  international audiences. Given the shared jurisdiction  for climate change in Canada, the table also includes  information on some of the most important provincial  and territorial policies and measures.  Policies and measures in the planning stage are  included and these are clearly distinguished from  implemented policies and measures throughout.  Emissions reductions may not be available for planned  measures as final regulations or agreements have not  yet been finalized. Similarly, emission reductions may  not be available for supporting measures in cases where   emission reductions are not the primary objective of  the initiative.  The methodology for estimating expected emissions  reductions from individual measures may vary by  implementing entity and have been included on an as  provided basis from the implementing entity. Emissions  estimates for individual measures cannot be directly  linked to integrated emissions projections in Table 6a of  this report given the interactive effects that may occur  between different federal and provincial measures.  Rather than the sectoral categories used by the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),  Canada’s policies and measures are organized by  the following sectors: Transportation; Oil and Gas,  consisting of upstream and downstream sectors;  Electricity; Buildings; Emissions-Intensive and Trade- Exposed Industries; Agriculture; Waste and others; and  Cross-cutting (please see Chapter 5: Projections and the  Total Effect of Policies and Measures of Canada’s 6th  National Communication for more detail). The sectors  appear in order from the largest sources of emissions in  Canada to the smallest. Within the sectoral groupings,  federal measures appear first, followed by provincial  and territorial measures from west to east.    213  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] Ta  b le   3  P  ro gr  es s   in  A  ch ie  ve m  en t   of  Q  ua nt  ifi ed   E co  no m  y- w  id e   Em is  si on   R ed  uc tio  n  Ta  rg et  s:  M  iti ga  tio n   A ct  io ns   a nd   T he  ir  Ef  fe ct  s  N am  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    A ct  io n  Se ct  o r(  s)    A ff  ec te  d    G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in     20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  )  Li gh  t- D  ut y   Ve hi  cl e   G H  G    Re gu  la tio  ns :  Ph as  e  1*  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  th  e  on  -r oa  d  tr  an sp  or ta  ti on   s ec  to r  Re gu  la to  ry En  vi ro  nm en  t  C  an ad  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  11 10  ,0 00  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  re  gu la  ti on  s a pp  ly  in  cr ea  si ng  ly  s  tr in  ge nt   a nn  ua l G  H G   e m  is si  on s e  m is  si on   s ta  nd ar  ds  to   n ew   p as  se ng  er  a  ut om  ob ile  s a nd   li gh  t t ru  ck s   m an  uf ac  tu re  d  or    im  po rt  ed  in  to  C  an ad  a  fo  r t he   y ea  rs  2  01 1–  20 16  .  Li gh  t- D  ut y   Ve hi  cl e   G H  G    Re gu  la tio  ns :  Ph as  e  2*  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  th  e  on  -r oa  d  tr  an sp  or ta  ti on   s ec  to r  Re gu  la to  ry En  vi ro  nm en  t  C  an ad  a A  do pt  ed 20  17 3,  00 0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Pr  op os  ed  a  m en  dm en  ts  to   th e   Li gh  t- D  ut y   G H  G  R  eg ul  at io  ns  w  ill  in  vo lv  e  m  or e   st ri  ng en  t s ta  nd ar  ds  fo  r m od  el  y  ea rs   2 01  7– 20  25 .  H ea  vy  D  ut y   Ve hi  cl e   G H  G    Re gu  la tio  ns *  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  th  e  on  -r oa  d  tr  an sp  or ta  ti on   s ec  to r  Re gu  la to  ry En  vi ro  nm en  t  C  an ad  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  14 3,  00 0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  es e   re gu  la ti  on s w  ill  a  pp ly   in cr  ea si  ng ly   s tr  in ge  nt  a  nn ua  l G H  G  e  m is  si on  s s ta  nd ar  ds  to   n ew   o n-  ro ad   h ea  vy -d  ut y   ve hi  cl es   a nd   e ng  in es   im po  rt ed   o r   m an  uf ac  tu re  d  in   C an  ad a   fo r t  he  y  ea rs   2 01  4– 20  18 .  Fe de  ra l   Re ne  w ab  le  F  ue ls    Re  gu la  tio ns  *  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2 To   re gu  la te   re ne  w ab  le    co nt  en t i  n  fu  el Re  gu la  to ry  En vi  ro nm  en t   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d   20 10  2, 00  0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Re  gu la  ti on  s r eq  ui re   a n   av er  ag e   5%  re  ne w  ab le   fu el   c on  te nt   fo r g  as ol  in e,   a nd   2 %   re ne  w ab  le  fu  el  c  on te  nt  in   m os  t d ie  se l f  ue l.  C ar  bo n   D io  xi de    St  an da  rd s   fo r   A vi  at io  n  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2 To   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   fr om   n ew   a ir  pl an  es Re  gu la  to ry  Tr an  sp or  t  C  an ad  a Pl  an ne  d TB  D N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n C  an ad  a  is   p ar  ti ci  pa ti  ng  in   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t o  f a  n  ew  in  te rn  at io  na l C  O 2 s  ta nd  ar d   fo r n  ew  a  ir pl  an es   a t t  he  In  te rn  at io  na l C  iv il   Av ia  ti on   O rg  an iz  at io  n.    C an  ad a   pl an  s t o   ad op  t t he   s ta  nd ar  d  on  ce  it   h as   b ee  n  fin  al iz  ed  a  nd  a  pp ro  ve d   by  th  e  In  te rn  at io  na l C  iv il   Av ia  ti on   O rg  an iz  at io  n.  A bb  re vi  at io  ns : G  re en  ho us  e  ga  s  (G  H G  ),  K  ilo to  nn e   of  c  ar bo  n  di  ox id  e  eq  ui va  le nt   (k t C  O 2 e  q) , M  eg at  on ne  s  (M  t) , N  ot  e  st im  at ed   (N E)  , T o   be  d  et er  m in  ed  (T  BD )  *  A  st er  is k   in di  ca te  s t ha  t t he   p ol  ic y   or  m  ea su  re  h  as  b  ee n   m od  el ed   u si  ng  E  nv ir  on m  en t C  an ad  a’s  e  ne rg  y,  e  nv ir  on m  en t,   an d   ec on  om y   m od  el  (E  3M C  ) a nd   is  re  fle ct  ed  in   C an  ad a’s    G  H G   e m  is si  on s p  ro je  ct io  n  as   p re  se nt  ed  in   T ab  le  6  a  of   th is   re po  rt  a  nd  C  ha pt  er  5   o f C  an ad  a’s  6  th  N  at io  na l C  om m  un ic  at io  n.  P  le as  e  no  te  th  at  e  m is  si on  s e st  im at  es  fo  r i nd  iv id  ua l   m ea  su re  s c an  no t b  e  di  re ct  ly  li  nk ed   to  in  te gr  at ed   e m  is si  on s p  ro je  ct io  ns  in   T ab  le  6  a  of   th is   re po  rt , g  iv en   th e   in te  ra ct  iv e   eff ec  ts  th  at  m  ay  o  cc ur   b et  w ee  n  di  ffe re  nt  fe  de ra  l a nd    pr  ov in  ci al   m ea  su re  s.    214  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  C an  ad a’  s  A  ct io  n  Pl  an  t  o  Re  du ce    G  H G   E m  is si  on s   fr om   A vi  at io  n  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  th  e  av  ia ti  on  s  ec to  r Vo  lu nt  ar y   A gr  ee m  en t  Tr an  sp or  t  C  an ad  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  12 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n A   c om  pr eh  en si  ve  v  ol un  ta ry   a pp  ro ac  h  th  at  in  cl ud  es  a  ll  se  gm en  ts  o  f t he   C an  ad ia  n  av  ia ti  on  s  ec to  r,  fr  om  a  ir lin  es  a  nd  a  ir po  rt s t  o  ai  r t ra  ffi c   na vi  ga ti  on  a  nd    ai rc  ra ft   m an  uf ac  tu re  rs , t  he  A  ct io  n  Pl  an  s  et s a  n  as  pi ra  ti on  al  g  oa l t  o  im  pr ov  e  fu  el  e  ffi ci  en cy   fr om   a  2  00 5   ba se  lin e   by  a  n  av  er ag  e  an  nu al   ra te   o f a  t l ea  st    2%  p  er  y  ea r u  nt il   20 20  . T he   A ct  io n   Pl an   fo rm  s t he   b as  is  fo  r t he   G ov  er nm  en t o  f C an  ad a’s   re sp  on se   to  th  e  In  te rn  at io  na l C  iv il   Av ia  ti on   O rg  an iz  at io  n’ s   A ss  em bl  y  Re  so lu  ti on   A 37  -1 9,   w hi  ch  e  nc ou  ra ge  d  M  em be  r S ta  te s t  o  su  bm it   na ti  on al   a ct  io n   pl an  s  by   Ju ne   2 01  2  se  tt in  g  ou  t m ea  su re  s e ac  h  st  at e   is  ta  ki ng   o r   w ill   ta ke   to  a  dd re  ss  in  te rn  at io  na l a  vi at  io n   em is  si on  s.  Re gu  la to  ry    C oo  pe ra  tio n   C ou  nc il   Lo co  m ot  iv e   Em is  si on  s  In  iti at  iv e  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  lo  co m  ot iv  es  o  pe ra  ti ng    in   C an  ad a   an d   th e   U .S  .  Vo lu  nt ar  y  A  gr ee  m en  t Tr  an sp  or t   C an  ad a  A do  pt ed  TB D  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Em  is si  on s   In it  ia tiv  e  is   a  jo  in t v  ol un  ta ry   a pp  ro ac  h  w  it h   th e   U .S  . E nv  ir on  m en  ta l P  ro te  ct io  n  A  ge nc  y  on   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t o  f p ot  en ti  al  s  tr at  eg ie  s t o   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s f  ro m   lo co  m ot  iv es  . A m  on g   ot he  r e le  m en  ts , a   C an  ad ia  n  in  du st  ry -g  ov er  nm en  t M em  or an  du m   o f U  nd er  st an  di ng   th at   in cl  ud es    m  ea su  re s,   ta rg  et s a  nd  a  ct io  ns  to   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on  in  te ns  it y   fr om   ra il   op er  at io  ns  w  as  c  on cl  ud ed   a s p  ar t o  f t hi  s  in  it ia  tiv e.   T he   in it  ia tiv  e  al  so  in  vo lv  es    w or  k  to  w ar  ds  a   C an  ad a–  U .S  . i nd  us tr  y- go  ve rn  m en  t v ol  un ta  ry  a  ct io  n  pl  an  to   re du  ce  g  re en  ho us  e  ga  s e m  is si  on s f  ro m   lo co  m ot  iv es  .  En er  gy  E  ffi ci  en cy    Re  qu ire  m en  ts  f  or    M ar  in e   Ve ss  el s  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  in  te rn  at io  na l s  hi pp  in g  Re gu  la to  ry Tr  an sp  or t   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d  Ju ne   2 01  3 36  6  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n C  an ad  a  ha  s e na  ct ed   n at  io na  l r eg  ul at  io ns   to  im  pl em  en t n  ew  e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy  re  qu ir  em en  ts  n  eg ot  ia te  d  un  de r A  nn ex   V I o  f t he   In te  rn at  io na  l M ar  it im  e  O  rg an  iz at  io n’  s  Co  nv en  tio n   fo r t  he  P  re ve  nt io  n  of   P ol  lu tio  n  fr  om  S  hi ps  . T he   re gu  la ti  on s r  eq ui  re  a  ll  ve  ss el  s o f 4  00  g  ro ss   to nn  ag e   an d   ab ov  e  to   h av  e  a   Sh ip    En  er gy   E ffi  ci en  cy  M  an ag  em en  t P la  n  on   b oa  rd , s  ta ti  ng  h  ow  e  ac h   ve ss  el  w  ill  in  cr ea  se  e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy  a  nd  re  du ce   g re  en ho  us e   ga s e  m is  si on  s.  A  dd it  io na  lly ,   un de  r t he   re gu  la ti  on s,   n ew   v es  se ls   o f 4  00  g  ro ss   to nn  ag e   an d   ab ov  e  m  us t m  ee t E  ne rg  y  Effi  ci en  cy  D  es ig  n  In  de x   re qu  ir em  en ts   th at   w ill   in cr  ea se   e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy   b y   30 %   b y   20 25  . T he   E ne  rg y   Effi ci  en cy   D es  ig n   In de  x  re  qu ir  em en  ts  d  o  no  t a pp  ly  to   d om  es ti  c  ve  ss el  s v oy  ag in  g  on  ly  in   C an  ad ia  n  w  at er  s,  a  s  it   w as    fo  un d   th at   a pp  ly in  g  th  e  in  te rn  at io  na l s  ta nd  ar ds   to  th  es e   ve ss  el s,   w hi  ch  a  re  s  m al  le r a  nd  u  se  s  ho rt  er  ro  ut es  , w ou  ld  re  su lt   in  in  cr ea  se d   em is  si on  s.    En er  gy  E  ffi ci  en cy    Re  qu ire  m en  ts  f  or    C an  ad ia  n  M  ar in  e  Ve  ss el  s  th  at  S  er ve    D  om es  tic  T  ra de  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  d  om es  ti c   sh ip  pi ng  Re gu  la to  ry Tr  an sp  or t   C an  ad a  Pl an  ne d  TB D  N E   Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n N  ew  C  an ad  ia n   sh ip  s t ha  t s er  ve  d  om es  ti c   tr ad  e  w  it hi  n  C  an ad  a  ar  e  cu  rr en  tly  e  xe m  pt  fr  om  th  e  In  te rn  at io  na l M  ar it  im e   O rg  an iz  at io  n’ s   En er  gy  E  ffi ci  en cy    D  es ig  n  In  de x   re qu  ir em  en ts  . A  te  ch ni  ca l r  ev ie  w  fo  un d   th at   w he  n  th  e  in  te rn  at io  na l E  ne rg  y  Effi  ci en  cy  D  es ig  n  In  de x   st an  da rd   is  a  pp lie  d  to   C an  ad ia  n  sh  ip s o  n  do  m es  ti c   se rv  ic e,   w hi  ch  a  re  s  m al  le r a  nd  u  se  s  ho rt  er  ro  ut es  , t he   re su  lts  w  ou ld   re du  ce  th  e  en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy  o  f t he  se  s  hi ps   a nd   in cr  ea se   th ei  r C O  2  em  is si  on s.   T he   te ch  ni ca  l r ev  ie w   re co  m m  en de  d  w  ay s t  o  ap  pl y   th e   En er  gy  E  ffi ci  en cy   D es  ig n   In de  x  to   y ie  ld  th  e  in  te nd  ed  re  su lts  ; T ra  ns po  rt  C  an ad  a  pl  an s t  o  im  pl em  en t a  dj us  te d   do m  es ti  c  En  er gy   E ffi  ci en  cy  D  es ig  n  In  de x   st an  da rd  s  in   th e   fu tu  re .    215  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Sh or  e  Po  w er    Te  ch no  lo gy   f or    Po  rt s   Pr og  ra m  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  d  oc ke  d  sh  ip s  Ec on  om ic  Tr an  sp or  t  C  an ad  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  11 7   Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Sh  or e   Po w  er  T  ec hn  ol og  y  fo  r P or  ts  P  ro gr  am  p  ro vi  de s c  os t-  sh ar  ed  fu  nd in  g  fo  r t he   d ep  lo ym  en t o  f m ar  in e   sh or  e  po  w er   te ch  no lo  gy  a  t C an  ad ia  n  po  rt s.    Th  is  te  ch no  lo gy   a llo  w s s  hi ps   to  p  lu g   in to   th e   lo ca  l e le  ct ri  ca l g  ri d   to  p  ow er   th e   ve ss  el  in  st ea  d  of   u si  ng  th  ei r a  ux ili  ar y   di es  el  e  ng in  es  w  he n   do ck  ed .  ec oT  EC H  N O  LO G  Y    fo r   Ve hi  cl es    Pr  og ra  m  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  s  up po  rt  th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t  of   lo w  -e m  is si  on  v  eh ic  le    re gu  la ti  on s,   s ta  nd ar  ds ,   co de  s,  p  ro to  co ls  , g ui  de lin  es ,   an d   re la  te d   in st  ru m  en ts  Re se  ar ch  ,  In  fo rm  at io  n Tr  an sp  or t   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 11  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  ec  oT EC  H N  O LO  G Y   fo r V  eh ic  le s p  ro gr  am  te  st s,   e va  lu at  es , a  nd  p  ro vi  de s e  xp er  t t ec  hn ic  al  in  fo rm  at io  n  on   th e   en vi  ro nm  en ta  l a nd   s af  et y   pe rf  or m  an ce   o f   ad va  nc ed   li gh  t- du  ty  v  eh ic  le  a  nd  h  ea vy  -d ut  y  ve  hi cl  e  te  ch no  lo gi  es . T  he  e  co TE  C H  N O  LO G  Y  pr  og ra  m  s  ha re  s t ec  hn ic  al  fi  nd in  gs  to   in fo  rm  th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t  of   v eh  ic le   e m  is si  on s r  eg ul  at io  ns ; t  o  gu  id e   th e   pr oa  ct iv  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t o f n  ew  o  r r ev  is ed   s af  et y   re gu  la ti  on s,   s ta  nd ar  ds , c  od es   a nd   g ui  de lin  es ; a  nd  to   s up  po rt    th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t o f n  on -r  eg ul  at or  y  in  du st  ry  c  od es   a nd   s ta  nd ar  ds  to   h el  p  in  te gr  at e   ne w   v eh  ic le   te ch  no lo  gi es   in to   C an  ad a.    Th  e  ec  oT EC  H N  O LO  G Y   pr og  ra m   is  n  ot  e  xp ec  te d   to  d  ir ec  tly  re  su lt   in  e  m is  si on   re du  ct io  ns ; h  ow ev  er , i  t w ill   in fo  rm  th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t o f C  an ad  a’s  li  gh t-  du ty    ve  hi cl  e  an  d  he  av y-  du ty   v eh  ic le   G H  G  e  m is  si on   re gu  la ti  on s a  nd  h  el p   m or  e  lo  w -e  m is  si on   v eh  ic le   te ch  no lo  gi es   to  e  nt er   th e   C an  ad ia  n  m  ar ke  t.  Tr uc  k  Re  se rv  at io  n  Sy  st em   P ro  gr am  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  as  so ci  at ed   w it  h  po  rt -r  el at  ed    tr uc  ki ng   a ct  iv it  y  at   C an  ad a’s    m  aj or   c on  ta in  er  p  or ts  Ec on  om ic  Tr an  sp or  t  C  an ad  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  13 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Tr  uc k   Re se  rv at  io n   Sy st  em s   Pr og  ra m   p ro  vi de  s f un  di ng   to  p  ro je  ct s a  t C an  ad a’s   m aj  or  c  on ta  in er   p or  ts  fo  r t he   d ep  lo ym  en t o  f t ec  hn ol  og ie  s a nd   p ra  ct ic  es    th at   im pr  ov e   po rt  -t ru  ck in  g  effi  ci en  cy  a  nd  e  nv ir  on m  en ta  l p er  fo rm  an ce   (e .g  .,  re  du ci  ng  tr  uc k   id lin  g,  w  ai t t  im es   a t p  or t t  er m  in al  s,  a  nd  c  on ge  st io  n  on   a cc  es s   ro ad  s) .  Th e   Tr uc  k  Re  se rv  at io  n  Sy  st em   P ro  gr am   is  c  ur re  nt ly   w or  ki ng   w it  h  pr  oj ec  t p ro  po ne  nt s (  no ta  bl y   C an  ad ia  n  Po  rt  A  ut ho  ri ti  es ),   to  g  at he  r m or  e  co  m pl  et e   da ta    on   tr uc  k  m  ov em  en ts   w it  hi n   po rt   a re  as  to   b et  te r m  ea su  re  G  H G   e m  is si  on s o  n  an   o ng  oi ng   b as  is  a  nd  a  ls o   in  c  er ta  in  re  gi on  s t o   se t a   b as  el in  e.  S  pe ci  fic  G  H G    em  is si  on  re  du ct  io n   ta rg  et s w  ill  b  e  se  t t hr  ou gh  ou t t  he  c  ou rs  e  of   in di  vi du  al  p  ro je  ct io  ns .   Br iti  sh  C  ol um  bi a   Re ne  w ab  le  a  nd    Lo w   C ar  bo n   Fu el    Re  qu ire  m en  ts    Re gu  la tio  n*  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on Re  du ce   th e   ca rb  on  in  te ns  it y   an d   in cr  ea se   th e   re ne  w ab  le    co nt  en t o  f f ue  ls  s  ol d   in  B  .C .  Re gu  la to  ry Br  it is  h  C  ol um  bi a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 10  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Re  gu la  ti on   th at   ta rg  et s a   10 %   d ec  re as  e  in   c ar  bo n   in te  ns it  y  of   tr an  sp or  t f ue  ls  s  ol d   in  B  .C . b  y  20  20 , a  nd  5  %  re  ne w  ab le   c on  te nt   in  g  as ol  in e   (4 %   in  d  ie se  l) .    216  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br iti  sh  C  ol um  bi a   C le  an  E  ne rg  y  Ve  hi cl  es  P  ro gr  am  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on To   re du  ce  G  H G  s  in    tr  an sp  or ta  ti on    Ec  on om  ic Br  it is  h  C  ol um  bi a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 11  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  $1  4. 3   m ill  io n   pr og  ra m   p ro  vi de  s  in  ce nt  iv es   fo r e  lig ib  le  c  le an   e ne  rg y   ve hi  cl es   a nd   in cl  ud es   d ep  lo ym  en t o  f c ha  rg in  g  po  in t i  nf ra  st ru  ct ur  e  fo  r t he  se    ve hi  cl es  .   A lb  er ta    Re  ne w  ab le   F ue  l  St  an da  rd *  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on To   a cc  el er  at e   th e   us e   of  fu  el s   de ri  ve d   fr om   re ne  w ab  le    so ur  ce s  Re gu  la to  ry A  lb er  ta Im  pl em  en te  d  20  11 1,0  00  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Re  gu la  ti on   re qu  ir es   a n   av er  ag e   of  2  %  re  ne w  ab le   c on  te nt   in  d  ie se  l f ue  l a nd   5 %   re ne  w ab  le  a  lc oh  ol  in   g as  ol in  e.  T  he  re  ne w  ab le   fu el   c on  te nt   m us  t h av  e  at    le  as t 2  5%  le  ss  G  H G   e m  is si  on s t  ha n   th e   eq ui  va le  nt  p  et ro  le um   fu el   o n   a  lif  e- cy  cl e   ba si  s.    A lb  er ta   G re  en TR  IP    Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on To   in cr  ea se   th e   ac ce  ss ib  ili ty    an  d  us  e  of   p ub  lic  tr  an si  t i n   A lb  er ta  Ec on  om ic    A  lb er  ta Im  pl em  en te  d 20  10 50  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  is   a  $  2  bi  lli on   o ne  -t im  e  ca  pi ta  l f un  di ng   p ro  gr am   th at   s up  po rt  s  ne  w  a  nd  e  xp an  de d   pu bl  ic  tr  an si  t i n   A lb  er ta  . T o   da te  , 1 3   pr oj  ec ts   a re   re ce  iv in  g  fu  nd in  g  an  d  on  ly  th  re e   pr oj  ec ts   h av  e  m  ad e   es ti  m at  es  fo  r t he  ir  ex  pe ct  ed  G  H G   re du  ct io  ns .  M an  ito ba   B io  fu el    Pr  od uc  tio n   In ce  nt iv  e*  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2 To   p ro  vi de   fi na  nc ia  l  su  pp or  t f or   e th  an ol   a nd    bi  od ie  se l m  an uf  ac tu  re rs   in    M an  ito ba   in  o  rd er   to  re  du ce    tr  an sp  or ta  ti on   e m  is si  on s  Re gu  la to  ry M  an ito  ba Im  pl em  en te  d 20  10 N  E  Br ie  f  de  sc rip  tio n  Th e   Et ha  no l F  un d   G ra  nt  R  eg ul  at io  n  st  ar te  d  in   2 00  8  an  d  pr  ov id  es  a   p or  ti on   o f g  as  ta  x  re  ve nu  e  to   b e   cr ed  ite d   to  a  n  Et  ha no  l F un  d  G  ra nt  , w hi  ch  p  ro vi  de s   an  e  ig ht  -y ea  r g ra  nt  to   s up  po rt   e th  an ol   m an  uf ac  tu re  rs  in   M an  ito ba  . T he   B io  di es  el  F  un d   G ra  nt  R  eg ul  at io  n  is   a  fi  ve -y  ea r g  ra nt   p ro  gr am   th at   p ro  vi de  s a n   in ce  nt iv  e  of   14  c  en ts   p er   li tr  e  of   b io  di es  el  to   s up  po rt   b io  di es  el  p  ro du  ct io  n  M  an ito  ba . T  he  p  ro gr  am  s  ta rt  ed  A  pr il   1,  20  10  a  nd  e  nd s   M ar  ch  3  1,  20  15 .  O nt  ar io   E th  an ol    in   G as  ol in  e  Re  gu la  tio n*  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on CO  2 To   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   fr om   tr an  sp or  t s ec  to r  Re gu  la to  ry O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  07 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n O  nt ar  io  R  eg ul  at io  n  53  5/ 05   (E th  an ol   in  G  as ol  in e)  , r eq  ui re  s a n   an nu  al  a  ve ra  ge  o  f 5 %   e th  an ol   in  g  as ol  in e   (b eg  in ni  ng  w  it h   ca le  nd ar   y ea  r 2 00  7) .   O nt  ar io   T he    Bi  g  M  ov e:    Tr  an sf  or m  in g   Tr an  sp or  ta tio  n  in   t he   G re  at er    To  ro nt  o  an  d  H  am ilt  on  A  re a*  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on To   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   fr om   th e   tr an  sp or  t s ec  to r  Ec on  om ic  O nt  ar io  Im pl  em en  te d  20 08  3, 90  0    217  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  2  5- ye  ar  R  eg io  na l T  ra ns  po rt  at io  n  Pl  an  a  im s t  o  im  pr ov  e  re  gi on  al  tr  an sp  or ta  ti on  , b ol  st er   g lo  ba l c  om pe  ti tiv  en es  s,  p  ro te  ct  th  e  en  vi ro  nm en  t a nd    en  ha nc  e  qu  al it  y  of   li fe  . T o   da te  , $ 16   b ill  io n   ha s   be en   c om  m itt  ed  w  it h   pr oj  ec ts   u nd  er w  ay . O  nt ar  io ’s   20 13  –1 4   bu dg  et  a  llo ca  te d   $3 .4   b ill  io n   to w  ar ds   p ub  lic    tr an  si t i  nf ra  st ru  ct ur  e  in   th e   pr ov  in ce  , a  la  rg e   po rt  io n   of  w  hi ch   w as   a llo  ca te  d  to   th is   p la  n. Em  is si  on  re  du ct  io ns   fo r O  nt ar  io ’s   tr an  sp or  ta ti  on  s  ec to  r a re   c om  bi ne  d.  C  om bi  ne d   es ti  m at  ed  m  it ig  at io  n  im  pa ct   o f 3  .9  M  t a pp  lie s t  o  in  it ia  tiv es   re la  te d   to :  –  Th  e  Bi  g  M  ov e   Re gi  on al   tr an  sp or  ta ti  on  p  la n   an d   G ro  w th   P la  n  fo  r t he   G re  at er   G ol  de n   H or  se sh  oe –   Pa ss  en ge  r v eh  ic le   e ffi  ci en  cy  re  gu la  ti on  s –   Fr ei  gh t t  ru ck   s pe  ed  li  m ite  r r eg  ul at  io n  –  M  un ic  ip al   h yb  ri d   bu s p  ur ch  as e   an d   G re  en  C  om m  er ci  al  V  eh ic  le s   Pr og  ra m  –  O  nt ar  io  e  th an  ol  re  gu la  ti on    –   O th  er  re  la te  d  tr  an sp  or ta  ti on   in it  ia tiv  es  Q ue  be c   El ec  tr ic    Ve  hi cl  e  A  ct io  n  Pl  an  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on To   a cc  el er  at e   th e   de pl  oy m  en t o  f e le  ct ri  c  ve  hi cl  es  a  nd  re  la te  d  in  fr as  tr uc  tu re     Ec on  om ic  Q ue  be c  Im pl  em en  te d   20 11  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  A  ct io  n  Pl  an  a  im s t  o  ha  ve :  –  25  %  o  f t he   2 02  0  sa  le s o  f n ew   li gh  t p as  se ng  er  v  eh ic  le  b  e  fo  r e le  ct ri  c  ve  hi cl  es  (p  lu g-  in  h  yb ri  ds  o  r a ll-  el ec  tr ic   v eh  ic le  s) –   95 %   o f p  ub lic   tr an  si t c  om m  ut er  s u se   v eh  ic le  s p ow  er ed   b y   el ec  tr ic  it y   by  2  03 0  –   In  cr ea  se  e  m pl  oy m  en t i  n  th  is  fi  el d   fr om   1, 50  0  to   5 ,0  00  b  y  20  20 Th  e  A  ct io  n  pl  an  a  im s t  o  ac  ce le  ra te   th e   de pl  oy m  en t o  f e le  ct ri  c  ve  hi cl  es  a  nd  re  la te  d  in  fr as  tr uc  tu re  , s uc  h  as   c ha  rg in  g  st  at io  ns , a  t e le  ct ri  fy in  g  Q  ue be  c’s    pu bl  ic  tr  an sp  or ta  ti on   s ys  te m   a nd   a t s  up po  rt in  g  Q  ue be  c  bu  si ne  ss es   in  th  is  fi  el d.     Q ue  be c   Pu bl  ic    Tr an  si t   Po lic  y  Tr  an sp  or ta  ti on  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  th  e  tr  an sp  or t s  ec to  r O  th er    Q  ue be  c Pl  an ne  d N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Fo  llo w  in g   th e   su cc  es s o  f Q ue  be c’s   fi rs  t P ub  lic  T  ra ns  it  Po  lic y   in  2  00 6,   w hi  ch  in  cr ea  se d   ri de  rs hi  p  by   11 %   in  2  01 2,   a  n  ew  s  us ta  in ab  le  m  ob ili  ty  p  ol ic  y  is   b ei  ng    de ve  lo pe  d  an  d  w  ill  a  dd re  ss  la  nd -u  se  p  la nn  in g   an d   tr an  sp or  ta ti  on , g  ov er  na nc  e  an  d  pu  bl ic   tr an  si t f  un di  ng , e  le ct  ri fic  at io  n  of   tr an  sp or  ta ti  on , r  eg io  na l a  nd    ru ra  l t ra  ns po  rt at  io n   as  w  el l a  s t ra  ns it   ad ap  te d   to  th  e  ne  ed s o  f p er  so ns   w it  h  di  sa bi  lit ie  s o r l  im ite  d  m  ob ili  ty .       Fe de  ra l O  il  an  d  G  as  S  ec to  r  G  H G    Re  gu la  tio ns  O il   an d   G as    TB  D To   re du  ce  e  m is  si on  s f ro  m    th e   oi l a  nd  g  as  s  ec to  rs  in    C  an ad  a  Re gu  la to  ry En  vi ro  nm en  t  C  an ad  a Pl  an ne  d TB  D N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  ov er  nm en  t o f C  an ad  a  is   w or  ki ng   w it  h  pr  ov in  ce s t  o  re  du ce   e m  is si  on s f  ro m   th e   oi l a  nd  g  as  s  ec to  rs  w  hi le   e ns  ur in  g  C  an ad  ia n   co m  pa ni  es    re m  ai n   co m  pe ti  tiv e.    218  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br iti  sh  C  ol um  bi a   Fl ar  in g   an d   Ve nt  in g   Re du  ct io  n  G  ui de  lin e  O il   an d   G as    C  H 4  To  re  du ce   fl ar  in g   an d   ve nt  in g   in  th  e  oi  l a nd   g as    se  ct or  ; g oa  l i s t  o  el  im in  at e   al l r  ou ti  ne  fl  ar in  g  by   2 01  6  Re gu  la to  ry    Br it  is h   C ol  um bi  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  10 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n A  pp lie  s t o   th e   fla ri  ng , i  nc in  er at  io n   an d   ve nt  in g   of  n  at ur  al  g  as  a  t w el  l s ite  s,  fa  ci lit  ie s a  nd  p  ip el  in es  .   A lb  er ta   C ar  bo n   C ap  tu re   a nd  St or  ag e   Fu nd  in g   A ct  *  O il   an d   G as    TB  D To   e na  bl e   go ve  rn m  en t   su pp  or t f  or  c  ar bo  n  ca  pt ur  e  an  d  st  or ag  e  pr  oj ec  ts  Ec on  om ic  A lb  er ta  Im pl  em en  te d  20 08  2, 80  0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n En  ab le   A lb  er ta   to  a  dm in  is te  r f un  di ng   to  s  up po  rt  la  rg e-  sc al  e  ca  rb on   c ap  tu re   a nd   s to  ra ge   p ro  je ct  s.  Re du  ct io  n  of    C  O 2   Em is  si on  s  fr  om  C  oa l-fi  re d   G en  er at  io n   of  E  le ct  ric ity    Re  gu la  tio ns  *  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  th  e  co  al -fi  re d   el ec  tr ic  it y   se ct  or  Re gu  la to  ry    En vi  ro nm  en t   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 15  3, 00  0   Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Re  gu la  ti on  s u nd  er  th  e  Ca  na di  an  E  nv ir  on m  en ta  l P ro  te ct  io n   A ct  , 1 99  9  w  ill  a  pp ly   a  p  er fo  rm an  ce  s  ta nd  ar d   to  n  ew  c  oa l-  fir ed   e le  ct ri  ci ty   g en  er at  io n   un it  s  an  d  to   o ld   u ni  ts  th  at  h  av e   re ac  he d   th e   en d   of  th  ei r u  se fu  l l ife  . T he   p er  fo rm  an ce   s ta  nd ar  d  of   4 20   to nn  es  C  O 2 p  er  g  ig aw  at t h  ou r w  ill  c  om e   in to   fo rc  e  Ju  ly  1,    20  15 . G  H G   re du  ct io  ns  in   2 02  0  ar  e  es  ti m  at ed   a t 3  ,0 00   k t C  O 2 e  m is  si on  s.  T  he  re  gu la  ti on  s a re   e st  im at  ed  to   re su  lt  in   a  n  et  re  du ct  io n   of  a  pp ro  xi m  at el  y  21  4  M  t  CO  2 e q   G H  G  o  ve r t  he  p  er io  d  20  15 –2  03 5.  ec oE  N ER  G Y   f or    Re  ne w  ab le   P ow  er    pr og  ra m  *  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  by   in cr  ea si  ng  re  ne w  ab le    el  ec tr  ic it  y  su  pp ly   in  C  an ad  a  Ec on  om ic  N at  ur al    Re  so ur  ce s   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  6, 24  0   Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  pr  og ra  m  o  ffe rs   a n   in ce  nt iv  e  of   1¢  p  er  k  ilo w  at t-  ho ur   o f e  le ct  ri ci  ty  p  ro du  ce d   ov er   a  p  er io  d  of   te n   ye ar  s f ro  m  a   q ua  lif yi  ng  lo  w -i  m pa  ct  re  ne w  ab le   e ne  rg y   pr oj  ec t b  ui lt   be fo  re  M  ar ch   3 1,   20 11.     Br iti  sh  C  ol um  bi a   C le  an  E  ne rg  y  A  ct : C  le an    or   r en  ew ab  le    el ec  tr ic  ity    re qu  ire m  en t  El ec  tr ic  it y  To  m  ai nt  ai n   lo w   c ar  bo n   el ec  tr ic  it y   su pp  ly Re  gu la  to ry  Br it  is h   C ol  um bi  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  10 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n C  le an   E ne  rg y   A ct   c om  m it  s t ha  t B ri  ti sh   C ol  um bi  a  w  ill  g  en er  at e   at  le  as t 9  3%  o  f t he  ir  el  ec tr  ic it  y  fr  om  c  le an   o r r  en ew  ab le   s ou  rc es  .    219  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  M an  ito ba   C oa  l  an  d  Pe  tr ol  eu m    C  ok e   H ea  tin g   Ba n   Re gu  la tio  n  El ec  tr ic  it y  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  c  oa l a  nd  p  et ro  le um    co  ke  Re gu  la to  ry M  an ito  ba Im  pl em  en te  d 20  13 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Ba  n  on   th e   us e   of  p  et ro  le um   c ok  e  fo  r s pa  ce  h  ea ti  ng  e  ffe ct  iv e   D ec  em be  r 3 1,   20 12  . C oa  l u se  rs  m  us t s  ub m  it  pl  an s f  or  c  on ve  rt in  g  aw  ay  fr  om  c  oa l i  n  Ju  ne  o  f  20  14 , p  la ns   m us  t b e   im pl  em en  te d   by  Ju  ne  2  01 7.   F un  ds  fr  om  M  an ito  ba ’s   em is  si on  s t ax   o n   co al   a re   re di  re ct  ed  to   s up  po rt   tr an  si ti  on  fr  om  c  oa l t  o  bi  om as  s.  M an  ito ba    Em  is si  on s   Ta x   on    C oa  l A ct  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  c  oa l i  n  M  an ito  ba    Ec on  om ic  M an  ito ba  Im pl  em en  te d  20 12  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  in  cl ud  es  a   ta x   on  c  oa l e  m is  si on  s;  c  ap it  al  s  up po  rt  fo  r c oa  l u se  rs  to   c on  ve rt   to  c  le an  er  e  ne rg  y;  a  nd  s  up po  rt  fo  r d ev  el op  in g   bi om  as s,   w hi  ch  is   a  c  oa l   al te  rn at  iv e.   T he   E m  is si  on s   Ta x   on  C  oa l A  ct  c  am e   in to   e ffe  ct  Ja  nu ar  y  20  12 . T  he  ta  x  is   p ay  ab le   b y   an y   in di  vi du  al  w  ho  p  ur ch  as es   m or  e  th  an  a   to nn  e  of   c oa  l  fo  r u se   in  M  an ito  ba . D  iff er  en t g  ra de  s o f c  oa l a  re  s  ub je  ct  to   a  d  iff er  en t t  ax  ra  te , a  pp ro  xi m  at el  y  $1  0- pe  r- to  nn e   CO 2 e  q  em  is si  on s.   T he   ta x   w ill   b e   ex te  nd ed   to    in cl  ud e   pe tr  ol eu  m  c  ok e.  M an  ito ba   C oa  l  Fi  re d   Em er  ge nc  y  O  pe ra  tio ns    Re  gu la  tio n  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2  To  re  st ri  ct  M  an ito  ba  H  yd ro  ’s  us  e  of   c oa  l  Re  gu la  to ry  M an  ito ba  Im pl  em en  te d  20 09  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  re  gu la  ti on   re st  ri ct  s  M  an ito  ba  H  yd ro  ’s  us  e  of   c oa  l t o   ge ne  ra te   p ow  er  to   e m  er ge  nc y   op er  at io  ns . M  an ito  ba  H  yd ro  ’s  la  st  re  m ai  ni ng   c oa  l- fir  ed  fa  ci lit  y  is    lo  ca te  d  at   B ra  nd on   U ni  t #  5   in  B  ra nd  on , M  an ito  ba .  M an  ito ba    G  eo th  er m  al    En er  gy  In  ce nt  iv e   Pr og  ra m  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2  To  re  du ce   th e   us e   of    im po  rt ed   n at  ur al   g as   a nd    pr  om ot  e  he  at in  g  an  d  co  ol in  g  of   b ui  ld in  gs  w  it h   re ne  w ab  le  g  eo th  er m  al  h  ea t   pu m  ps    Ec on  om ic  M an  ito ba    Im  pl em  en te  d  20  09 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  p  ro gr  am  o  ffe rs   in ce  nt iv  es  to   re si  de nt  ia l a  nd  c  om m  er ci  al  b  ui ld  in g   ow ne  rs  fo  r i ns  ta lli  ng  g  eo th  er m  al  h  ea t-  pu m  p  sy  st em  s.  In  ce nt  iv es   in cl  ud e   pr ov  in ci  al  g  ra nt  s f or   n ew   h ou  se s   in  n  at ur  al  g  as  s  er vi  ce  a  re as  , p ro  vi nc  ia l g  ra nt  s f or   d is  tr ic  t g eo  th er  m al   s ys  te m  s,  a  nd  a   G re  en  E  ne rg  y  Eq  ui pm  en t T  ax    C re  di t.  O nt  ar io   C oa  l  Ph  as e-  O ut  * El  ec tr  ic it  y To   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   fr om   c oa  l- fir  ed  e  le ct  ri ci  ty    ge ne  ra ti  on  Re gu  la to  ry O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  07 31  ,6 00    220  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n O  nt ar  io  m  an da  te d   th e   ce ss  at io  n  of   c oa  l- fir  ed  e  le ct  ri ci  ty  g  en er  at io  n  by   th e   en d   of  2  01 4   th ro  ug h   a  re  gu la  to ry   a m  en dm  en t (  O .R  eg . 4  96 /0  7) . O  nt ar  io    ha s s  hu t d  ow n   11  of   19  c  oa l u  ni ts   a cr  os s fi  ve  g  en er  at in  g  st  at io  ns , w  it h   6  m  or e   un it  s t o   be  s  hu t d  ow n   at  th  e  en  d  of   2 01  3,  o  ne  y  ea r a  he ad   o f s  ch ed  ul e.   T he    O  nt ar  io  g  ov er  nm en  t e st  im at  es  th  at  th  is  p  ol ic  y  w  ill  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s f ro  m  th  e  el  ec tr  ic it  y  se  ct or   b y   up  to   3 0   M t c  om pa  re d   to  2  00 3   le ve  ls . O  nt ar  io    is  re  pl ac  in g   co al   w it  h  in  cr ea  se d   co ns  er va  ti on   a nd   c le  an er   e ne  rg y   so ur  ce s   lik e   na tu  ra l g  as , n  uc le  ar , s  ol ar   a nd   w in  d.  E  m is  si on   re du  ct io  ns  fo  r O nt  ar io  ’s  el  ec tr  ic it  y  se  ct or   a re   c om  bi ne  d.  T  he  c  om bi  ne d   es ti  m at  ed  m  it ig  at io  n  im  pa ct   o f 3  1.6  M  t a pp  lie s t  o  in  it ia  tiv es   re la  te d   to  O  nt ar  io ’s   Lo ng  -T er  m  E  ne rg  y  Pl  an :   –  co  al  p  ha se  -o ut    –   Fe ed  -i n-  Ta ri  ff  p  ro gr  am –   re si  de nt  ia l,   co m  m er  ci al   a nd   in du  st ri  al  c  on se  rv at  io n   pr og  ra m  s  –   re la  te d   el ec  tr ic  it y   po lic  ie s  O nt  ar io   F ee  d- in  - Ta  rif f*  El ec  tr ic  it y  To  s  up po  rt  th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t  of   re ne  w ab  le  a  nd  c  le an    en  er gy   s ou  rc es     Ec on  om ic  O nt  ar io  Im pl  em en  te d  20 09  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Fe  ed -i  n  Ta  ri ff   P ro  gr am   a llo  w s   in di  vi du  al s a  nd  c  om pa  ni es   to  s  el l r  en ew  ab le   e ne  rg y,   li ke   s ol  ar , w  in d,   w at  er , b  io m  as s,   b io  ga s a  nd  la  nd fil  l g as  , i nt  o  th  e  gr  id  a  t s et   ra te  s.  A  s o f M  ay  2  01 3   ab ou  t 1 ,7  00  p  ro je  ct s   ha ve   b ee  n  ap  pr ov  ed , r  ep re  se nt  in g   ov er   4 ,5  00  m  eg aw  at ts   o f c  ap ac  it y.   T hi  s  in  cl ud  es  o  ve r 2  00  la  rg e-  sc al  e  pr  oj ec  ts  th  at  a  cc ou  nt  fo  r o ve  r 4 ,2  00  m  eg aw  at ts   o f c  ap ac  it y.   T he   F ee  d- in   T ar  iff  p  ro gr  am  w  as  re  -l au  nc he  d  in   D ec  em be  r 2 01  2.  Q ue  be c   En er  gy    St ra  te gy  El ec  tr ic  it y  To  in  cr ea  se  re  ne w  ab le    el  ec tr  ic it  y  ge  ne ra  ti on   a nd    en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy  Ec on  om ic  Q ue  be c  Im pl  em en  te d  20 06  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  st  ra te  gy  p  ro vi  de s f  or  n  ew  re  ne w  ab le   e ne  rg y   ge ne  ra ti  on  (h  yd ro  el ec  tr ic  it y,   w in  d  an  d  bi  oe ne  rg y)   b y   20 15   a nd   a n   in cr  ea se   in  e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy  fo  r a ll   ty pe  s o f e  ne rg  y.  A   n ew   s tr  at eg  y  is   c ur  re nt  ly  b  ei ng   d ra  ft ed  .  N ew   B ru  ns w  ic k—  El ec  tr ic  ity  A  ct    Re ne  w ab  le    Po rt  fo lio   S ta  nd ar  d  Re  gu la  tio n   El ec  tr ic  it y   To  a  ch ie  ve  4  0%  o  f  re  ne w  ab le   e ne  rg y  Re gu  la to  ry N  ew  B  ru ns  w ic  k  Pl  an ne  d 20  14 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Cu  rr en  t R en  ew ab  le  P  or tf  ol io   S ta  nd ar  d  is   b ei  ng  re  vi se  d  to   re fle  ct  4  0%  re  ne w  ab le  , c on  si st  en t w  it h   th e   En er  gy  B  lu ep  ri nt   P ol  ic y.  N ov  a  Sc  ot ia    G  re en  ho us  e  G  as  E  m is  si on  s  Re  gu la  tio ns  *  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2,   N H  3,  N  2O , F  6S ,   H FC  s,    PF C  s  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  c  oa l e  ne rg  y Re  gu la  to ry  N ov  a  Sc  ot ia  Im pl  em en  te d  20 09  2, 50  0    221  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n N  ov a   Sc ot  ia  h  as  im  pl em  en te  d  a   m an  da to  ry  d  ec lin  in g   ca p   on  G  H G   e m  is si  on s f  ro m   N ov  a  Sc  ot ia   P ow  er  In  c. , s  ta rt  in g   at  a  n  av  er ag  e  of   9 .6   M t o  ve r 2  01 0   an d   20 11   to  7  .5  M  t b y   20 20  . I n   Se pt  em be  r 2 01  2,  th  e  N  ov a   Sc ot  ia  g  ov er  nm en  t a nd   th e   C an  ad ia  n  fe  de ra  l g ov  er nm  en t p  ub lis  he d   a  dr  af t e  qu iv  al en  cy  a  gr ee  m en  t  on   c oa  l- fir  ed  e  le ct  ri ci  ty , w  hi ch   c om  m itt  ed  N  ov a   Sc ot  ia  to   a m  en d   it s   G H  G  re  gu la  ti on  s t o   re qu  ir e   ad di  ti on  al  re  du ct  io n   re qu  ir em  en ts   fo r t  he  2  02 1 t  o  20  30    pe ri  od . T  he  a  gr ee  m en  t r eq  ui re  s t he   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s c ap   to  d  ec lin  e  fr  om  7  .5  M  t i n   20 20   to  4  .5  M  t i n   20 30  .  Ef fic  ie nc  y  N  ov a   Sc ot  ia    C or  po ra  tio n   A ct  *  El ec  tr ic  it y  To  u  se  e  ne rg  y  m  or e   effi ci  en tly  Re gu  la to  ry N  ov a   Sc ot  ia Im  pl em  en te  d 20  09 1,3  00  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n  Th  e  le  gi sl  at io  n  cr  ea te  d  an   in de  pe nd  en t e  le ct  ri ci  ty  e  ffi ci  en cy   a dm  in is  tr at  or  c  al le  d  th  e  Effi  ci en  cy  N  ov a   Sc ot  ia  C  or po  ra ti  on . I  t e st  ab lis  he d   a  fu  nd  th  at  is    de  di ca  te d   to  d  el iv  er  e  le ct  ri ci  ty  e  ffi ci  en cy   p ro  gr am  s.  T  he  E  ffi ci  en cy   N ov  a  Sc  ot ia   C or  po ra  ti on   a ls  o  m  an ag  es  e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy  a  nd  c  on se  rv at  io n   pr og  ra m  s  ou  ts id  e  of   e le  ct ri  ci ty   s av  in g   m ea  su re  s.  F  un di  ng  c  om es   fr om   a  le  vy  o  n  th  e  N  ov a   Sc ot  ia  e  le ct  ri ci  ty  ra  te -p  ay er   b as  e  an  d  th  e  Pr  ov in  ce  o  f N ov  a  Sc  ot ia  .  N ov  a  Sc  ot ia    Re  ne w  ab le    El  ec tr  ic ity   P la  n*  El ec  tr ic  it y  To  in  cr ea  se  th  e  sh  ar e   of  c  le an   e ne  rg y   in  th  e  pr  ov in  ce ’s   en er  gy  u  se  Re gu  la to  ry N  ov a   Sc ot  ia Im  pl em  en te  d 20  10 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Re  gu la  ti on  s r eq  ui re   2 5%   o f e  le ct  ri ci  ty  s  up pl  y  to   b e   ge ne  ra te  d  fr  om  re  ne w  ab le   s ou  rc es   b y   20 15   a nd   4 0%   b y   20 20  . T hi  s w ill   in vo  lv e   th e   ad op  ti on   o f a    di  ve rs  e  m  ix  o  f e ne  rg y   so ur  ce s   in cl  ud in  g  w  in d,   ti da  l,  so  la r,   hy dr  o  an  d  bi  oe ne  rg y.  Pr in  ce  E  dw ar  d  Is  la nd  ’s  En  er gy    A  cc or  d  El ec  tr ic  it y  To  in  cr ea  se  P  ri nc  e  Ed  w ar  d  Is  la nd  ’s  re  lia nc  e  on   w in  d  po  w er  Vo lu  nt ar  y  A  gr ee  m en  t Pr  in ce   E dw  ar d   Is la  nd Im  pl em  en te  d 20  11 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Pr  in ce   E dw  ar d   Is la  nd ’s   En er  gy  A  cc or  d  w  as  re  le as  ed  in   N ov  em be  r 2 01  0  an  d  to  ok  e  ffe ct   in  M  ar ch   2 01  1.  Th  e  A  cc or  d  is   a  fi  ve -y  ea r e  ne rg  y  st  ra te  gy  d  ev el  op ed    by   P ri  nc e   Ed w  ar d   Is la  nd  in   c ol  la bo  ra ti  on  a  nd  p  ar tn  er sh  ip  w  it h   M ar  it im  e  El  ec tr  ic  C  om pa  ny  L  im ite  d.  It  s g oa  ls  a  re  to   lo w  er  a  nd  s  ta bi  liz e   el ec  tr ic  it y   ra te  s a nd   in cr  ea se   P ri  nc e   Ed w  ar d   Is la  nd ’s   re lia  nc e   on  lo  ca lly   o w  ne d   w in  d  po  w er  . T he   A cc  or d   co nt  ai ns   a  n  um be  r o f i  ni ti  at iv  es  in  cl ud  in g   su pp  or t f  or  a  n  ad  di ti  on al   4 0   m eg  aw at  ts  in   w in  d  ge  ne ra  ti on  . N ew   w in  d  ge  ne ra  ti on   is  e  xp ec  te d   to  b  e  op  er at  io na  l b y   20 13  , a t w  hi ch   ti m  e  33  %  o  f t he   p ro  vi nc  e’s  e  le ct  ri ci  ty    su pp  ly  w  ou ld   c om  e  fr  om  w  in d   po w  er .   N ew  fo un  dl an  d  an  d  La  br ad  or    G re  en  F  un d  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2,   C H  3  N  2O To   p ro  vi de   s up  po rt   fo r   cl im  at e   ch an  ge  in  it ia  tiv es  Fi sc  al N  ew fo  un dl  an d   an d   La br  ad or  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Pr  oj ec  ts  fu  nd ed   th ro  ug h   th e   G re  en  F  un d   in cl  ud e   en er  gy  e  ffi ci  en cy  , s m  al l s  ca le   w in  d  tu  rb in  es , b  io fu  el s,   a nd   w as  te  m  et ha  ne  c  ap tu  re .  N ew  fo un  dl an  d  an  d  La  br ad  or    M us  kr at   F al  ls    H yd  ro el  ec tr  ic ity    pr  oj ec  t*  El ec  tr ic  it y  CO 2,   C H  3  N  2O To   in cr  ea se   th e   sh ar  e  of   c le  an  e  ne rg  y  in   th e   pr ov  in ce  ’s  en  er gy   u se     Ec on  om ic  N ew  fo un  dl an  d  an  d  La  br ad  or /  N al  co r E  ne rg  y  in    pa  rt ne  rs hi  p  w  it h   Em er  a  Pl an  ne d  20 17  1,2 00  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n O  nc e   de ve  lo pe  d,  th  e  82  4  m  eg aw  at t M  us kr  at  F  al ls   h yd  ro el  ec tr  ic  p  ro je  ct  w  ill  d  is pl  ac e   oi l-  fir ed   e le  ct ri  ci ty   g en  er at  io n   re pr  es en  ti ng   o ve  r 1 0%   o f t  he    pr ov  in ce  ’s  G  H G   e m  is si  on s.    222  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  –  N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito rie  s  A  lte rn  at iv  e  En  er gy    Te  ch no  lo gi  es    Pr og  ra m  El ec  tr ic  it y   To  s  up po  rt  c  on ve  rs io  n  to   re ne  w ab  le  a  nd  c  le an    en  er gi  es    Fi sc  al N  or th  w es  t  Te  rr ito  ri es  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  pr  og ra  m  w  ill  s  up po  rt  A  bo ri  gi na  l a nd   c om  m un  it y   go ve  rn m  en ts  , n on  -f or  -p ro  fit  o  rg an  iz at  io ns  , c om  m er  ci al   b us  in es  se s,   a nd   re si  de nt  s t o   co nv  er t t  o  re  ne w  ab le   a nd   c le  an  e  ne rg  ie s.   T ec  hn ol  og ie  s e lig  ib le   fo r i  nc en  tiv es   in cl  ud e   so la  r,  ho  t w at  er  h  ea ti  ng  s  ys te  m s,   a nd   w in  d  tu  rb in  es .   N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito rie  s  En  er gy   E ffi  ci en  cy    In ce  nt iv  e  Pr  og ra  m    El ec  tr ic  it y  To  s  up po  rt  u  pg ra  de s t  o  m  or e   en er  gy  e  ffi ci  en t   te ch  no lo  gi es  Fi sc  al N  or th  w es  t  Te  rr ito  ri es  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  En  er gy   E ffi  ci en  cy  In  ce nt  iv e   Pr og  ra m   p ro  vi de  s r eb  at es   fo r e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  t a pp  lia nc  es , r  es id  en ti  al  re  tr ofi  ts , a  nd  n  ew  h  om es   ra ng  in g   fr om   $ 50    to   $ 4,  50 0.  N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito rie  s  C  om m  er ci  al    En er  gy    C on  se rv  at io  n  an  d  Ef  fic ie  nc y   Pr og  ra m     El ec  tr ic  it y   To  s  up po  rt  c  om m  er ci  al    en er  gy  a  nd  w  at er   e ffi  ci en  cy Fi  sc al  N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito ri  es Im  pl em  en te  d 20  11  N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n El  ig ib  le  s  m al  l b us  in es  se s r  ec ei  ve  fr  ee  e  ne rg  y  au  di ts   a nd   2 5%   o f t  he  c  os t o  f r et  ro fit   e xp  en se  s u p   to  a   m ax  im um   o f $  10 ,0  00 .  N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito rie  s  A  rc tic    En  er gy   A lli  an ce     El ec  tr ic  it y   To  e  du ca  te , r  ai se   a w  ar en  es s   an d   he lp   re si  de nt  s o f t  he    N or  th w  es t T  er ri  to ri  es  a  do pt    en  er gy   s av  in g   be st   p ra  ct ic  es    Ed uc  at io  n N  or th  w es  t  Te  rr ito  ri es  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n N  on -p  ro fit   A rc  ti c   En er  gy  A  lli an  ce  p  ro vi  de s f  re e   in fo  rm at  io n,   a dv  ic e,   in ce  nt iv  es  a  nd  a  ns w  er s t  o  qu  es ti  on s f  ro m   re si  de nt  s o f t  he  N  or th  w es  t T er  ri to  ri es   o n   en er  gy  e  ffi ci  en cy   a nd   h os  ts  a  nn ua  l E ne  rg y   A ct  io ns   A w  ar ds  . T he   A rc  ti c   En er  gy  A  lli an  ce  a  ls o   co nd  uc ts   e ne  rg y   au di  ts  to   e du  ca te   re si  de nt  s o n   ho w   to  re  du ce    ho  m e   en er  gy  c  on su  m pt  io n.  Br iti  sh  C  ol um  bi a   Bu ild  in g   G re  en    C od  e*  Bu ild  in gs  To  im  pr ov  e  en  er gy    effi  ci en  cy  in   n ew   h ou  se s   an d   bu ild  in gs  Re gu  la to  ry Br  it is  h  C  ol um  bi a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 08  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n In   S ep  te m  be r 2  00 8,   B ri  ti sh   C ol  um bi  a  ad  op te  d  ne  w  e  ne rg  y  an  d  w  at er   e ffi  ci en  cy  o  bj ec  tiv es   a nd   re qu  ir em  en ts   fo r a  ll  bu  ild in  gs  in   th e   Br it  is h   C ol  um bi  a  Bu  ild in  g  C  od e.   F ur  th er   e ffi  ci en  cy  u  pd at  es  to   th e   C od  e  ar  e  pr  op os  ed  b  ut  n  ot  y  et  a  do pt  ed .  Li ve  Sm ar  t  BC  : E ffi  ci en  cy    In ce  nt iv  e  Pr  og ra  m  Bu ild  in gs  To  s  up po  rt  h  om eo  w ne  rs    in  im  pr ov  in g   en er  gy    effi ci  en ci  es  o  f t he  ir  ho  m es     Ec on  om ic  Br it  is h   C ol  um bi  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  08 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  p  ro gr  am  p  ro vi  de s   in ce  nt iv  es  fo  r h om  eo w  ne rs   to  im  pr ov  e  th  e  en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy  o  f t he  ir  ho  m es  . S in  ce  th  e  pr  og ra  m  w  as  la  un ch  ed  in   2 00  8,  a  ro un  d  $1  10  m  ill io  n  ha  s  be  en  in  ve st  ed . T  hi s p  ro gr  am  w  ill  e  nd  o  n  M  ar ch   3 1,   20 14  .    223  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  O nt  ar io   B ui  ld in  g  C  od e*  Bu ild  in gs  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  in    th  e  bu  ild in  gs  s  ec to  r Re  gu la  to ry  O nt  ar io  Im pl  em en  te d  20 12  2, 90  0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Bu  ild in  g  C  od e   is  p  ha si  ng  in   h ig  he r e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy  re  qu ir  em en  ts  fo  r n ew   b ui  ld in  gs  o  ve r t  im e,   w hi  ch  p  la ys   a  s  ig ni  fic an  t r ol  e  in   li m  it in  g  gr  ee nh  ou se    ga  s e m  is si  on s w  hi le   a llo  w in  g  bu  si ne  ss es   a nd   re si  de nt  s t he   fl ex  ib ili  ty  to   m ov  e  fo  rw ar  d  in   a  c  os t-  effi ci  en t m  an ne  r. Em  is si  on  re  du ct  io ns   fo r O  nt ar  io ’s   bu ild  in gs   s ec  to r a  re  c  om bi  ne d.  C om  bi ne  d  es  ti m  at ed   m it  ig at  io n   im pa  ct  o  f 2 .9   M t a  pp lie  s t o   in it  ia tiv  es  re  la te  d  to  : –   Th e   G ro  w th   P la  n  fo  r t he   G re  at er   G ol  de n   H or  se sh  oe –   N at  ur al   g as   d em  an d   si de   m an  ag em  en t p  ro gr  am s  –  Bu  ild in  g  C  od e   ch an  ge s  –  O  th er   re la  te d   bu ild  in gs   a nd   c ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng  in  it ia  tiv es  N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito rie  s  C  ap ita  l  A  ss et   R et  ro fit    Fu  nd  Bu ild  in gs  To  in  cr ea  se  b  ui ld  in g   en er  gy  s  ys te  m  e  ffi ci  en ci  es    in  s  ch oo  ls  a  nd  o  th er    te  rr ito  ri al   b ui  ld in  gs . T  ar ge  ts    be nc  hm ar  ki ng   o f h  ea lth  ca re    fa  ci lit  ie s a  nd /o  r g ov  er nm  en t   bu ild  in gs   a cr  os s t  he    N or  th w  es t T  er ri  to ri  es  O th  er N  or th  w es  t  Te  rr ito  ri es  Im pl  em en  te d  20 08  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  ro ug  h  en  er gy   a ud  it s,   b ui  ld in  g  su  rv ey  s a nd   e ne  rg y   be nc  hm ar  ki ng  , b ui  ld in  gs  a  re  id  en ti  fie d   an d   re tr  ofi tt  ed  to   im pr  ov e   th ei  r e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy  . T he    pr  og ra  m  tr  ac ks   a ct  ua l fi  na nc  ia l s  av in  gs  fr  om  re  tr ofi  ts  a  nd  re  in ve  st s t  he m   in to   th e   C ap  it al   A ss  et  R  et ro  fit  F  un d.  N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito rie  s  In  iti at  iv es   f or   N ew    Bu  ild in  gs  Bu ild  in gs    To   re du  ce  e  ne rg  y  co  ns um  pt io  n  an  d  en  su re    qu  al it  y  co  nt ro  l f or   b ui  ld in  gs    in  th  e  no  rt h  O th  er N  or th  w es  t  Te  rr ito  ri es  Im pl  em en  te d  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n In  it ia  tiv es   in cl  ud e   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t a  nd  u  se  o  f A  G  oo d   Bu ild  in g   Pr ac  tic e   fo r N  or th  er n   Fa ci  lit ie  s  gu  id eb  oo k.   T he   G ov  er nm  en t o  f t he   N or  th w  es t T  er ri  to ri  es    Pu bl  ic  W  or ks   a nd   S er  vi ce  s c on  du ct  s d es  ig n   re vi  ew s a  nd  e  ng ag  es  in   e ne  rg y   m od  el lin  g  w  or ks  ho ps  , p ub  lic  a  w ar  en es  s a ct  iv it  ie s r  el at  ed  to   e ne  rg y   us e   an d   co ns  er va  ti on   a nd   in fo  rm at  io n   sh ar  in g   w it  h  ot  he r g  ro up  s a nd   T er  ri to  ri es  .  N or  th w  es t   Te rr  ito rie  s  H  ou si  ng    C or  po ra  tio n   En er  gy  In  iti at  iv es  Bu ild  in gs  To  a  ch ie  ve  h  ig he  r h ig  h  en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy  a  nd  m  ee t   N at  ur al   R es  ou rc  es  C  an ad  a’s    m in  im um   s ta  nd ar  d   O th  er N  or th  w es  t  Te  rr ito  ri es  Im pl  em en  te d  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  re e   ke y   in it  ia tiv  es  in  cl ud  e:  1)   A  d  ra ft   R et  ro fit   S tr  at eg  y;  2  ) T he   N or  th er  n  Su  st ai  na bl  e  H  ou si  ng  P  ro je  ct  fo  r t he   d es  ig n   of  a   h ig  hl y   effi ci  en t b  ui ld  in g   w it  h  re  du ce  d  op  er at  in g   co st  s a nd   g re  en ho  us e   ga s e  m is  si on  s a nd  ; 3 ) P  ro m  ot in  g  en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy  th  ro ug  h  th  e  H  om eo  w ne  rs hi  p  Pr  og ra  m  “S  ol ut  io ns   T o   Ed uc  at e   Pe op  le ”.    224  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Yu ko  n  G  ov er  nm en  t  G  re en   B ui  ld in  g  St  an da  rd s  Bu ild  in gs  To  in  cr ea  se  e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy    of  n  ew  b  ui ld  in gs   w it  hi n   th e   C it  y  of   W hi  te ho  rs e  Re gu  la to  ry Yu  ko n  Im pl  em en  te d  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n In  cr ea  se d   m in  im um   in su  la ti  on  v  al ue  s,  re  qu ir  em en  ts  fo  r a  B  lo w  er  d  oo r t  es t o  n  al  l n ew   c on  st ru  ct io  n,  a  nd  re  qu ir  em en  ts  fo  r h ea  t- re  co ve  ry  v  en ti  la to  rs .  Em is  si on  -In te  ns iv  e  an  d  Tr  ad e-  Ex po  se d   Se ct  or    Re gu  la tio  ns  Em is  si on  s- In  te ns  iv e   an d   Tr ad  e- Ex  po se  d   CO 2 a  nd    TB D  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  m  aj or  -e m  itt in  g  in  du st  ri al   s ec  to rs  Re gu  la to  ry En  vi ro  nm en  t  C  an ad  a Pl  an ne  d TB  D N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Se  ct or  -s pe  ci fic   re gu  la to  ry  a  pp ro  ac he  s a re   b ei  ng  d  ev el  op ed   fo r m  aj or  -e m  itt in  g  in  du st  ri al   s ec  to rs   u nd  er  C  an ad  a’s  s  ec to  r- by  -s ec  to r r  eg ul  at or  y  ap  pr oa  ch  to    re  du ci  ng  g  re en  ho us  e  ga  s e m  is si  on s.   T he  se  a  pp ro  ac he  s a re   c ur  re nt  ly  u  nd er   d ev  el op  m en  t.  Pu lp   a nd    Pa  pe r   G re  en    Tr an  sf or  m at  io n   Pr og  ra m  *  Em is  si on  s- In  te ns  iv e   an d   Tr ad  e- Ex  po se  d   CO 2,   C H  4,  N  2O To   im pr  ov e   th e   en vi  ro nm  en ta  l p er  fo rm  an ce    of   C an  ad a’s   p ul  p  an  d  pa  pe r i  nd us  tr y   in  th  e  ar  ea s o  f r en  ew ab  le  e  ne rg  y  pr  od uc  ti on   a nd   e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy  Fi sc  al N  at ur  al    Re so  ur ce  s  C  an ad  a  Im pl  em en  te d   20 09    1,3  60    Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n O  pe ra  ti ng   fr om   Ju ne   2 00  9  to   M ar  ch  2  01 2,   th e   $1 -b  ill io  n  Pu  lp  a  nd  P  ap er   G re  en  T  ra ns  fo rm  at io  n  Pr  og ra  m  p  ro vi  de d   fu nd  in g   to  C  an ad  ia n   pu lp   a nd   p ap  er    co m  pa ni  es  fo  r c ap  it al   p ro  je ct  s w it  h  en  vi ro  nm en  ta l b  en efi  ts . T  ho ug  h  no  t s pe  ci fic  al ly   d es  ig ne  d  as   a  c  lim at  e  ch  an ge   m it  ig at  io n   m ec  ha ni  sm , t  hr ou  gh    pr oj  ec ts   th at   im pr  ov ed   e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy  , e na  bl ed   fu el   s w  itc hi  ng  a  nd  a  dd ed   c ap  ac it  y  to   g en  er at  e  re  ne w  ab le   e le  ct ri  ci ty  , t he   P ul  p  an  d  Pa  pe r G  re en    Tr  an sf  or m  at io  n  Pr  og ra  m  g  en er  at ed   b ot  h  di  re ct   a nd   in di  re ct   G H  G  e  m is  si on   re du  ct io  ns .   Sa sk  at ch  ew an    M  an ag  em en  t  an  d  Re  du ct  io n   of  G  re en  ho us  e  G  as es   R eg  ul at  io n  Em is  si on  s- In  te ns  iv e   an d   Tr ad  e- Ex  po se  d  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  la  rg e   fin al   e m  itt er  s Re  gu la  to ry  Sa sk  at ch  ew an  Pl an  ne d  20 13  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  re  gu la  ti on   re qu  ir es   la rg  e  fin  al  e  m itt  er  fa  ci lit  ie s t  ha t e  m it   ov er   5 0,  00 0   to nn  es  C  O 2 t  o  re  du ce   th ei  r e m  is si  on s   by  2  0%  b  y  20  20  fr  om  a   2 00  6  ba  se lin  e.    C om  pl ia  nc e   op ti  on s   in cl  ud e   pa ym  en ts   in to   a  n  on -p  ro fit   te ch  no lo  gy  fu  nd  o  nl y   ac ce  ss ib  le  to   re gu  la te  d  em  itt er  s f or   lo w   c ar  bo n   in ve  st m  en ts  . M on  ie s   no t   us ed   c an   b e   he ld   in  th  e  te  ch no  lo gy   fu nd   fo r 5   y ea  rs  a  nd  th  en  tr  an sf  er s   in to   th e   C lim  at e   C ha  ng e   Fo un  da ti  on  w  hi ch   is  a  cc es  si bl  e  fo  r c lim  at e   ch an  ge  re  la te  d  re  se ar  ch  a  nd  d  ev el  op m  en t o  r e du  ca ti  on , a  nd  is   a va  ila bl  e  to   a ny  on e   in  th  e  pr  ov in  ce  u  po n   ap pr  ov al   o f a  n  ap  pl ic  at io  n.  O nt  ar io   G re  en be  lt  Pl  an A  gr ic  ul tu  re To   p er  m an  en tly   p ro  te ct    pr  im e   ag ri  cu ltu  ra l l  an d   an d   en vi  ro nm  en ta  lly  s  en si  tiv e   ar ea  s  Re gu  la to  ry O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  05 N  E    225  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  re en  be lt   Pl an   id en  ti fie  s  1.8   m ill  io n   ac re  s o f l  an d   w he  re  fu  tu re   u rb  an iz  at io  n  sh  ou ld   n ot   o cc  ur  b  y  pr  ov id  in g   pe rm  an en  t p ro  te ct  io n   fo r p  ri m  e  ag  ri cu  ltu ra  l l an  d  an  d  en  vi ro  nm en  ta lly   s en  si tiv  e  ar  ea s.  Th e   O nt  ar io    Bi  og as   S ys  te m  s  Fi  na nc  ia l   A ss  is ta  nc e   Pr og  ra m  A gr  ic ul  tu re  To  s  up po  rt  th  e  re  du ct  io n   of    G H  G  e  m is  si on  s f ro  m  fa  rm s  Fi sc  al O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  08 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  pr  og ra  m , c  om pl  et ed   in  2  01 0,   s uc  ce ss  fu lly   le d   to  m  or e   th an   11  m  eg aw  at ts   in st  al le  d  el  ec tr  ic al   c ap  ac it  y,  e  no ug  h  po  w er   fo r 1  0, 00  0  ho  m es  . I t s  up po  rt ed    G  H G   e m  is si  on  re  du ct  io ns   b y   di re  ct  a  vo id  an ce   o f e  m is  si on  s f ro  m  m  an ur  e  st  or ag  e  an  d  off  se tt  in g   em is  si on  s  by   re pl  ac in  g  fo  ss il   fu el   g en  er at  ed  e  le ct  ri ci  ty  o  r  na  tu ra  l g as  .  Th e   O nt  ar io    Et  ha no  l G ro  w th    Fu  nd  A gr  ic ul  tu re  To  s  up po  rt  th  e  pr  od uc  ti on    of   e th  an ol   fu el  Fi sc  al O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  05 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Fu  nd  h  as  h  el pe  d  cr  ea te   a n   in du  st ry   w it  h  do  m es  ti c   pr od  uc ti  on  th  at  is   c ur  re nt  ly  a  t 8 85   m ill  io n   lit re  s p er   y ea  r,  pr  oj ec  te d   to  g  ro w   to  o  ve r 1   b ill  io n   lit re  s  pe  r y ea  r.  O  nt ar  io  h  as  s  ev en   e th  an ol   fa ci  lit ie  s  in   p la  ce .  Br iti  sh  C  ol um  bi a   La nd  fil l G  as    M an  ag em  en t   Re gu  la tio  n*  W as  te C  H 4  To  in  cr ea  se  m  et ha  ne    ca pt  ur e   ra te   a t l  an dfi  lls Re  gu la  to ry  Br it  is h   C ol  um bi  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  09 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Re  qu ir  es  la  rg er   m un  ic ip  al  s  ol id   w as  te  la  nd fil  ls  (>  1,0 00   to nn  es  m  et ha  ne /y  ea r)   to  in  st al  l a pp  ro ve  d  la  nd fil  l g as   c ap  tu re   s ys  te m  s w it  h  a   ca pt  ur e   ra te   ta rg  et  o  f  75  % . R  eg ul  at io  ns  w  ill  ta  ke  e  ffe ct   in  2  01 6.  M an  ito ba    Pr  es cr  ib ed    La  nd fil  ls  M  et ha  ne    G as   C ap  tu re    Re  gu la  tio n  W as  te C  H 4  To  re  du ce   m et  ha ne    em  is si  on s f  ro m   la nd  fil ls    Re  gu la  to ry  M an  ito ba  Im pl  em en  te d  20 09  19 5  Br ie  f  de  sc rip  tio n  Re gu  la ti  on  18  0/ 20  09  p  er ta  in in  g  to   M an  ito ba  ’s  C  lim at  e  C  ha ng  e  Em  is si  on s   an d   Re du  ct io  n  A  ct , i  n  co  m bi  na ti  on  w  it h   s. 15   o f t  he  A  ct , r  eq ui  re s   M an  ito ba  ’s  th  re e   la rg  es t l  an dfi  lls —  th e   Ea st  vi ew   L an  dfi ll   in  B  ra nd  on , t  he  B  ra dy   L an  dfi ll   so ut  h  of   W in  ni pe  g,  a  nd  th  e  BF  I C an  ad a   Pr ai  ri e   G re  en  L  an dfi  ll— to   c ap  tu re    or   fl ar  e  ex  ce ss   m et  ha ne  . T he   R eg  ul at  io n   is  e  xp ec  te d   to  re  su lt   in  e  m is  si on  s r ed  uc ti  on s o  f 1 95   k t G  H G   p er   y ea  r.  O nt  ar io   L an  dfi ll   G as   C ol  le ct  io n*  W as  te C  H 4  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  th  e  w  as te   s ec  to r  Re gu  la to  ry O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  08 2,  00 0     226  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n In   2 00  8,  O  nt ar  io  in  tr od  uc ed   re gu  la ti  on s r  eq ui  ri ng   a ll   la nd  fil ls   la rg  er  th  an  1.  5  m  ill io  n  cu  bi c   m et  re s t  o  in  st al  l l an  dfi ll   ga s c  ol le  ct io  n  an  d  fla  ri ng   s ys  te m  s.    Cu rr  en tly  , m os  t o f t  he  la  rg es  t l an  dfi lls   a re   n ow   c ol  le ct  in g   la nd  fil l g  as  in   O nt  ar io  . Em  is si  on  re  du ct  io ns   fo r O  nt ar  io ’s   ag ri  cu ltu  re  a  nd  w  as te   s ec  to rs   a re   c om  bi ne  d.  C  om bi  ne d   es ti  m at  ed  m  it ig  at io  n  im  pa ct   o f 2   M t a  pp lie  s t o   in it  ia tiv  es    re la  te d   to :  –  Bi  og as   F in  an ci  al  A  ss is  ta nc  e  Pr  og ra  m –   La nd  fil l g  as  c  ap tu  re  re  gu la  ti on  –  O  th er   p ol  ic ie  s a nd   p ro  gr am  s  in   th e   w as  te  a  nd  a  gr ic  ul tu  ra l s  ec to  rs .    ec oE  N ER  G Y    Ef  fic ie  nc y*  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng    CO 2,   C H  4,  N  2O To   im pr  ov e   en er  gy    effi ci  en cy   in  C  an ad  a In  fo rm  at io  n,    re gu  la to  ry ,   an d   ed uc  at io  n   N at  ur al    Re  so ur  ce s   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 11  6, 50  0   Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  ec  oE N  ER G  Y  Effi  ci en  cy  p  ro gr  am :  –  su  pp or  ts  th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t a nd   im pl  em en  ta ti  on  o  f e ne  rg y   co de  s,  b  en ch  m ar  ki ng   to ol  s,  tr  ai ni  ng  a  nd  in  fo rm  at io  n  m  at er  ia ls   to  im  pr ov  e  th  e  en  er gy    effi  ci en  cy  o  f c om  m er  ci al   a nd   in st  it ut  io na  l b ui  ld in  gs  in   C an  ad a;  –  en  ab le  s a nd   p ro  m ot  es  th  e  co  ns tr  uc ti  on  a  nd  re  tr ofi  t o f e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  t l ow  -r is  e  re  si de  nt ia  l h ou  si ng   th ro  ug h   th e   En er  G ui  de  R  at in  g  Sy  st em  , t he   R -2  00 0   St an  da rd  , a nd   E N  ER G  Y  ST  A R   fo r N  ew  H  om es   in it  ia tiv  es ;   –  in  tr od  uc es   o r r  ai se  s e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy   s ta  nd ar  ds  fo  r a  ra  ng e   of  p  ro du  ct s,   a nd   p ro  m ot  es  e  ne rg  y- effi  ci en  t p ro  du ct  s t hr  ou gh   th e   EN ER  G Y   ST A  R  in  it ia  tiv e;  –  ai  ds  th  e  ad  op ti  on  a  nd  im  pl em  en ta  ti on   o f a  n  en  er gy   m an  ag em  en t s  ta nd  ar d   in  C  an ad  a,  a  cc el  er at  es  e  ne rg  y- sa  vi ng  s  in  ve st  m en  ts  in   in du  st ri  al  fa  ci lit  ie s   an d   su pp  or ts   th e   ex ch  an ge   o f b  es t-  pr ac  ti ce  s  in  fo rm  at io  n  w  it hi  n  C  an ad  a’s  in  du st  ri al   s ec  to r;   a nd  , –   pr ov  id es   C an  ad ia  ns  w  it h   de ci  si on  -m ak  in g   to ol  s f or   b uy  in g   m or  e  fu  el  e  ffi ci  en t v  eh ic  le s   in cl  ud in  g  in  tr od  uc in  g  im  pr ov  ed  v  eh ic  le  fu  el  c  on su  m pt  io n   la be  ls . I  t a ls  o  pr  ov id  es  C  an ad  ia ns   a nd   C an  ad a’s   c om  m er  ci al  /i ns  ti tu  ti on  al  fl  ee t s  ec to  r w it  h  in  fo rm  at io  n  to   o pe  ra te   th ei  r v eh  ic le  s t o   re du  ce  fu  el    co ns  um pt  io n   by  e  xp os  in g   dr iv  er s t  o  fu  el -e  ffi ci  en t d  ri vi  ng  te  ch ni  qu es  . N  ot e:   T he   e st  im at  ed  m  it ig  at io  n  im  pa ct   o f 6  ,5 00   k t i  n  20  20  o  nl y   in cl  ud es   e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy   im pa  ct s a  ss oc  ia te  d  w  it h   po lic  ie s a  nd  m  ea su  re s t  ha t o  cc ur  re d   si nc  e  C  an ad  a’s  5  th  N  at io  na l C  om m  un ic  at io  n  an  d  as  so ci  at ed   in -d  ep th   re vi  ew  in   2 01  1.  Th  is  fi  gu re   d oe  s  no  t i nc  lu de   th e   es ti  m at  ed  m  it ig  at io  n  im  pa ct   o f   44 ,7  50  k  t i n   20 20   re su  lti ng   fr om   e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy   s ta  nd ar  ds  p  ub lis  he d   pr io  r t o   20 11.  ec oE  N ER  G Y    In  no va  tio n   In iti  at iv  e  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng CO  2 To   s up  po rt   re ne  w ab  le  a  nd    cl ea  n  en  er gy   te ch  no lo  gi es  Fi sc  al N  at ur  al    Re so  ur ce  s  C  an ad  a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 11  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  ov er  nm en  t o f C  an ad  a  ha  s  in  ve st  ed  $  26 8   m ill  io n   ov er   fi ve   y ea  rs  (2  01 1–  20 16  ) i n   re ne  w ab  le  e  ne rg  y  an  d  cl  ea n   en er  gy  te  ch no  lo gi  es . T  he  o  bj ec  tiv e   is  to    su  pp or  t e ne  rg y   te ch  no lo  gy  in  no va  ti on   to  p  ro du  ce  a  nd  u  se  e  ne rg  y  m  or e   cl ea  nl y   an d   effi ci  en tly  . T he   in it  ia tiv  e  pr  im ar  ily  in  vo lv  es  re  se ar  ch  p  ro je  ct s;   o nl  y  m  in or   d ir  ec t G  H G   e m  is si  on s r  ed uc  ti on  s a re   e xp  ec te  d.  ec oE  N ER  G Y    Te  ch no  lo gy    In  iti at  iv e  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng CO  2 To   in cr  ea se   c le  an  e  ne rg  y  su  pp ly  , r ed  uc e   en er  gy  w  as te  ,  an  d  re  du ce   p ol  lu ti  on  fr  om    co nv  en ti  on al   e ne  rg y  Fi sc  al N  at ur  al    Re so  ur ce  s  C  an ad  a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  20 0     227  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n $2  30  m  ill io  n  in  ve st  m en  t i n   sc ie  nc e   an d   te ch  no lo  gy  to   a cc  el er  at e   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t a  nd  m  ar ke  t r ea  di ne  ss  o  f t ec  hn ol  og y   so lu  ti on  s  in   c le  an  e  ne rg  y.  T  he    ec oE  N ER  G Y   Te ch  no lo  gy  In  it ia  tiv e   al so   c on  tr ib  ut ed   $ 7.  2  m  ill io  n  to   th e   In te  rn at  io na  l E ne  rg y   A ge  nc y   G re  en ho  us e   G as   R es  ea rc  h  an  d  D  ev el  op m  en t   Pr og  ra m  m e   W ey  bu rn  -M id  al e   CO 2 M  on ito  ri ng   a nd   V er  ifi ca  ti on   P ro  je ct   w hi  ch  s  tu di  ed  C  O 2 g  eo lo  gi ca  l s to  ra ge   in  d  ep le  te d   oi lfi  el ds  . I t w  as  c  on du  ct ed    in   c on  ju nc  ti on   w it  h  tw  o  co  m m  er ci  al  C  O 2-  en ha  nc ed   o il   re co  ve ry   o pe  ra ti  on s   ne ar   W ey  bu rn  , S as  ka tc  he w  an . O  th er   c ar  bo n   ca pt  ur e   an d   st or  ag e   fu nd  in g   th ro  ug h   th e   ec oE  N ER  G Y   Te ch  no lo  gy  In  it ia  tiv e   in cl  ud es   E nh  an ce   E ne  rg y’  s A lb  er ta   C ar  bo n   Tr un  k  Li  ne  (1  .8  M  t C O  2 p er   y ea  r b eg  in ni  ng  in   2 01  5)  a  nd    H us  ky ’s   Ll oy  dm in  st er   p ilo  t p ro  je ct   (0 .1   M t C  O 2 p  er  y  ea r s  in ce   2 01  1) . T  he  la  tt er   is  e  xp ec  te d   to  re  su lt   in  e  m is  si on  s r ed  uc ti  on s o  f u p   to  2  00  k  t C O  2 p er   y ea  r.  C ar  bo n   ca pt  ur e   an d   st or  ag e   in ve  st m  en t   in    C an  ad a’  s  Fe  de ra  l  Bu  dg et   2 00  8*  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng CO  2 To   s up  po rt   th e   Sa sk  Po w  er    Bo un  da ry   D am   c le  an  e  ne rg  y  te  ch no  lo gy   p ro  je ct  Fi sc  al G  ov er  nm en  t o f   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 14  1,0 00     Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n A  s p ar  t o f B  ud ge  t 2 00  8,  a   o ne  -t im  e  al  lo ca  ti on   o f $  24 0   m ill  io n   w as   g iv  en  to  w ar  ds  th  e  Sa  sk Po  w er   B ou  nd ar  y  D  am  c  ar bo  n  ca  pt ur  e  an  d  st  or ag  e  pr  oj ec  t w hi  ch    w ill   c ap  tu re   a nd   s to  re  u  p  to   1, 00  0  kt   C O  2 p er   y ea  r f ro  m  2  01 4   on w  ar ds   fo r t  he  li  fe  o  f t he   p la  nt .  C le  an  E  ne rg  y  Fu  nd C  ro ss  -c ut  ti ng  CO 2  To  s  up po  rt  c  le an   e ne  rg y   te ch  no lo  gy  re  se ar  ch ,   de m  on st  ra ti  on  a  nd    de ve  lo pm  en t  Fi sc  al N  at ur  al    Re so  ur ce  s  C  an ad  a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 09  2, 80  0   Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  ov er  nm en  t o f C  an ad  a  ha  s a llo  ca te  d  $3  17 .6   m ill  io n   ov er   fi ve   y ea  rs  (2  00 9/  10 –2  01 3/  14 ) f  or  th  e  de  m on  st ra  ti on   o f p  ro m  is in  g  te  ch no  lo gi  es , i  nc lu  di ng    la  rg e-  sc al  e  ca  rb on   c ap  tu re   a nd   s to  ra ge   p ro  je ct  s,  a  nd  re  ne w  ab le   e ne  rg y   an d   cl ea  n  en  er gy   s ys  te m  s d em  on st  ra ti  on  a  nd  re  se ar  ch  a  nd  d  ev el  op m  en t p  ro je  ct s.    Th  e  Fu  nd  is   e xp  ec te  d  to   re su  lt  in   e m  is si  on s r  ed uc  ti on  s o f u  p  to   2 ,8  00  k  t C O  2 e q   pe r y  ea r f  ro m   2 01  5  to   2 02  5,  a  nd  p  os si  bl y   be yo  nd .  Su st  ai na  bl e   D ev  el op  m en  t  Te  ch no  lo gy    C  an ad  a—    Su st  ai na  bl e   D ev  el op  m en  t  Te  ch  F  un d  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng CO  2,  C  H 4,   N 2O  Su pp  or t f  or  re  ne w  ab le   a nd    cl  ea n   en er  gy  te  ch no  lo gi  es  a  s  pa  rt  o  f a  b  ro ad  er  m  an da  te    to  s  up po  rt  th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t,  de  m on  st ra  ti on   a nd    co  m m  er ci  al iz  at io  n  of   c le  an    te ch  no lo  gi es     Ec on  om ic  Su st  ai na  bl e   D ev  el op  m en  t  Te  ch no  lo gy    C  an ad  a  (E  nv ir  on ne  nt    C an  ad a   an d   N at  ur al    Re  so ur  ce s   C an  ad a)  Im pl  em en  te d  20 01    N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  ov er  nm en  t o f C  an ad  a  ha  s a llo  ca te  d  a   to ta  l o f $  91 5   m ill  io n   to  S  us ta  in ab  le  D  ev el  op m  en t T  ec hn  ol og  y  C  an ad  a’s  S  us ta  in ab  le  D  ev el  op m  en t T  ec h   Fu nd  ,  in  cl ud  in g   an  in  je ct  io n   of  $  32 5   m ill  io n   in  B  ud ge  t 2 01  3.  T  o  da  te , t  he  S  us ta  in ab  le  D  ev el  op m  en t T  ec h   Fu nd   h as   a llo  ca te  d  $5  92  m  ill io  n  to   s up  po rt   2 45   p ro  je ct  s  ac  ro ss   C an  ad a,   le ve  ra gi  ng  a  n  ad  di ti  on al   $ 1.5   b ill  io n   m os  tly  fr  om  in  du st  ry . G  H G   e m  is si  on s r  ed uc  ti on  s  (a  s w el  l a s o  th er   p os  it iv  e  en  vi ro  nm en  ta l o  ut co  m es  )  ar  e  an   in di  re ct   a nd   lo ng  -t er  m  o  bj ec  tiv e.   It  is   e st  im at  ed  th  at  S  us ta  in ab  le  D  ev el  op m  en t T  ec hn  ol og  y  C  an ad  a’s  e  ffo rt  s w ill   h av  e  re  su lte  d  in   a  to  ta l c  um ul  at iv  e  gl  ob al   G H  G  re  du ct  io n   of  13  5. 8   M t C  O 2 e  q  by   2 02  0.  A  s o f 2  01 2,   c om  pl et  ed  p  ro je  ct s a  re  e  st im  at ed   to  h  av e   yi el  de d   a  to  ta l o  f 2 .1   M t C  O 2 e  q.      228  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  ec oE  N ER  G Y    fo  r  A  bo rig  in al    an  d  N  or th  er n   C om  m un  iti es  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng CO  2 Re  du ce  d  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   in  A  bo ri  gi na  l a nd   n or  th er  n  co  m m  un it  ie s  Fi sc  al A  bo ri  gi na  l A ffa  ir s   an d   N or  th er  n  D  ev el  op m  en t   C an  ad a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 11  70  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  ec  oE N  ER G  Y  fo  r A bo  ri gi  na l a  nd  N  or th  er n   C om  m un  it ie  s  Pr  og ra  m  is   in ve  st in  g  $2  0  m  ill io  n  ov  er  fi  ve  y  ea rs   to  s  up po  rt  A  bo ri  gi na  l a nd   n or  th er  n  co  m m  un it  ie s,   in cl  ud in  g  off  -g ri  d  co  m m  un it  ie s,   to  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s t hr  ou gh   th e   in te  gr at  io n   of  p  ro ve  n  re  ne w  ab le   e ne  rg y   te ch  no lo  gi es   s uc  h  as    re  si du  al  h  ea t r  ec ov  er y,   b io  m as  s,  g  eo th  er m  al , w  in d,   s ol  ar  a  nd  s  m al  l h yd  ro . T  he  p  ro gr  am  p  ro vi  de s f  un di  ng  s  up po  rt  fo  r t he   d es  ig n   an d   co ns  tr uc  ti on   o f   re ne  w ab  le  e  ne rg  y  pr  oj ec  ts  in  te gr  at ed   w it  h  co  m m  un it  y  bu  ild in  gs , a  nd  fo  r t he   fe as  ib ili  ty  s  ta ge  s o f l  ar ge  r r en  ew ab  le  e  ne rg  y  pr  oj ec  ts , t  he re  by  d  is pl  ac in  g  na  tu ra  l g as  , c oa  l a nd   d ie  se l g  en er  at io  n  of   e le  ct ri  ci ty   a nd   h ea  t. Th  e  ob  je ct  iv e   of  th  e  ec  oE N  ER G  Y  fo  r A bo  ri gi  na l a  nd  N  or th  er n   C om  m un  it ie  s  Pr  og ra  m  (2  01 1 –  20 16  ) i s t  o  re  du ce   o r d  is pl  ac e   na tu  ra l g  as , c  oa l a  nd  d  ie se  l  ge  ne ra  ti on   o f e  le ct  ri ci  ty  th  er eb  y  re  du ci  ng  g  re en  ho us  e  ga  s e m  is si  on s   by  a   p ro  je ct  ed  1.  5  M  t o ve  r a  2  0- ye  ar  p  ro je  ct  li  fe cy  cl e   fo r a  ll  pr  oj ec  ts  fu  nd ed   b y   M ar  ch  3  1,  20  16 .   N ot  e:  T  he  p  ro gr  am  fu  nd s   la rg  er  re  ne w  ab le   e ne  rg y   pr oj  ec ts   a t t  he  fe  as ib  ili ty   s ta  ge s.   A s a   re su  lt,  it   is  p  os si  bl e   th at   n ot   a ll   of  th  e  fu  nd ed   p ro  je ct  s w ill   re ac  h  th  e  im  pl em  en ta  ti on   p ha  se  a  nd  re  al iz  e  gr  ee nh  ou se   g as   e m  is si  on  re  du ct  io ns  . I n   so m  e  ca  se s,   g re  en ho  us e   ga s r  ed uc  ti on  s  m  ay  b  e  no  t b e   re al  iz ed   u nt  il  af  te r   20 20  .  Br iti  sh  C  ol um  bi a   C ar  bo n   Ta x*  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng  C  O 2,   C H  4,  N  2O ,   H FC  s,    PF C  s,    SF 6  To  in  tr od  uc e   a  co  st  fo  r G H  G    em is  si on  s f ro  m  fo  ss il   fu el  s  Ec  on om  ic Br  it is  h  C  ol um  bi a  Im pl  em en  te d  20 08  3, 00  0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  re  ve nu  e- ne  ut ra  l t ax   a pp  lie s t  o  vi  rt ua  lly  a  ll  fo  ss il   fu el  s,  in  cl ud  in g:   g as  ol in  e,  d  ie se  l,  na  tu ra  l g as  , c oa  l,  pr  op an  e,  a  nd  h  om e   he at  in g   fu el  . T he   c ar  bo n   ta x   st ar  te d   at  a   ra te   b as  ed  o  n  $1  0  pe  r t on  ne  o  f a ss  oc ia  te d   ca rb  on  o  r c ar  bo n-  eq ui  va le  nt  e  m is  si on  s,  a  nd  w  ill  ri  se  b  y  $5   e ac  h  ye  ar  o  ve r t  he  n  ex t f  ou r y  ea rs  ,  re  ac hi  ng  $  30  p  er  to  nn e   in  2  01 2   w he  re  it   w ill   re m  ai n.   T he   re ve  nu e   ge ne  ra te  d  by   th is   ta x   is  re  tu rn  ed  to   in di  vi du  al s a  nd  b  us in  es se  s t hr  ou gh   re du  ct io  ns  to    ot  he r t  ax es   a nd   o th  er  ta  x  cr  ed it  s.  C ar  bo n   N eu  tr al    G  ov er  nm en  t  of    Br  iti sh   C ol  um bi  a  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   a ch  ie ve   c ar  bo n   ne ut  ra lit  y  in   g ov  er nm  en t o  pe ra  ti on  s  Re  gu la  to ry  Br it  is h   C ol  um bi  a Im  pl em  en te  d 20  07 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  re en  ho us  e  G  as  R  ed uc  tio ns   T ar  ge ts   A ct   re qu  ir ed   th e   pr ov  in ci  al  g  ov er  nm en  t,  in  cl ud  in g   pr ov  in ci  al  m  in is  tr ie  s a nd   a ge  nc ie  s,  s  ch oo  ls , c  ol le  ge s,    un  iv er  si ti  es , h  ea lth   a ut  ho ri  ti es   a nd   C ro  w n   co rp  or at  io ns  , t o   be co  m e   ca rb  on  n  eu tr  al  b  y  20  10  a  nd  to   m ak  e  pu  bl ic   a  re  po rt   e ve  ry  y  ea r d  et ai  lin g   ac ti  on s   ta ke  n  to  w ar  ds  c  ar bo  n  ne  ut ra  lit y.   T he   p ro  vi nc  e  ha  s s in  ce  a  nn ou  nc ed   th at   it  a  ch ie  ve d   ca rb  on  n  eu tr  al it  y  in   2 01  0,  2  01 1 a  nd  2  01 2.   E m  is si  on s r  ed uc  ti on  s o ffs  et    m ar  ke t d  ev el  op m  en t,   ou tr  ea ch  , a nd   d em  on st  ra ti  on .  A lb  er ta   In du  st ria  l  Re  gu la  tio ns  * C  ro ss  -c ut  ti ng  To  li  m it   em is  si on  s  in  te ns  it y   fr om   th e   in du  st ri  al  s  ec to  r Re  gu la  to ry  A lb  er ta  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  10 ,0  00    229  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n In  du st  ri al   fa ci  lit ie  s t ha  t e m  it  m  or e   th an   10 0,  00 0   to nn  es  C  O 2 e  q  ar  e  re  qu ir  ed  to   re du  ce  th  ei r e  m is  si on  s  in  te ns  it y   by  12  %  u  si ng   a  b  as el  in e   ba se  d  on   p as  t  em  is si  on s.   R eg  ul at  ed  fa  ci lit  ie s   ha ve   fo ur   c om  pl ia  nc e   op ti  on s:   im pr  ov e   th e   G H  G  in  te ns  it y   of  th  ei r o  pe ra  ti on  s;  b  uy  e  m is  si on  s p er  fo rm  an ce   c re  di ts   fr om    ot  he r r  eg ul  at ed   fa ci  lit ie  s t ha  t a ch  ie ve   re du  ct io  ns  b  ey on  d  th  ei r r  eq ui  re m  en t;   bu y   A lb  er ta  -b as  ed  o  ffs et  s;  o  r p ay   $ 15   p er   to nn  e  CO  2 e q   to  th  e  C  lim at  e  C  ha ng  e  an  d  Em  is si  on s   M an  ag em  en t F  un d.   A s o  f 2 01  3,  th  e  re  gu la  ti on   c ov  er s   10 6   fa ci  lit ie  s f ro  m  15   in du  st ri  al  s  ec to  rs  (a  bo ut   h al  f o f A  lb er  ta ’s   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s) .  A lb  er ta   C lim  at e   C ha  ng e   Em is  si on  s  M  an ag  em en  t  Fu  nd  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   p ro  m ot  e  in  ve st  m en  ts    in  g  re en   p ro  je ct  s a nd    te  ch no  lo gi  es  Ec on  om ic  A lb  er ta  Im pl  em en  te d  20 08  70 0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  C  lim at  e  C  ha ng  e  an  d  Em  is si  on s   M an  ag em  en t F  un d   in ve  st s   in  p  ro je  ct s a  nd  te  ch no  lo gy   to  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  in   A lb  er ta  , i nc  lu di  ng  re  ne w  ab le    fo  rm s o  f e ne  rg y   an d   cl ea  ne r e  ne rg  y  de  ve lo  pm en  t.  Fu  nd s c  om e   fr om   c om  pa ni  es  w  ho  h  av e   ch os  en  to   p ay   fo r t  he ir   ex ce  ss  e  m is  si on  s,  o  ne  o  f t he   fo ur    co  m pl  ia nc  e  op  ti on  s u nd  er  A  lb er  ta ’s   In du  st ri  al  R  eg ul  at io  ns . S  in ce   2 00  7,  a  ro un  d  $4  00  m  ill io  n  ha  s  be  en  p  ai d   in to   th e   cl ea  n  te  ch no  lo gy   fu nd  , a nd    18  2  m  ill io  n  ha  s  be  en  in  ve st  ed  in   4 8   cl ea  n  en  er gy   p ro  je ct  s.  Sa sk  Po w  er    de m  on st  ra tio  n  ca  rb on   c ap  tu re    an  d  st  or ag  e  pr  oj ec  ts *  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   s up  po rt   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t   of  c  ar bo  n  ca  pt ur  e  an  d  st  or ag  e  te  ch no  lo gy  Fi sc  al Sa  sk at  ch ew  an Im  pl em  en te  d N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Sa  sk at  ch ew  an  h  as  in  ve st  ed  u  pw ar  ds  o  f $ 17   m ill  io n   in  c  ap tu  re  a  nd  s  to ra  ge  p  ro je  ct s a  nd  p  ro je  ct s t  ha t r  ed uc  e  fla  ri ng  . T og  et he  r w it  h  in  du st  ry  a  nd    go ve  rn m  en t p  ar tn  er s,   it  h  as  s  ev er  al  c  ap tu  re  a  nd  s  to ra  ge  p  ro je  ct s u  nd er  w ay  . T he   W ey  bu rn  -M id  al e   pr oj  ec t i  s t he   la rg  es t c  ap tu  re  a  nd  s  to ra  ge  d  em on  st ra  ti on    si  te  in   th e   w or  ld . S  as ka  tc he  w an   is  a  ls o   im pl  em en  ti ng   th e   ap pr  ox im  at el  y  $1   b ill  io n,   11 5   m eg  aw at  t p ro  je ct   a t B  ou nd  ar y   D am  , w it  h  a   $2 40   m ill  io n   fe de  ra l   go ve  rn m  en t c  on tr  ib ut  io n.   O nc  e  op  er at  io na  l i n   20 14  , t he   B ou  nd ar  y  D  am  P  ro je  ct  is   e xp  ec te  d  to   c ap  tu re   u p   to  1   M t C  O 2 p  er  y  ea r,   th er  eb y   re du  ci ng    em  is si  on s   by  7  .2 %   fr om   2 00  2  le  ve ls  .  Sa sk  at ch  ew an    G  o  G  re en   F un  d  in    En  vi ro  nm en  t  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   th ro  ug h   gr ee  n  in  it ia  tiv es  Fi sc  al Sa  sk at  ch ew  an Im  pl em  en te  d N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n La  un ch  ed  a  s p ar  t o f t  he  G  o  G  re en   P la  n,  th  is  fu  nd  in  ve st  s  in   p ro  je ct  s w hi  ch  re  du ce   o r a  vo id   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s,  a  m on  g  ot  he r e  nv ir  on m  en ta  l p ri  or it  ie s s  uc h   as  w  at er   c on  se rv  at io  n.  T  he  2  01 1 S  as ka  tc he  w an   b ud  ge t i  nc lu  de d   $1 7   m ill  io n   in  fu  nd in  g  to   th e   G o   G re  en  F  un d   an d   gr ee  n  in  it ia  tiv es   fu nd  in g   fo r E  ne rg  y  an  d  Re  so ur  ce s.   P re  vi ou  sl y   fu nd  ed  in  it ia  tiv es   in cl  ud e   th e   H ig  h  W  in d   an d   St or  ag e   Pr oj  ec t,   w hi  ch  a  im s t  o  de  ve lo  p  w  in d   en er  gy  a  nd  e  ne rg  y  st  or ag  e  te  ch no  lo gy  ,  an  d  A  Q U  IS TO  RE , w  hi ch   w ill   d ev  el op   te ch  no lo  gi es   fo r c  ar bo  n  di  ox id  e  st  or ag  e  in   s al  in e   aq ui  fe rs  .  M an  ito ba    Bi  om as  s  En  er gy    Su  pp or  t  Pr  og ra  m  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng CO  2 To   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   fr om   c oa  l t o   pr om  ot e   bi om  as s e  ne rg  y   Ec on  om ic  M an  ito ba  Im pl  em en  te d  20 12  N E    230  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Br ie  f  de  sc rip  tio n  Th is   p ro  gr am   p ro  vi de  s u p   to  $  40 0,  00 0   in  g  ra nt  s t o   en co  ur ag  e  co  al  u  se rs   to  s  w itc  h  to   b io  m as  s e ne  rg y   pr od  uc ts   a nd   s up  po rt   th e   ex pa  ns io  n  an  d  gr  ow th   o f   th e   bi om  as s e  ne rg  y  pr  od uc  ti on   in du  st ry  . I t c  on si  st s o  f t w  o  co  m po  ne nt  s:  1)   a  c  on su  m er   s up  po rt   c om  po ne  nt  th  at  p  ro vi  de s g  ra nt  s o f u  p  to   $ 12  ,0 00   to  c  oa l   us er  s t o   he lp   o ffs  et  th  e  pr  ic e   di ffe  re nt  ia l b  et w  ee n   co al   a nd   b io  m as  s p ro  du ct  s;  a  nd  2  ) a  c  ap it  al  c  om po  ne nt   th at   p ro  vi de  s g ra  nt s o  f u p   to  $  50 ,0  00  to   h el  p  bi  om as  s u se  rs  a  nd  p  ro ce  ss or  s d ev  el op   h ig  h- qu  al it  y,  re  ne w  ab le   b io  m as  s p ro  du ct  s f or   u se   in  c  om bu  st io  n  he  at in  g  sy  st em  s.  O nt  ar io   P la  ce s   to    G ro  w  A  ct C  ro ss  -c ut  ti ng  To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  fr  om  la  nd  u  se  a  nd    tr an  sp or  ta ti  on  Re gu  la to  ry O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  05 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  ro w  th  P  la n   fo r t  he  G  re at  er  G  ol de  n  H  or se  sh oe   2 00  6,  is   d es  ig ne  d  to   s up  po rt   g re  at er   d en  si ty   a nd   tr an  si t a  lte rn  at iv  es . T  he se   h el  p  lim  it  gr  ow in  g  tr  affi c   co ng  es ti  on  a  nd  u  rb an   s pr  aw l.   Th e   G ro  w th   P la  n  fo  r N or  th er  n  O  nt ar  io , 2  01 1,   un de  r t he   P la  ce s   to  G  ro w   A ct  , 2 00  5,  in  cl ud  es  p  ol ic  ie s t  o  in  co rp  or at  e  cl  im at  e  ch  an ge   m it  ig at  io n   an d   ad ap  ta ti  on  c  on si  de ra  ti on  s  in  to  p  la nn  in g   an d   de ci  si on   m ak  in g   w he  re  a  pp ro  pr ia  te .  O nt  ar io   P ro  vi nc  ia l   Po lic  y  St  at em  en t   C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   p ro  vi de   p ol  ic y   di re  ct io  n  in   m at  te rs   o f p  ro vi  nc ia  l  in  te re  st  in   la nd   u se    pl  an ni  ng  a  nd  d  ev el  op m  en t   In fo  rm at  io n  O nt  ar io  Im pl  em en  te d  20 05  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  Pr  ov in  ci al   P ol  ic y   St at  em en  t g ui  de s   m un  ic ip  al it  ie s   in  m  ak in  g  la  nd  u  se  p  la nn  in g   de ci  si on  s t ha  t i nfl  ue nc  e  tr  an sp  or ta  ti on  , e ne  rg y   de m  an d,   a nd    en  co ur  ag es   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t o  f c om  pa ct   c om  m un  it ie  s a nd   th e   re du  ct io  n  of   e m  is si  on s.  O nt  ar io   N ex  t  G  en er  at io  n  Jo  bs    Fu nd     C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   s up  po rt   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t   of  g  re en   te ch  no lo  gi es    Fi  sc al  O nt  ar io  Im pl  em en  te d  20 07  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  fu  nd  s  up po  rt s p  ro je  ct s r  el at  ed  to   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t o  f c le  an  c  ar s,   c le  an  fu  el s,   a nd   c le  an  p  ro du  ct s a  nd  te  ch no  lo gy   in  O  nt ar  io . P  ro je  ct s   m us  t  de  m on  st ra  te  e  nv ir  on m  en ta  l a nd   e co  no m  ic  b  en efi  ts , i  nc lu  di ng   jo b   cr ea  ti on   a nd   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s r ed  uc ti  on .   O nt  ar io    In  no va  tio n   D em  on st  ra tio  n  Fu  nd  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   s up  po rt   th e   de ve  lo pm  en t   of  g  re en   te ch  no lo  gi es  Fi sc  al O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d  20  06    N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  In  no va  ti on   D em  on st  ra ti  on  F  un d   su pp  or ts   p ilo  t d em  on st  ra ti  on s   in  e  m er  gi ng   te ch  no lo  gi es   w it  h  a   pr ef  er en  ce  to  w ar  ds  e  nv ir  on m  en ta  l,  al  te rn  at iv  e  en  er gy  , b io  -p ro  du ct  s,  h  yd ro  ge n   an d   ot he  r g re  en  s  ec to  rs . T  he  In  no va  ti on   D em  on st  ra ti  on  F  un d   he lp  s c om  pa ni  es  m  it ig  at e   te ch  no lo  gi ca  l r is  k  an  d  ad  dr es  se s   th e   fin an  ci ng   g ap   th at   e xi  st s   be tw  ee n   re se  ar ch   a nd   d ev  el op  m en  t a nd   c om  m er  ci al  iz at  io n.  O nt  ar io   5 0   M ill  io n   Tr ee   P ro  gr am  C ro  ss  c  ut ti  ng To   s eq  ue st  er  c  ar bo  n  an  d  im  pr ov  e  ad  ap tiv  e  ca  pa ci  ty    of  th  e  se  tt le  d  la  nd sc  ap e  Fi sc  al O  nt ar  io Im  pl em  en te  d 20  07 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  18   y ea  r p ro  gr am  , t o   in ve  st  $  79  m  ill io  n  in   th e   pl an  ti ng   o f 5  0  m  ill io  n  tr  ee s o  n  th  e  se  tt le  d  la  nd sc  ap e   of  s  ou th  er n   O nt  ar io   th at   w ill   s eq  ue st  er  6  .6  M  t C O  2  by   2 05  0  an  d  he  lp  re  st or  e  fo  re st   c ov  er  o  n  th  is  h  ig hl  y  fr  ag m  en te  d  la  nd sc  ap e.    231  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Q ue  be c   20 13  –2 02  0  C  lim at  e  C  ha ng  e  A  ct io  n  Pl  an    an d   A da  pt at  io n   St ra  te gy  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng    To  re  du ce   G H  G  e  m is  si on  s  by   2 5%   c om  pa re  d  to   19 90    le  ve ls   in  2  02 0  Re gu  la to  ry Q  ue be  c Im  pl em  en te  d 20  13 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  20  13 –2  02 0   C lim  at e   C ha  ng e   A ct  io n   Pl an   h as   a n   es ti  m at  ed  $  3  bi  lli on   b ud  ge t o  ve r 8   y ea  rs  to   fi na  nc e   30  p  ri or  it ie  s  in   th e   fo llo  w in  g  ar  ea s:   tr an  sp or  t,  in  du st  ry , b  ui ld  in gs  , l an  d- us  e  pl  an ni  ng , r  es ea  rc h   an d   de ve  lo pm  en t,   go ve  rn m  en t p  ro cu  re m  en t,   en er  gy  e  ffi ci  en cy  , b io  -e ne  rg y,   a gr  ic ul  tu re   a nd   w as  te    m an  ag em  en t.   A t t  he  h  ea rt   o f t  he  a  ct io  n  pl  an  is   Q ué  be c’s   c ap  -a nd  -t ra  de  s  ys te  m  w  hi ch   a llo  w s f  or  th  e  fu  nd in  g  of   m os  t o f i  ts  G  H G   re du  ct io  n  m  ea su  re s   th ro  ug h   th e   go ve  rn m  en t s  al e   of  e  m is  si on   a llo  w an  ce s.   T hi  s p la  n  ta  ke s o  ve r f  ro m   th e   20 06  –2 01  2  ac  ti on   p la  n.  Q ue  be c   D ut  y  on    N  on -R  en ew  ab le    Fo  ss il   Fu el  s  Pa  ya bl  e  to   t he    G  re en   F un  d*  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng    TB D  To  re  du ce   e m  is si  on s f  ro m    ga  so lin  e  an  d  ot  he r f  os si  l  fu  el s  Re gu  la to  ry Q  ue be  c Im  pl em  en te  d 20  07 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n A   le vy   th at   a pp  lie s t  o  di  st ri  bu to  rs  o  f g as  ol in  e  an  d  fo  ss il   fu el   u se  d  fo  r e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy   p ur  po se  s.  It   is  c  al cu  la te  d  ba  se d   on  G  H G   b y   ty pe   o f e  ne rg  y  an  d  ge  ne ra  te s r  ev en  ue s o  f $ 20  0  m  ill io  n  a   ye ar   th at   a re   d ir  ec te  d  to   th e   pr ov  in ci  al  G  re en   F un  d  to   re du  ce  G  H G   e m  is si  on s a  nd  im  pr ov  e  pu  bl ic   tr an  sp or  t.   Q ue  be c’  s  C  ap -a  nd -T  ra de    Sy  st em  *  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng C  ap -a  nd -t  ra de   s ys  te m  Ec on  om ic    an  d  Re  gu la  to ry  Q ue  be c  Im pl  em en  te d  20 12  N E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n O  ne  o  f t he   k ey   e le  m en  ts  o  f Q ue  be c’s   a pp  ro ac  h  to   c lim  at e   ch an  ge  is   a  c  ap -a  nd -t  ra de   s ys  te m   w hi  ch  b  ec am  e  eff  ec tiv  e  in   Ja nu  ar y   20 12  , w it  h  a   fir st    co  m pl  ia nc  e  pe  ri od   s ta  rt in  g  Ja  nu ar  y  20  13 . C  ov er  ed  e  nt it  ie s p  ri m  ar ily   in cl  ud e   el ec  tr ic  it y   pr od  uc ti  on  a  nd  d  is tr  ib ut  io n   an d   la rg  e  in  du st  ri al   fa ci  lit ie  s.  In   2 01  5,    th e   sy st  em  w  ill  e  xp an  d  to   c ov  er  th  e  di  st ri  bu ti  on  o  f f ue  l u se  d  in   th e   tr an  sp or  ta ti  on , b  ui ld  in g,   a nd   s m  al l-   a nd   m ed  iu m  -s iz  ed  b  us in  es s s  ec to  rs . Q  ue be  c  an  d  C  al ifo  rn ia   w ill   fo rm  al ly   li nk   th ei  r e m  is si  on s t  ra di  ng  s  ch em  es  in   2 01  4.  Q  ue be  c  an  ti ci  pa te  s  it  s a uc  ti on   o f G  H G   e m  is si  on  a  llo w  an ce  s f or   th e   fa ll   of  2  01 3   an d   th e   fir st   Q ue  be c–  C al  ifo rn  ia  jo  in t a  uc ti  on  a  t t he   b eg  in ni  ng  o  f 2 01  4.    D ev  el op  m en  t  st  ra te  gy  f  or    Q ue  be c’  s  en  vi ro  nm en  ta l   an d   gr ee  n  te  ch no  lo gy    in  du st  ry  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   s up  po rt   re se  ar ch   a nd    de  ve lo  pm en  t a s w  el l a  s  bu  si ne  ss es   in  th  e  fie  ld  o  f  gr  ee n   te ch  no lo  gy    In fo  rm at  io n,    Re  se ar  ch Q  ue be  c Im  pl em  en te  d 20  08 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n In   re la  ti on   to  c  lim at  e  ch  an ge  , n ew   e ne  rg ie  s,  e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy , a  nd  c  ar bo  n  ca  pt ur  e  an  d  se  qu es  tr at  io n   am on  g  ot  he r a  re as  , t he   s tr  at eg  y  ai  m s t  o: –   su pp  or t i  nd us  tr ia  l r es  ea rc  h; –   he lp   d is  se m  in at  e  in  fo rm  at io  n  on   u ni  ve rs  it y   re se  ar ch   p ro  je ct  s  in   g re  en  te  ch no  lo gy  ; –   su pp  or t t  ec hn  ol og  y  re  fin em  en t a  nd  d  em on  st ra  ti on   p ro  je ct  s;  a  nd ,  –  im  pr ov  e  en  vi ro  nm en  ta l c  er ti  fic at  io n   m ec  ha ni  sm s a  nd  th  e  im  pl em  en ta  ti on   o f m  ea su  re s t  o  fa  ci lit  at e   th e   ex ec  ut io  n  of   d em  on st  ra ti  on  p  ro je  ct s.    232  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  N am  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    A ct  io n  Se ct  o r(  s)    A ff  ec te  d G  H G  (s )   A ff  ec te  d    O b  je ct  iv e   an d  /o r   A ct  iv it  y  A  ff ec  te d  Ty p  e  o  f  In  st ru  m en  t Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    En  ti ty  St at  u s   o f   Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    St ar  t  D  at e   o f   Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  )  Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  N ew   B ru  ns w  ic k   En er  gy  B  lu e   Pr in  t C  ro ss  -c ut  ti ng    To   im pr  ov e   en er  gy    se cu  ri ty  , a ffo  rd ab  ili ty   a nd    re  lia bi  lit y,   e nv  ir on  m en  ta l   re sp  on si  bi lit  y,  e  ffe ct  iv e   re gu  la ti  on  O th  er N  ew  B  ru ns  w ic  k Im  pl em  en te  d 20  11 1,3  00  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  po  lic y   is  a   th re  e  ye  ar  p  la n,   w it  h  a   te n   ye ar   v ie  w  a  nd  in  cl ud  es  fi  ve  k  ey  e  ne rg  y  ob  je ct  iv es  . 1 3   of  th  e  20   a ct  io ns   re la  te  d  ir ec  tly  o  r i nd  ir ec  tly  to   re du  ci ng    G  H G   e m  is si  on s.     N ew   B ru  ns w  ic k   En er  gy  E  ffi ci  en cy    Re  gu la  tio n  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng    To  im  pr ov  e  en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy    an d   en er  gy  c  on se  rv at  io n  Re gu  la to  ry ,  Ed uc  at io  n N  ew  B  ru ns  w ic  k Im  pl em  en te  d 20  05 30  0  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Effi  ci en  cy  N  ew  B  ru ns  w ic  k  is   a  C  ro w  n  C  or po  ra ti  on  A  ge nc  y  es  ta bl  is he  d  in   2 00  5.  It  s  m  an da  te  is   to  p  ro vi  de  a  dv ic  e  an  d  so  lu ti  on s t  o  he  lp  re  si de  nt s u  se  e  ne rg  y  m  or e   effi ci  en tly  , m ak  e  be  tt er   e ne  rg y   ch oi  ce s,   m an  ag e   en er  gy  e  xp en  se s a  nd  le  ss en   th e   im pa  ct  o  f e ne  rg y   us e   on  th  e  en  vi ro  nm en  t,  M  or e   sp ec  ifi ca  lly , t  he    ag en  cy ’s   m an  da te   is  to  :  –   Pr om  ot e   en er  gy  e  ffi ci  en cy   m ea  su re  s  in   th e   re si  de nt  ia l,   co m  m un  it y   an d   bu si  ne ss   s ec  to rs  ;  –   D ev  el op   a nd   d el  iv er   p ro  gr am  s a nd   in it  ia tiv  es  in   re la  ti on   to  e  ne rg  y  effi  ci en  cy ;   –  Pr  om ot  e  th  e  de  ve lo  pm en  t o f a  n  en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy  s  er vi  ce s   in du  st ry  ;  –   A ct   a s a   c en  tr al   re so  ur ce   fo r t  he  p  ro m  ot io  n  of   e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy  ; a nd  ,  –   Ra is  e  aw  ar en  es s o  f h ow   e ne  rg y   effi ci  en cy   m ea  su re  s c an   le ad   to  a   m or  e  re  lia bl  e  en  er gy   s up  pl y   fo r N  ew  B  ru ns  w ic  k.  N ew   B ru  ns w  ic k’  s  A  ir  Q  ua lit  y  Re  gu la  tio ns  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   li m  it  G  H G   e m  is si  on s   fr om   in du  st ri  al  s  ec to  rs    Re gu  la to  ry N  ew  B  ru ns  w ic  k Pl  an ne  d 20  14 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  is  s  et s t  he  c  on te  xt  fo  r a ll   in du  st ri  al  s  ec to  rs  o  pe ra  ti ng   in  th  e  pr  ov in  ce  a  nd  in  cl ud  es  a   s tr  on g   in du  st ri  al  a  pp ro  va ls   p ro  gr am   w hi  ch  g  en er  al ly   in co  rp or  at es    fa  ci lit  y  le  ve l e  m is  si on   c ap  s,  a  s w el  l a s   m on  ito ri  ng  a  nd  re  po rt  in g   pr og  ra m  s.  Yu ko  n  G  ov er  nm en  t  C  ar bo  n- N  eu tr  al ity  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   a ch  ie ve   c ar  bo n   ne ut  ra lit  y Re  gu la  to ry  Yu ko  n A  do pt  ed 20  09 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Th  e  G  ov er  nm en  t o f Y  uk on  ’s  20  09  C  lim at  e  C  ha ng  e  A  ct io  n  Pl  an  c  om m  it s t  he  Y  uk on   G ov  er nm  en t t  o  ca  p  G  H G   e m  is si  on s f  ro m   it s   in te  rn al   o pe  ra ti  on s   in    20 10  , r ed  uc e   th em   b y   20 %   b y   20 15   a nd   b ec  om e   ca rb  on  n  eu tr  al  b  y  20  20 . I  t a ls  o  co  m m  itt ed   th e   go ve  rn m  en t t  o  re  po rt   o n   th es  e  em  is si  on s t  hr ou  gh  th  e  C  lim at  e  Re  gi st  ry  a  nd  to   d ev  el op   a  c  ar bo  n  off  se t p  ol ic  y  fo  r i nt  er na  l o pe  ra ti  on s.    233  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ] N  am e   o f   M it  ig at  io n    A  ct io  n Se  ct o  r( s)    A  ff ec  te d  G H  G (s  )  A  ff ec  te d    O  b je  ct iv  e  an  d /o  r  A  ct iv  it y   A ff  ec te  d Ty  p e   o f   In st  ru m  en t  Im p  le m  en ta  ti o  n    En ti  ty St  at u  s  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n    St  ar t   D at  e  o  f  Im  p le  m en  ta ti  o n  Es ti  m at  e  o  f  M  it ig  at io  n    Im p  ac t   in    20 20  (k t   C O  2  eq  ) Table 3 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets: Mitigation Actions and Their Effects (continued)  Yu ko  n  G  ov er  nm en  t  Se  ct or   S pe  ci fic    Ta  rg et  s  C ro  ss -c  ut ti  ng To   m in  im iz  e  gr  ow th   in    ov er  al l Y  uk on   e m  is si  on s  Re gu  la to  ry Yu  ko n  A do  pt ed  20 12    N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n Bu  ild in  g  Se  ct or  –  By   2 01  6,  in  cr ea  se  th  e  av  er ag  e  en  er gy   e ffi  ci en  cy  o  f n ew   b ui  ld in  gs  c  on st  ru ct  ed  o  ut si  de  o  f W hi  te ho  rs e   by  2  5%  c  om pa  re d   to  2  01 1 s  ta nd  ar ds  –  By   2 02  0,  re  du ce   th e   em is  si on  s  in  te ns  it y   of  e  xi st  in g   bu ild  in gs   a cr  os s Y  uk on   b y   5% –    By  2  02 0,   m ee  t 2 0%   o f g  ov er  nm en  t b ui  ld in  gs ’ s  pa ce   h ea  ti ng   n ee  ds  w  it h   cl ea  n  en  er gy   s ou  rc es  Tr an  sp or  ta ti  on  S  ec to  r –    By  2  01 5,   re du  ce  e  m is  si on  s f ro  m  Y  uk on   g ov  er nm  en t l  ig ht   fl ee  t o pe  ra ti  on s   by  5  % –    By  2  01 5,   re du  ce  e  m is  si on  s  in   th e   tr an  sp or  ta ti  on  s  ec to  r b y   10 %  El ec  tr ic  it y   Se ct  or –    By  2  02 0,   re du  ce  th  e  em  is si  on  in  te ns  it y   of  o  n- gr  id  d  ie se  l p ow  er  g  en er  at io  n  by   2 0%  –   By   2 01  6,  re  du ce   o n-  gr id   e le  ct ri  ca l u  sa ge   b y   5  gi  gw at  ts  p  er  h  ou r t  hr ou  gh  d  em an  d- si  de  m  an ag  em en  t p ro  gr am  s In  du st  ri al   S ec  to r  –   By   2 01  6,  re  du ce   th e   el ec  tr ic  al  e  ne rg  y  in  te ns  it y   of  in  du st  ri al   o pe  ra ti  on s p  re se  nt  in   2 01  1 b y   15 %  –   By   2 01  4,  e  st ab  lis h   re po  rt in  g  pr  ot oc  ol s f  or  s  ta ti  on ar  y  fa  ci lit  ie s e  m itt  in g   ov er   2 .5   k t G  H G   p er   y ea  r  N un  av ut  ’s  En  er gy    St  ra te  gy C  ro ss  -c ut  ti ng  To  re  du ce   fo ss  il  fu  el    co ns  um pt  io n   O th  er N  un av  ut A  do pt  ed 20  06 N  E  Br ie  f  D  es cr  ip tio  n A  s p ar  t o f t  he  E  ne rg  y  St  ra te  gy , t  he  N  un av  ut  G  ov er  nm en  t s ta  te d   a  go  al  to   re du  ce  th  e  Te  rr ito  ry ’s   de pe  nd en  cy  o  n  im  po rt  ed  fu  el  th  ro ug  h  co  ns er  va ti  on  a  nd    de ve  lo pm  en t o  f r en  ew ab  le  e  ne rg  y  so  ur ce  s.    234  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  4.B Reporting on Progress  Total Canadian GHG emissions were 737,000 kt  CO2 eq in the base year (2005). By 2011, the latest year  of reporting, GHG emissions were 702,000 kt without  accounting for a reduction of almost 9,000 kt CO2 eq  from the Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry  (LULUCF) sector. Contributions from the LULUCF  sector are quantified for 2010 and 2011 but applied only  to the 2020 CO2 eq emissions total.   Further detail on reductions measures can be found in  Chapter 4: Policies and Measures of the 6th National  Communication Report as well as the relevant tables  within this Biennial Report.   Table 4: Reporting on Progress  Year  Total  Emissions  Excluding  LULUCF  (kt CO2   eq)  Contribution  from LULUCF  (kt CO2 eq)  Quantity of  Units from   Market  Based   Mechanisms  Under the   Convention  (number of  units and kt   CO2 eq)  Quantity  of Units   from Other  Market  Based   Mechanisms  (number of  units and kt   CO2 eq)  2005 737,000 NA  2010 701,000 22,000  2011 702,000 29,000 NA = Not applicable, numbers rounded to the nearest Mt, 2012  historical estimates are not yet available.  4.C  Estimates of Emission Reductions  and Removals and the Use of Units  from the Markets-Based Mechanisms  and Land Use, Land-use Change and  Forestry Activities  Overview  The accounting contribution by the LULUCF Sector  amounts to credits of 2,400 and 9,100 kt for 2010 and  2011, respectively.2 The difference in the net LULUCF  contribution between 2010 and 2011 is largely due to the   changing contribution from Forest Land Remaining  Forest Land. The net GHG flux from LULUCF  subcategories included in the accounting amounted to  emissions of 72,000 and 57,000 kt CO2 eq for the 2010  and 2011 inventory years, respectively.   Canada’s general approach to including  LULUCF in accounting  Canada’s approach to LULUCF accounting incorporates  the Convention categories Forest Land and Cropland,  including all land conversion to these categories  since 1970, and the conversion of Forest Land to  Wetlands and Settlements. The LULUCF subcategories  that are reported in Canada’s 2013 National GHG  Inventory submission (NIR 2013) but excluded  from the accounting are: Other Land converted to  Wetlands (Other Land converted to Flooded Lands),  Grassland conversion to Settlements (non-forest land  conversion to Settlements in the Canadian North) and  Settlements remaining Settlements (urban forests).  The notation “NI” in Table 4(a)I of Canada’s 1st Biennial  Report indicates that a LULUCF category, although  reported in the national inventory, is “not included”  in the accounting. The exclusion of these categories  results in minor differences from the National  Inventory estimates.   All of Canada’s managed land is Forest Land, Cropland,  Grassland, Wetlands or Settlements. The category  “Other Land” entirely consists in unmanaged land;  thus, its inclusion in the accounting would not be  appropriate (notation key “NA” for “not applicable”).   The notation “IE” in the last row indicates that  estimates of delayed emissions from the pool of wood  products from domestic harvest have been “included  elsewhere”, specifically in the category Forest Land  remaining Forest Land (FLFL). Additional explanations  on the FLFL and Harvested Wood Products (HWP)  categories are provided in the sections concerning  “Forest Land Remaining Forest Land” and “Harvested  Wood Products.”    235  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  For all categories except FLFL, the accounting  contribution is calculated by subtracting the 2005  (base-year) estimates from the 2010 and 2011 estimates.  For FLFL, reference level (RL) accounting is used: the  accounting contribution is calculated by subtracting  the RL value for any given year from the corresponding  inventory FLFL estimate reported. The 2010 and  2011 values for “Base year/period or reference level  value” of Table 4(a)I—74,000 and 66,000 kt CO2 eq  respectively—were generated automatically by adding  the FLFL RL value to the base year emissions of all other  categories. Because Canada uses different accounting  rules for different categories, the significance of these  numbers is unclear.  Canada’s target is formulated for the year 2020 as  opposed to a time period; for this reason, a cumulative  contribution from LULUCF is “not applicable”.   Accounting Framework in Table 4(a)I  Forest Land Remaining Forest Land  The accounting “contribution from LULUCF for  reported year” of Table 4(a)I is derived using a RL  approach. The contribution is calculated by comparing  the RL value for that year to the actual emissions and  removals that occurred in that year. The resulting  accounting contribution for 2010 is 1,200 kt CO2 eq (an  accounting debit) and, for 2011, 24,800 kt CO2 eq (an  accounting credit).   To derive the RL values Canada has followed the  same methodology as that used for the RL for Forest  Management (FM) it submitted in 2011, which was  subsequently assessed and included in the Annex  to Decision 2/CMP.7.3 Canada’s RL was based on a  projection for each year from 2010 to 2020, with the  RL calculated as the average value for the period  2013–2020. HWPs were included, with the pool starting  in 1990, and emissions estimated for historical years  and projected based on assumptions about future  harvest levels and the use of harvested wood products.  In keeping with the focus on anthropogenic emissions   and removals, Canada’s RL also excluded the impact  of natural disturbances, apart from a low, constant  background level of fire emissions expected to occur  each year.  The RL approach is an internationally accepted,  scientifically credible method of accounting for  managed forests. Canada will continue to use the RL  approach and the assumptions about future harvest  levels and the use of harvested wood products integral  to the approach, although it is no longer a party to the  Kyoto Protocol. The derivation of Canada’s RL times  series, and the specific values for 2010 and 2011 shown  in “Contribution from LULUCF for reported year”  of Table 4(a)I, is described below, and reflects the  following changes: a. Canada is now accounting for managed forests using   the UNFCCC category of FLFL rather than the activity  of FM.   b. Canada’s Copenhagen target of reducing emissions  17% below 2005 levels is in relation to 2020, not  a commitment period of 2013–2020, as under the  Kyoto Protocol. Consequently, the contribution  from managed forests in 2020 will be accounted  for on the basis of the 2020 value from the RL time  series, not the average of values for each year in the   2013–2020 period.   c. Canada has applied a technical correction process  to its RL time series for 2010 to 2020 in order to  ensure the integrity of the accounting approach,  and as a result of revisions and recalculations in its  FLFL estimates. The technical correction aims for  consistency with good practice as defined by the  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),  although the relevant guidance was not adopted yet  at the time of writing this report.   Category definition Canada has derived the values indicated in Table 4(a) I  using the UNFCCC category FLFL. This category  includes all land that was converted to forest more than  20 years ago.     236  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  The net GHG emissions and removals from FLFL  are estimated at 68,000 kt CO2 eq in 2010 and  54,000 kt CO2 eq in 2011. These values are derived using  the same data and methodologies used to produce  FLFL estimates for NIR 2013. While the historical  FLFL values in column “Net GHG emissions/removal  from LULUCF categories” are identical to estimates  in Table 7.5, Chapter 7 of NIR 2013, they are not the  same as numbers reported in the Common Reporting  Format (CRF) tables because of the treatment of  HWPs. In the CRF tables, HWP carbon is assumed  to be instantaneously oxidized at the time of harvest.  In Table 7.5 the estimates assume a pool of HWP  carbon that starts in 1990 from domestically harvested  wood and include emissions of carbon from the pool  over time.   Reference level  In column “base year/period or reference level value”  of Table 4(a)I, the 2010 value of the RL time series  is estimated at 67,000 kt CO2 eq, and for 2011, at  59,000 kt CO2 eq. These RL values are derived using the  same data and methodologies used to produce FLFL  estimates for NIR 2013,4 and differ from the RL values  Canada submitted in 2011. This is because the historical  data used in developing FLFL inventory estimates  and constructing the time series for the RL have been  revised and updated since 2011.   The updates and recalculations to the historical data  and the methodological improvements are explained  in detail in Chapter 7: Land Use, Land-use Change, and  Forestry of NIR 2013, including: a. Harvest and natural disturbance data updates: Data for   2010 and 2011 are now available and revisions to official  harvest data from 1990 onward were incorporated  in NIR 2013. The largest recalculation in NIR 2013  FLFL estimates was for the 2010 inventory year, where  official data replaced preliminary harvest estimates.  Updated wildfire data that utilized more detailed  mapping of areas affected by fires for 2009 and 2010  caused upward recalculations for these years.   b. Forest conversion updates: Updated estimates for  conversion of forests to other uses were obtained  based on digital remote sensing analysis. Forest  conversion rates and corresponding emissions  decreased for the 1990–1999 time period, while both  increased in the 2000–2009 time period. This affects  the total land area captured within the FLFL category.  c. Error corrections: Errors identified in the  implementation of various methodological changes  introduced in past NIRs were corrected, namely those  related to harvest activities. The error correction  with the largest influence on total recalculations was  related to a reduced Ontario harvest discount factor,  which affected all years prior to 2008.  Implementing these methodological changes and  corrections in the calculation of the RL time series is  required to maintain the comparability of the FLFL  estimates and the RL values, and therefore, the integrity  of the accounting approach.5 Incorporating these  changes required a technical correction to the RL time  series that Canada submitted in 2011. The technical  correction reflects the following: • Re-estimation of the projected RL time series for   2010–2020 as a result of the above-mentioned  updates to the historic data (1990–2009) and  methodological changes.  • No changes to the harvest and management  assumptions for the 2010–2020 period from the  original RL, apart from the correction of an error in  treatment of slash burning emissions in one province  in 2020.6  • No change to the assumption of no natural  disturbances used in deriving the RL in the projection  period, apart from a low, constant background level of  fire emissions (equal to 95,000 hectares).7 However,  as actual disturbance data is now available for 2010  and 2011, the impacts of disturbance in these two  years (approximately 2.3 million hectares burned by  wildfire) is now included in the RL. In this way, the  impact of these natural disturbances is excluded from  accounting because the impact is included both in  the RL values for 2010 and 2011 and in the FLFL values  for those years, and so cancels out in the accounting.    237  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  The technical correction is equal to the difference  between Canada’s original RL (from 2011) and the  updated and recalculated RL reflecting the above data  updates, methodological improvements and switch to  focussing on FLFL. For 2010, the technical correction is  estimated at 163.7 megatonnes (Mt) CO2 eq; for 2011, the  correction is 164.4 Mt CO2 eq. The size of the correction  is largely attributable to the inclusion of emissions from  natural disturbances—the known emissions for 2010 and  2011 are considerably higher than the low background  level of disturbance assumed in the RL (see below). The  technical correction is not a result of any changes in  policy assumptions for the 2010–2020 period (e.g. harvest  rates) from the original RL assumptions.  Breakdown of the technical correction (Mt CO2 eq)  2010 2011  Methodological changes 25.9 26.9  Data updates 2.9 3.1  Inclusion of actual natural disturbances 166.7 168.2  Technical correction 163.7 164.4  The technical correction is the value that must be added  to the original value from the RL time series that Canada  submitted in 2011, in order to reflect methodological changes,  data updates and actual natural disturbance impacts rather  than only a low background level of fire. Positive values  indicate the correction reduces the RL sink while negative  values indicate the correction increases the RL sink.  Exclusion of natural disturbance impacts  Natural disturbance (fire, insect infestation) impacts  are excluded from the accounting for 2010 and 2011,  as explained above. The approach Canada has used to  calculate a “background level” of natural disturbance  is explained in Canada’s 2011 RL submission. Detailed,  spatially-referenced information on the year, location,  and type of natural disturbances excluded from the  accounting is available upon request. The modelling  approach Canada uses to estimate emissions and  subsequent removals associated with natural   disturbances is described in Chapter 7, Section 7.3.1 of  NIR 2013. Canada’s National Forest Carbon Monitoring,  Accounting and Reporting System, the same system used  to provide FLFL estimates for NIR, is used to estimate the  emissions and will be used to identify any subsequent  removals from the lands affected by natural disturbances,  as well as to monitor lands affected by natural  disturbances for salvage logging or subsequent land use  change in order to account for any associated emissions.  The excluded natural disturbance impacts are “beyond  control” and “not materially influenced” by Canada, as these  natural disturbances occur each year in spite of significant  and costly efforts to manage disturbance. Canada engages  in on-going efforts to prevent, manage and control natural  disturbances to the extent practicable. For fires, efforts  occur through the Provincial and Territorial Forest Fire  Management Agencies, the Canadian Interagency Forest  Fire Centre (www.ciffc.ca), and the use of fire information  tools. A Canadian Wildland Fire Strategy (see http://www. nrcan.gc.ca/forests/fire/13157) helps guide fire management  agencies and research to better mitigate forest fires in  Canada. For insects, Canada uses risk analysis and an  integrated pest management approach under a National  Forest Pest Strategy which provides a venue for sharing  knowledge and expertise on pest status, methods, and best  practices (see http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/insects- diseases/13361). Canada also engages in efforts to rehabilitate  land that has been subject to natural disturbance, where  practicable: these efforts are governed by forest regeneration  policies that exist in each province and territory.   Cap Canada does not apply a cap in accounting for FLFL.  Land Converted to Forest Land  The accounting contribution in 2010 is 180 kt CO2 eq  and, in 2011, is 230 kt CO2 eq (both accounting debits).  The contribution is derived using a net-net approach  that compares the estimated emissions in the year of  interest to the emissions in Canada’s base year (2005).   http://www.ciffc.ca http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/fire/13157 http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/insects-diseases/13361   238  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Canada is using the UNFCCC inventory category of Land  Converted to Forest Land (LFL), noting that net removals  from LFL that are more than 20 years old are captured  under FLFL. In any given year, LFL always consists of forest  that existed for less than 20 years; as such, it differs from  the activity of Afforestation under the Kyoto Protocol,  which includes all Forest Land created since 1990.  Historical estimates for LFL and their associated  removals are the same as those reported in the CRF table  of the NIR 2013. For 2010, reported LFL net removals are  estimated at 740 kt CO2 eq; for 2011, 700 kt CO2 eq.  The base year (2005) value for LFL is the same as that  reported in Canada’s NIR 2013.  Cropland   The accounting contribution of the Cropland  category for 2010 is 23,500 kt CO2 eq and, for 2011,  23,900 kt CO2 eq (both accounting credits). The  contribution is calculated by subtracting the net  2005 GHG flux from the values for 2010 and 2011.   The category definitions and the methodologies used  to derive the estimates for 2005, 2010 and 2011 are  described in NIR 2013. The estimates in the 2nd and  3rd columns of Table 4(a)I are identical to those in the  Common Reporting Format tables in NIR 2013 for the  corresponding categories and years.   Forest Land converted to Other Land categories The categories “Wetlands” and “Settlements” of  Table 4(a)I include only emissions from the conversion  of Forest Land. Forest conversion to Wetlands  contributes credits of 490 and 650 kt CO2 eq in 2010  and 2011 respectively. Meanwhile, Forest conversion to  Settlements results in a debit of 150 and a small credit  of 12 kt CO2 eq for 2010 and 2011, respectively. These  contributions are derived by subtracting the emissions  in Canada’s base year (2005) from the estimated  emissions in the year of interest.  The category definitions and the methodologies used to  derive the estimates for 2005, 2010 and 2011 are described  in NIR 2013 (Table 7.1 and Section 7.8). The estimates  in “Net GHG emissions/removals from LULUCF  categories” and “Base year/period or reference level  value” columns of Table 4(a)I are identical to those in the  Common Reporting Format tables in NIR 2013 for the  corresponding categories and years. As in NIR 2013, all  carbon stored in forest products produced in the course  of forest conversion is deemed an immediate emission.  Harvested Wood Products  There are significant temporal inaccuracies resulting  from a default assumption that all carbon transferred  out of forests in wood commodities is emitted  immediately. To improve the temporal accuracy of  estimates, Canada has developed a country specific  model, the Carbon Budget Model Framework for  Harvest Wood Products (CBM-FHWP) to monitor  and quantify the fate of carbon from domestic harvest,  according to the general framework of the production  approach (IPCC 2006). For the purpose of this report,  in Table 4(a)I the delayed emissions from the Harvested  Wood Product pool are included in the FLFL category  for the 2010 and 2011 inventory year estimates and the  corresponding FLFL reference level values.   In general, the incorporation of the long term carbon  storage in HWP changes the temporal pattern of  emissions as carbon storage in the HWP pool delays  emissions. A comparison of the estimates of net flux  from FLFL using both the default instantaneous  oxidation approach (IPCC 2003) and the incorporation of  HWP using the CBM-FHWP is presented in Table 7-5 of  the NIR 2013. More information on Canada’s application  of the production approach using the CBM-FHWP is  provided in section 7.3.1.1 and A3.4.7 of NIR 2013.    239  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 4(a) I Progress in Achieving the Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets—Further information on mitigation actions  relevant to the contribution of the Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Sector in 2010   Net GHG  Emissions/ Removals   from LULUCF  Categories   (kt CO2 eq)  Base Year/Period  or Reference  Level Value   (kt CO2 eq)   Contribution  from LULUCF for  Reported Year    (kt CO2 eq)  Cumulative  Contribution  from LULUCF  (kt CO2 eq)   Accounting  Approach  Total LULUCF 71,788 74,189 22,401 NA  A. Forest land 67,300 65,874 1,426  Forest land remaining forest land 68,044 66,802 1,242 2010–RL2010  Land converted to forest land 2744 2928 184 2010–2005 BY  Other (please specify)  B. Cropland 27,584 24,100 23,484 2010–2005 BY  Cropland remaining cropland 212,879 210,127 22,752  Land converted to cropland 5,296 6,027 2732  Other (please specify)  C. Grassland NI NI NI NI  Grassland remaining grassland  Land converted to grassland  Other (please specify)  D. Wetlands 2,559 3,053 2494 2010–2005 BY  Wetlands remaining wetlands 1,978 2,164 2185  Land converted to wetlands 580 889 2308  Other (please specify)  E. Settlements 9,514 9,363 151  Settlements remaining settlements NI NI NI NI  Land converted to settlements 9,514 9,363 151 2010–2005 BY  Other (please specify)  F. Other land NA NA NA NA  Other land remaining other land  Land converted to other land NA NA NA NA  Other   G. Other (please specify)  Harvested wood products IE IE IE Abbreviations: LULUCF = Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry, RL = Reference level, BY = Base year, IE = Included elsewhere, NA = Not  applicable, NI = Not included    240  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 4(a) I Progress in Achieving the Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets—Further information on mitigation actions  relevant to the contribution of the Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Sector in 2011   Net GHG  Emissions/ Removals   from LULUCF  Categories   (kt CO2 eq)  Base Year/Period  or Reference  Level Value   (kt CO2 eq)   Contribution  from LULUCF for  Reported Year    (kt CO2 eq)  Cumulative  Contribution  from LULUCF  (kt CO2 eq)   Accounting  Approach  Total LULUCF 57,077 66,173 29,096 NA  A. Forest land 53,296 57,858 24,562  Forest land remaining forest land 53,994 58,786 24,792 2011–RL2011 Land converted to forest land 2697 2928 230 2011–2005 BY  Other (please specify)  B. Cropland 27,974 24,100 23,873 2011–2005 BY  Cropland remaining cropland 213,240 210,127 23,113  Land converted to cropland 5,267 6,027 2761  Other (please specify)  C. Grassland NI NI NI NI  Grassland remaining grassland  Land converted to grassland  Other (please specify)  D. Wetlands 2,403 3,053 2649 2011–2005 BY  Wetlands remaining wetlands 1,935 2,164 2229  Land converted to wetlands 468 889 2420  Other (please specify)  E. Settlements 9,351 9,363 212  Settlements remaining settlements NI NI NI NI  Land converted to settlements 9,351 9,363 212 2011–2005 BY  Other (please specify)  F. Other land NA NA NA NA  Other land remaining other land  Land converted to other land NA NA NA NA  Other   G. Other (please specify) IE IE IE Harvested wood products IE IE IE  Abbreviations: LULUCF = Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry, RL = Reference level, BY = Base year, IE = Included elsewhere, NA = Not  applicable, NI = Not included    241  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Section 5 Projections  Between 2005 and 2011, real gross domestic product  (GDP) grew at an annual average rate of 1.4%,  significantly less than the historical and projected  trends due to the economic downturn of 2008. This  historical data is available from Statistics Canada’s  National Income and Expenditure Accounts8 (and  CANSIM table 380-0002).9 Stronger growth trends are  assumed after 2011. Between 2011 and 2020, real GDP  is expected to increase by 2.1% on average each year.  The economic projections to the year 2018 are based on  private sector projections from Finance Canada’s Private  Sector Survey, June 2013.   The outer years are based on Finance Canada’s longer- term fiscal projections included in their Labour  Productivity Growth is based on Human Resources and  Skills Development Canada’s employment projections.   The outer years (2018–2030) are based on the  Department of Finance’s longer-term fiscal projections  included in their Economic and Fiscal Implications of  an Aging Population report.10 Forecasts of major energy  supply projects and prices forecasts are taken from the  National Energy Board’s preliminary 2013 projections.  Population growth in Canada is assumed to slow from  its historical trajectory out to 2030.11 The Canadian  labour force follows an assumed path of diminishing  growth, slowing from 17% overall growth in the last  decade (2000–2010), to 9% between 2010 and 2020,  and to 5% between 2020 and 2030. According to  Statistics Canada12 and Finance Canada,13 the decline  in the labour participation rate is mostly attributable  to the growing number of retirees (the “Baby Boomer”  generation), increasing life expectancy, and a decline in  fertility rates below the replacement level of 2.1 children  per woman. Population growth rate assumptions use  data provided by Statistics Canada.  Oil and natural gas price and production forecasts were  provided by the National Energy Board (preliminary  projections 2013).   For further detail on Macroeconomic  assumptions, please see Chapter 5, Annex I:  Baseline Data and Assumptions, in Canada’s 6th  National Communication.     242  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 5 Summary of Key Variables and Assumptions Used in the Projections Analysis   Key Underlying Assumptions  Historical Projected  1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2011 2015 2020 2025 2030  Oil Price (C$2010/bbl) $38.63 $25.75 $39.04 $64.38 $81.87 $97.73 $97.86 $105.42 $108.09 $110.82   Natural Gas Price (C$2010/GJ) $2.71 $2.49 $5.85 $10.45 $4.77 $4.28 $4.46 $5.29 $5.90 $6.34   Real GDP Chain-Weighted ($1997)* 0.2% 2.8% 5.2% 2.9% 3.2% 2.5% 2.6% 1.6% 1.5% 1.7%  Real GDP Per Capita ($1997)* 21.3% 1.8% 4.3% 2.0% 2.0% 1.3% 1.5% 0.6% 0.6% 0.9%  Consumer Price Index (1992=100)* 4.8% 2.2% 2.7% 2.2% 1.8% 2.9% 2.0% 2.2% 2.0% 2.1%  Population* 1.5% 1.0% 0.9% 1.0% 1.2% 1.2% 1.1% 1.0% 0.9% 0.8%  Population of Driving Age  (18–75)*  1.5% 1.2% 1.2% 1.2% 1.4% 1.3% 1.1% 0.7% 0.6% 0.6%  Labour Force* 1.3% 0.8% 1.7% 0.8% 1.1% 0.9% 1.0% 0.7% 0.5% 0.5% * Annual growth rate  Abbreviations: C$ = Canadian dollars, bbl = Barrels, GJ = Gigajoule, GDP = Gross domestic product    243  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 6(a) Information on Updated Greenhouse Gas Projections Under a ‘With Measures’ Scenario  Sector  Historical Projected  Base year 1990  (kt CO2 eq) 1995  (kt CO2 eq) 2000  (kt CO2 eq) 2005  (kt CO2 eq) 2010  (kt CO2 eq) 2011  (kt CO2 eq) 2020  (kt CO2 eq) 2030  (kt CO2 eq)  Oil and Gas 2005 101,000 124,000 150,000 162,000 164,000 163,000 200,000 241,000  Electricity 2005 94,000 98,000 129,000 121,000 99,000 90,000 82,000 59,000  Transportation 2005 128,000 137,000 155,000 168,000 167,000 170,000 176,000 179,000  Emissions- Intensive &  Trade-Exposed  Industries  2005 93,000 94,000 85,000 87,000 75,000 78,000 90,000 101,000  Buildings 2005 70,000 76,000 82,000 84,000 79,000 84,000 95,000 110,000  Agriculture 2005 54,000 61,000 66,000 68,000 69,000 68,000 69,000 70,000  Waste &  Others  2005 50,000 49,000 51,000 49,000 48,000 49,000 50,000 55,000  LULUCF  Emissionsa  -158,000 130,000 -120,000 -7,000 72,000 57,000 -128,000 -142,000  Gas  CO 2  emissions   including net  CO  2  from   LULUCF  2005 296,000 590,000 443,000 563,000 607,000 594,000 484,000 512,000   CO 2  emissions   excluding  net CO  2  from   LULUCF  2005 459,000 491,000 565,000 579,000 554,000 555,000 614,000 656,000   CH 4  emissions   including CH 4    from LULUCF  2005 75,000 105,000 96,000 104,000 102,000 102,000 87,000 88,000   CH 4  emissions   excluding CH 4    from LULUCF  2005 72,000 86,000 94,000 98,000 90,000 91,000 85,000 86,000   N 2 O emissions   including N 2 O   from LULUCF  2005 51,000 66,000 50,000 54,000 54,000 53,000 50,000 52,000   N 2 O emissions   excluding N 2 O   from LULUCF  2005 49,000 54,000 49,000 50,000 47,000 46,000 49,000 51,000   HFCs 2005 800 500 3,000 5,000 7,000 8,000 13,000 19,000   PFCs 2005 7,000 6,000 4,000 3,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000   SF 6  2005 3,000 2,000 3,000 2,000 400 400 300 400   Totals a While  the historical Forest Land remaining Forest Land (FLFL) values are consistent with information reported in Canada’s National   Inventory Report (NIR) 2013, they are not the same as numbers reported in the Common Reporting Format (CRF) tables of NIR2013 because  of the treatment of harvested wood products (HWPs). In the CRF tables, HWP carbon is assumed to be instantaneously oxidized at the  time of harvest. In contrast, all estimates shown in this Table assume a pool of HWP starting in 1990 from domestically harvested wood  and include emissions of carbon from the pool over time. The historical FLFL numbers here correspond to numbers shown in Table 7.5 of  NIR 2013. Values for 2012 onward use provincial/territorial projections for harvest and assume no natural disturbance impacts except a low  background level of fire emissions.    244  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Sector  Historical    Projected  Base year 1990  (kt CO2 eq) 1995  (kt CO2 eq) 2000  (kt CO2 eq) 2005  (kt CO2 eq) 2010  (kt CO2 eq) 2011  (kt CO2 eq) 2020  (kt CO2 eq) 2030  (kt CO2 eq)  Table 6(a) Information on Updated Greenhouse Gas Projections Under a ‘With Measures’ Scenario (continued)  Total with  LULUCF   433,000 769,000 598,000 730,000 773,000 759,000 635,000 673,000  Total without  LULUCF  591,000 639,000 718,000 737,000 701,000 702,000 762,000 815,000  LULUCF  Contribution  228,000 NE   Total with  LULUCF  Contribution  591,000 639,000 718,000 737,000 701,000 702,000 734,000 NE  Abbreviations: kt CO2 eq = Kilotonne of carbon dioxide equivalent, LULUCF = Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry, NE = Not estimated;  Totals may not add up due to rounding. Table 6(a) Notes:  Canadian emission projections point to significant progress that has already been achieved through actions taken by consumers, businesses  and governments. Under the “with current measures” scenario, Canada’s GHG emissions in 2020 are projected to be 734 megatonnes (Mt).  This is 128 Mt less than under a scenario where consumers, businesses and governments had taken no action to reduce emissions (the “without  measures” scenario). The projections indicate that further efforts will be required in order to meet the Copenhagen target. Further actions by  federal, provincial and territorial governments, as well as actions by individual Canadians and businesses, will contribute to the additional  reductions required for Canada to meet its commitments under the Copenhagen Accord. The Government of Canada supports the efforts of  provinces and territories as well as businesses and individuals to lower their respective emissions. Due to limitations with the Common Tabular Format (CTF) software, there are some inconstancies in Table 6(a) and 6(b) between the  information presented in this report and in the CTF. The information presented here is considered to be an accurate representation of data.      245  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 6(b) Information on Updated Greenhouse Gas Projections Under a ‘Without Measures’ Scenario  Historical Projected  Base  Year  1990 (kt CO2 eq)  1995 (kt CO2 eq)  2000 (kt CO2 eq)  2005 (kt CO2 eq)  2010 (kt CO2 eq)  2011 (kt CO2 eq)  2020 (kt CO2 eq)  2030 (kt CO2 eq)  Gas  CO 2  emissions   including net  CO  2  from   LULUCF  2005 NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE  CO 2  emissions   excluding  net CO  2  from   LULUCF  2005 459,000 491,000 565,000 579,000 584,000 577,000 702,000 NE  CH 4  emissions   including CH 4    from LULUCF  2005 NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE  CH 4  emissions   excluding CH 4    from LULUCF  2005 72,000 86,000 94,000 98,000 93,000 93,000 95,000 NE  N 2 O emissions   including N 2 O   from LULUCF  2005 NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE  N 2 O emissions   excluding N 2 O   from LULUCF  2005 49,000 53,700 49,000 50,000 49,000 47,000 50,000 NE  HFCs 2005 800 500 3,000 5,000 7,000 8,000 13,000 NE  PFCs 2005 7,000 5,500 4,000 3,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 NE  SF 6  2005 3,000 2,000 3,000 2,000 500 500 400 NE  Totals  Total with  LULUCF  NE NE NE NE NE NE NE NE  Total without  LULUCF  591,000 639,000 718,000 737,000 735,000 727,000 862,000 NE  Abbreviations: kt CO2 eq = Kilotonne of carbon dioxide equivalent, LULUCF = Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry, NE = Not estimated;  Totals may not add up due to rounding.    246  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 6 (b) Notes:  Progress in reducing GHG emissions is measured  against a “without measures” scenario. The “without  measures” scenario is constructed by beginning the  model’s forecasting mode in 2006 configured to  exclude any government policies implemented after  2005. Historical macroeconomic data is used between  2006 and 2011 and wholesale energy prices throughout  the entire projection period are kept the same as those  used in the reference scenario. Changes in electric  generation sector energy use resulting from non-policy  driven factors, including nuclear refurbishment or  historical weather-related fluctuations in hydroelectric  dam capacities are included in the “without measures”  scenario. Oil sands emissions are derived using  2005 emissions intensities. Agriculture emissions  from livestock and crop production are maintained  at reference scenario levels throughout the entire  projection period.  The scenario that includes current measures is then  compared against this baseline scenario. In order to   be included in the “with current measures” scenario,  the measure must be concrete or legislated, financially  backed, and specific enough to add to the modeling  platform as of May 2013.  The analysis indicates that if consumers, businesses  and governments had taken no action to reduce GHG  emissions after 2005, emissions in 2020 would have  risen to 862 Mt. This is in comparison to the “with  current measures” scenario where emissions in 2020  are expected to be 734 Mt (with the contribution from  LULUCF). This means that, taken together, actions  by consumers, businesses, and federal, provincial and  territorial governments have decreased emissions  substantially from the “without measures” scenario.  For further information on the “without measures”  scenario, including methodologies, please see the  “Assessment of Aggregate Effect of Policies and  Measures” Section 5.6 of Chapter 5 of Canada’s 6th  National Communication Report.   Figure 5.1 Scenarios of Canadian emissions to 2020 (Mt CO 2  eq)    247  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Section 6  Provisions of Financial, Technological and Capacity  Building Support to Developing Country Parties   6.A Finance  Developed country parties are required to report on  the financial resources they have provided over the last  two years in Tables 7, 7.A, and 7.B. These tables provide  accurate and transparent information on the type of  climate support provided by Canada to developing  countries and multilateral agencies. In order to give a  full account of Canada’s contributions to international  climate finance since our last National Communication  and the fast-start financing period, Canada is providing  information for the past four fiscal years, 2009/10,  2010/11, 2011/12, 2012/13.   Table 7 gives a summary of Canada’s climate finance  support. Table 7.A provides information on Canada’s  contributions through multilateral channels and  Table 7.B outlines information on Canada’s support to  bilateral programs.    Funds in the following tables are reported in Canadian  dollars in millions. Currency exchange rates are  based on data from the Organization for Economic  Co-operation Development (OECD), Development  Assistance Committee (DAC).   For more information on Canada’s financial support  to climate change action, please consult Canada’s  6th National Communications to the United Nations  Framework Convention Climate (UNFCCC) and  Canada’s May 2013 Fast-Start Financing Submission to  the UNFCCC.  You can also consult Canada’s Climate Finance website  at: http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/finance/default. aspx?lang=en-CA  Effectively Addressing Developing Countries Needs Through its climate finance, Canada provided extensive  support to efforts that effectively address climate   Figure 7.1 Canadian Climate Finance Programming for Fiscal Years  2009–2010 to 2012–2013 (Not including contributions to the Global  Environment Facility)  http://www.climatechange.gc.ca/finance/default.aspx?lang=en-CA   248  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  change in developing countries, delivered through a  wide range of multilateral, bilateral and partnership  channels. Canada responded to priorities identified  by bilateral partners in the context of ongoing  and longstanding development partnerships that  include addressing climate change issues as part of  development objectives set by our partners.   Over the last four fiscal years (2009–2010 to   2012–2013), Canada provided over $1.54 billion14 to  support climate change projects through a variety of  channels and programs (see figure 6.1). This amount  includes $1.2 billion in fast-start financing delivered  over the last three fiscal years (2010–2011 to 2012–2013),  as well as $350 million15 of international assistance  projects with a direct or significant focus on climate  change. Canada also provided over $204 million to  support the Global Environment Facility (GEF) in  the last four years, of which approximately a quarter  came from Canada’s fast-start financing. Detailed  information on Canada’s support to the GEF can be  found in table 7A of this Biennial Report.  New and additional resources Canada’s provision and mobilization of financial  support is in line with its obligation under the UNFCCC  to provide new and additional resources as part of its  overall support to help developing countries implement  actions to address climate change.   Canada’s fast-start financing effort is the prime example  of Canadian support that is fully new and additional.  Canada provided $1.2 billion in support to projects that  were above and beyond what was planned prior to the  Copenhagen Accord.   Over the past four years, Canada also responded to  priorities identified by bilateral partners in the context  of ongoing and longstanding development partnerships  that include addressing climate change issues as part of  objectives set by its partners. For this support, it is not  possible to determine a simple definition under which  this programming is new and additional or not, nor is   it necessary to do so given the importance of seeking  to mainstream climate change results in country- driven programming.   Mobilising Investments The majority of financing for climate change will come  from private sector sources, scaled up climate-focused  investment will be a key part of scaled up action on  climate change. There are a number of potential  barriers to facilitating sufficient private investment,  and therefore Canada is actively contributing to  international efforts to better understand opportunities  for mobilizing private investment.   A large portion of Canada’s climate financing over  the reporting period was provided to multilateral  organizations such as the International Finance  Corporation, the Inter- American Development Bank  and the Asian Development Bank for the establishment  of Canadian facilities targeting the mobilization of  climate friendly private-sector investment in developing  countries. The first two facilities, at the international  Finance Corporation and Inter-American Development  Bank, are fully operational and are showing results on  the ground.   Projects supported by these Canadian facilities are  expected to generate significant environmental benefits  and contributed to leveraging investment from the  public and private sectors. As of September 2013, out  of the $684 million provided to multilateral financial  institutions through our fast-start financing, direct  project investments using approximately $110 million  of the Canadian funding provided has been approved,  helping to mobilize over $1.050 billion of public and  private sector investment and contributing to achieving  annual GHG emission reductions of over 675 kilotonnes  carbon dioxide equivalent (Kt CO2 eq). These facilities  achieve an incremental benefit by providing support  to projects with measurable, positive climate impacts  that require some financing on concessional terms to  be viable.     249  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  table 7 provision of public Financial support–summary information in 2009–10  2009–10  allocation  Channels  domestic Currency (Cad Millions) Usd* (Millions)  Core/ General  Climate specific  Core/ General  Climate specific  Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other  Multilateral climate  change fund  33.94 0 5.50  0 0 38.73 0 6.28  0  0  Multilateral financial  intuitions   0 0 15.00 0 0 0 0 17.12 0 0  specialized United  nations bodies  0 0 38.50 0 0 0 0 43.93 0 0  total contributions  through bilateral,  regional and other  channels  0 12.43 15.17 1.41 0 0  14.18  17.31 1.61  0  Total 33.94 12.43 74.17 1.41 0 38.73  14.18 84.64 1.61  0 Abbreviations: CAD = Canadian dollars, USD = United States dollars * Based on OECD/DAC Exchange Rates for fiscal year (FY) 2009/10: 1.141  table 7 provision of public Financial support–summary information in 2010–11  2010–11  allocation  Channels  domestic Currency (Cad millions) Usd (millions)*  Core/ General  Climate specific  Core/ General  Climate specific  Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other  Multilateral climate  change fund  58.58 0 20.00 1.00  0  60.35 0 20.60 1.03 0  Multilateral financial  institutions   0 44.50 34.00 291.55  0 0 45.84 35.03 300.35 0  specialized United  nations bodies  0 0 55.55 0 0 0 0 57.23 0 0  total contributions  through bilateral,  regional and other  channels   0 1.23 53.76 6.20  0 0  1.27 55.38 6.39 0   Total 58.58 45.73 163.31 298.75 0 60.35 47.11 168.24 307.77 0  * Based on OECD/DAC Exchange Rates for FY 2010/11: 1.0302    250  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  table 7 provision of public Financial support–summary information in 2011–12  2011–12  allocation Channels  domestic Currency (Cad millions) Usd (millions)*  Core/ General  Climate specific  Core/ General  Climate specific  Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other  Multilateral climate  change fund  54.75 0.60 0 0.65 0  54.15 0.59 0 0.64 0  Multilateral financial  institutions   0 100.00 10.00 225.00 0  0  98.91 9.89 222.55 0  specialized United  nations bodies  0 0 41.35 0 0 0 0 40.90 0 0  total contributions  through bilateral,  regional and other  channels   0 2.39 67.90 2.86 0  0 2.37 67.15 2.83  0  Total  54.75 102.99 119.25 228.51 0 54.15 101.87 117.94 226.02 0 * Based on OECD/DAC Exchange Rates for FY 2011/12: 0.9891   table 7 provision of public Financial support–summary information in 2012–13  2012–13  allocation Channels  domestic Currency (Cad millions) Usd (millions)*  Core/ General  Climate specific  Core/ General  Climate specific  Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other Mitigation adaptation Cross-  Cutting other  Multilateral climate  change fund  57.29 0 0.99 2.30  0 56.67 0 0.97 2.28 0  Multilateral financial  institutions   0 100 0 197.17 0  0 98.91 0 195.02 0  specialized United  nations bodies   0 15.50 29.14 2.50  0  0 15.36 28.28 2.47 0  total contributions  through bilateral,  regional and other  channels   0 9.16 81.43 5.02  0  0 9.07 80.50 4.97 0  Total  57.29 124.66 111.56 206.99 0  56.67 123.34 110.34 204.74 0 * Based on OECD/DAC Exchange Rates for FY 2012/13: 0.9891  New and additional: Canada’s fast-start financing effort is the prime example of Canadian support that is fully  new and additional. Canada provided $1.2 billion in support to projects that were above and beyond what was  planned prior to the Copenhagen Accord.   Over the past four years, Canada also responded to priorities identified by bilateral partners in the context of  ongoing and longstanding development partnerships that include addressing climate change issues as part of  objectives set by its partners. For this support, it is not possible to determine a simple definition under which  this programming is new and additional or not, nor is it necessary to do so given the importance of seeking to  mainstream climate change results in country-driven programming.     251  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 7(a) Provision of Public Financial Support–Contribution through Multilateral Channels 2009-10  2009–2010  Multilateral Organization  Total Amount (millions)  Status Funding  Sourcea  Financial  Instrument  Type of  Support Sector  Core/ General  Climate Specific  CAD USD CAD USD  Multilateral Climate Change Fund  Global Environment Facility† 33.94 38.73 0 0 Provided ODA Grant Cross-cutting Cross-cutting  Consultative Group on International  Agricultural Research—Research  Program on Climate Change,  Agriculture and Food Security†  0 0 5.50 6.28 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  Subtotal 33.94 38.73 5.50 6.28  Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banksb  Strategic Climate Fund—Pilot Program  for Climate Resilience†  0 0 15.00 17.12 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting  Specialized United Nations bodies  World Food Programme—Food for  Asset Building—Ethiopia*  0 0 3.00 3.42 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  World Food Programme—Productive  Safety Net Programme—Ethiopia*  0 0 35.50 40.51 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  Subtotal 0 0 38.50 43.93  Total 33.94 38.73 59.00 67.33 † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’ Abbreviations: ODA = Official development assistance, OOF = Other official flows; USD= United States dollars; CAD = Canadian dollars   a Refers to “type of funding” in Canada. For more information on Canada’s International Assistance, please consult the Government of Canada’s  Statistical Report on International Assistance: http://www.acdi-cida.gc.ca/acdi-cida/acdi-cida.nsf/eng/JUD-4128122-G4W   b While it is expected that contributions made to multilateral banks will mostly flow to mitigation projects, Canadian support to the  International Finance Corporation, the Inter-American Development Bank, and the Asia Development Bank have been reported as supporting  “cross-cutting” activities because both adaptation and mitigation projects can receive funding from these facilities. Please refer to Canada’s  6th National Communications to the UNFCCC for a more detailed estimation of the expected sectorial breakdown of these contributions and  Canadian climate finance overall. More information can also be found on www.climatechange.gc.ca, which should be consulted for the latest  information.    252  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 7(a) Provision of Public Financial Support–Contribution through Multilateral Channels 2010-11  2010–2011  Multilateral Organization  Total Amount (millions)  Status Funding  Source  Financial  Instrument  Type of  Support Sector  Core/ General Climate Specific  CAD USD CAD USD  Multilateral Climate Change Fund  Global Environment Facility† 58.58 60.35 0 0 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Cross- cutting  Least Developed Countries Fund† 0 0 20.00 20.60 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  UNFCCC Trust Fund for Participation† 0 0 1.00 1.03 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Cross- cutting  Subtotal 58.58 60.35 21.00 21.63  Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banksa  BioCarbon Fund† 0 0 4.50 4.64 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Agriculture  Forest Carbon Partnership Facility— Readiness Fund†  0 0 40.00 41.21 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Forests  International Finance Corporation— Canada Climate Change Program†  0 0 271.00 279.18 Provided ODA Concessional Cross- cutting  Energy  International Finance Corporation— Canada Climate Change Program†  0 0 5.83 6.01 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Energy  International Finance Corporation— Catalyst Fund†  0 0 14.72 15.17 Provided OOF Concessional Cross- cutting  Energy  World Bank—Productive Safety Net  Programme—Ethiopia*  0 0 34.00 35.03 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  Subtotal 0 0 370.05 381.24  Specialized United Nations bodies  World Food Programme—MERET— Ethiopia†  0 0 15.00 15.45 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  World Food Programme—Productive  Safety Net Programme—Ethiopia*  0 0 40.55 41.77 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  Subtotal 0 0 55.55 57.22  Total 58.58 60.35 446.6 460.09 † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’    253  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  table 7(a) provision of public Financial support–Contribution through Multilateral Channels 2011–12  2011–2012  Multilateral organization  total amount (millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector  Core/ General  Climate  specific  Cad Usd Cad Usd  Multilateral Climate Change Fund Global environment Facility† 54.75  54.15  0  0 Provided  ODA  Grant Cross-  cutting Cross- cutting  Global alliance for Clean Cookstoves†  0  0 0.60  0.59 Provided  ODA  Grant Mitigation Cross- cutting   UnFCCC trust Fund for supplementary  activities†   0  0 0.65  0.64 Provided  ODA  Grant Cross- cutting  Cross- cutting  Subtotal 54.75 54.15 1.25 1.23  Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banks Caribbean development Bank—disaster  risk Management†   0  0 10.00  9.89 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Clean investment Fund—Clean  technology Fund†   0  0 100.00  98.91 Provided ODA Concessional Mitigation Energy  Congo Basin Forest Fund†  0  0 20.00 19.78 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forestry  Forest Carbon partnership Facility—  Carbon Fund†   0  0 5.00  4.95 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forestry  inter-american development Bank— Canadian Climate Fund for the private  sector in the americas†   0  0 200.00  197.82 Provided ODA Concessional Cross- cutting  Cross- cutting  Subtotal 0 0 335.00 331.35  Specialized United Nations bodies international Fund for agricultural  development†   0  0 19.85 19.63 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture   World Food programme—Cambodia*  0  0 4.00 3.96 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture   World Food programme—productive  safety net programme—ethiopia*   0  0 17.50 17.31 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture   Subtotal 0 0 41.35 40.09  Total 54.75 54.15 377.60 373.48 † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’    254  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  table 7(a) provision of public Financial support–Contribution through Multilateral Channels 2012–13  2012–2013  Multilateral organization  total amount (millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector  Core/ General  Climate  specific  Cad Usd Cad Usd  Multilateral Climate Change Fund Global environment Facility† 57.29 56.67  0  0 Provided ODA Grant Cross-  cutting Cross- cutting  Global alliance for Clean Cookstoves†  0  0 1.30  1.29 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting   Cross- cutting  international Center for tropical  agriculture—adaptation research  Fellowship†  0 0 0.50 0.49 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  international network for Bamboo and  rattan—Climate resilience in ethiopia†   0 0 0.49 0.48 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  UnFCCC trust Fund for supplementary  activities†   0  0 1.00 0.99 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Cross- cutting  Subtotal 57.29 56.67 3.29 3.25  Multilateral financial institutions, including regional development banks international Finance Corporation— Catalyst Fund†   0  0 60.28 59.62 Provided OOF Concessional Cross- cutting  Energy  asian development Bank—Canadian  Climate Fund for the private sector in  asia†   0  0 82.39  81.49 Provided ODA Concessional Cross- cutting  Energy  inter-american development Bank— Canadian Climate Fund for the private  sector in the americas†   0  0 50.00  49.46 Provided ODA Concessional Cross- cutting  Energy  Caribbean development Bank—disaster  risk Management†  0 0 4.50 4.45 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Clean investment Fund—Clean  technology Fund†   0  0 100.00  98.91 Provided ODA Concessional Mitigation Energy  Subtotal 0 0 297.17 293.93  Specialized United Nations Bodies United nations development  programme—Canadian Climate  adaptation Facility†   0  0 16.50  16.32 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  United nations development  programme—Mexico†  0 0 2.50 2.47 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Cross- cutting  United nations environment  programme—Climate and Clean air  Coalition†  0  0  13.00  12.89 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Cross- cutting  United nations environment  programme—Climate technology  Center and network†  0 0 2.50 2.47 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Cross- cutting  World Meteorological organization— Haiti Weather services and Global  Framework for Climate services†  0 0 12.64 12.50 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Subtotal 0 0 47.14 46.65  Total 57.29 56.67 347.60 343.82 † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’    255  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2009–10  2009–2010  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  africa* 1.41 1.61 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forests Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through the  International Model Forest  Network.  africa† 0.01 0.01 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Support for climate change  adaptation and capacity building in  Western Africa.  africa, asia, latin  america and the  Caribbean, and  the Middle east*   0.18 0.21  Provided  ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support to the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  africa, asia† 7.75 8.84  Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Support to the International  Development Research Centre  for  adaptation and climate resilience  research.   asia# 11.80 13.46 Provided OOF Grant Mitigation Energy Support for clean energy and  mitigation projects through the  Asia Pacific Partnership.  Bolivia* 0.25 0.29 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water and  sanitation  Support to the University du  Québec à Montréal for building  capacities in community-based eco- development and environmental  health in connection with water  and sanitation.  Caribbean  countries*   1.28 1.46 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Supporting the implementation  of the CARICOM’s disaster risk  management framework, including  the improvement of the capacities  of national governments and local  communities to respond to and  manage natural disasters.   Costa rica,  dominican  republic,  Honduras*  0.15 0.17 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Support to the Canadian Urban  Institute’s International Urban  Partnerships Program for  advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions, consistent  with the countries’ national  development agendas.  Haiti* 2.03 2.32 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed  in the border zone between Haiti  and the Dominican Republic.  Honduras* 0.17 0.19 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Enhancing food security  through improved agricultural  productivity, diversity and the  promotion of sustainable natural  resource management practices.     256  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2009–2010  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2009–10 (continued)  indonesia* 0.50 0.57 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Coastal zone  management  Enhancing the livelihood security  and well-being of vulnerable  coastal communities on the west  coast of South Sulawesi.   Jamaica, ethiopia,  philippines*  0.23 0.26 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions, consistent with the  countries’ national development  agendas.   latin america* 0.50 0.57 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Cross-cutting Support to the Latin American  Energy Organization.  nigeria† 1.52  1.73 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Supporting effective climate  change governance.  peru* 0.10 0.11 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Supporting the development of  sustainable management policies  and programs.   philippines† 1.00  1.14 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross-cutting Support the improvement of  enabling policies and strategic  environment for disaster risk  reduction.  senegal, south  africa, tanzania*  0.13 0.15 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Transport Increasing the capacity of local  authorities and their stakeholders  to develop integrated long-term  sustainability plans.  † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’ # Other climate finance excluding official development assistance ODA = Official development assistance, OOF = Other official flows; USD = United States dollars; CAD = Canadian dollars     257  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2010–11  2010–2011  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  africa* 1.75 1.80 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forests Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through  the International Model  Forest Network.  africa† 1.25 1.21 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  African Adaptation Research  Centers Program support  (launch costs, communications,  research information services  to partners, institutional risk  assessments, economic analysis  training, adaptation finance  consultancy).  africa* 0.06 0.06 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support for climate change  adaptation and capacity  building in Western Africa.  africa, asia† 8.28 8.53 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the International  Development Research Centre  for adaptation and climate  resilience research.  africa, asia, latin  america and the  Caribbean, and the  Middle east*   7.04 7.25 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  asia#  1.20 1.24 Provided OOF Grant Mitigation Energy Support for clean energy and  mitigation projects through the  Asia Pacific Partnership.  Benin† 0.78  0.80 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the “Initiatives pour  un Développement Intégré  Durable » for strengthening  economic skills and climate  change adaptive capacity.  Benin, Bolivia,  Burkina Faso,  ethiopia,  Honduras, Mali,  nepal, senegal,  east timor*   1.53 1.58 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support for the Unitarian  Service Committee—Seeds of  Survival 2010–2015 program.  Bolivia* 0.13 0.13 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water and  sanitation  Building capacities in  community-based eco- development and environmental  health in connection with water  and sanitation.  Burkina-Faso† 1.28  1.32 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Irrigation Support to the “Institut  International d’Ingénierie de  l’Eau et de l’Environnement»  for irrigation and  climate information.     258  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2010–2011  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2010–11 (continued)  Caribbean  countries*   1.60 1.65 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting the implementation  of the CARICOM’s disaster  risk management framework,  including the improvement  of the capacities of national  governments and local  communities to respond to and  manage natural disasters.  Congo Basin  region*  0.29 0.30 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting a fair and  sustainable management of  natural resources in Congo  Basin countries.   Costa rica,  dominican  republic,  Honduras*  0.04 0.04 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Helping communities restore  degraded forests and addressing  livelihood issues of local  landowners in areas with high  levels of rural poverty.   Cuba* 0.10 0.10 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Coastal zone  management  Enhancing municipal  environmental management  practices and the quality of life  of the communities in coastal  zones.   egypt† 1.16  1.20 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the University  of Alexandria for the  establishment of the Alexandria  Research Centre for Adaptation  to Climate Change.  ethiopia† 7.35  7.57 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Sanitation Support to the World Health  Organization to reduce  population health vulnerability  and increase resilience to vector- borne tropical diseases.   ethiopia, Kenya,  sudan, tanzania†  1.34  1.38 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture  and Water   Support to the Sokoine  University of Agriculture,  Tanzania, for enhancing climate  change adaptation in agriculture  and water resources (irrigation)  in the Greater Horn of Africa.   ethiopia, Jamaica,  philippines*  0.68 0.70 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the Sokoine  University of Agriculture,  Tanzania, for enhancing climate  change adaptation in agriculture  and water resources (irrigation)  in the Greater Horn of Africa.    259  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2010–2011  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2010–11 (continued)  Ghana† 1.40 1.44 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the Regional  Institute for Population  Studies of the University of  Ghana for Climate change  adaptation research and  capacity development.    Haiti* 1.90 1.96 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed  in the border zone between Haiti  and the Dominican Republic.  Haiti† 4.90  5.05 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to Oxfam-Québec,  UNDP, and the Center for  International Studies and  Cooperation for improving  local response to climate  change impacts, and reducing  vulnerability to natural  disasters.   Honduras* 5.93 6.11 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Enhancing food security  through improved agricultural  productivity, diversity and the  promotion of sustainable natural  resource management practices.  indonesia* 0.99 1.02 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Coastal zone  management  Enhancing the livelihood security  and well-being of vulnerable  coastal communities on the west  coast of South Sulawesi.   Kenya† 1.12  1.15 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support to the Kenya  Agricultural Research Institute  for enhancing climate change  adaptation research capacity in  the agriculture sector.   lesotho, Malawi,  swaziland†  1.50  1.55 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support to the Food, Agriculture  and Natural Resources Policy  Analysis Network, South Africa,  for linking climate change  adaptation to sustainable  agriculture in southern Africa.   latin america* 0.03 0.03 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Cross- cutting  Support to the Latin American  Energy Organization.  Mali* 0.50 0.52 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Supporting the development  and rehabilitation  of the agricultural  irrigation infrastructure.    260  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2010–2011  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2010–11 (continued)  nigeria† 1.17  1.21 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting effective climate  change governance.  peru* 0.04 0.04 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting the development  of sustainable management  policies and programs.   philippines* 1.40 1.44 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Improving the investment  climate for sustainable  economic growth.  Vietnam† 4.45 4.58 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Cross- cutting  Supporting the implementation  of the National Target Program  on climate change.   † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’ # Other climate finance excluding official development assistance  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2011–12  2011–2012  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  africa* 2.72 2.69 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forests Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through the  International Model Forest  Network.  africa, asia† 16.1 15.92 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting   Support to the International  Development Research Centre  for adaptation and climate  resilience research.  africa, asia, latin  america and the  Caribbean, and the  Middle east *  12.23 12.10 Provided ODA Grant  Adaptation Agriculture Support for the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  argentina† 1.26  1.25 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Fondacion  Bariloche for adaptation to  water stress research in the  Comahue Region.   Barbados, Guyana,  Grenada, Jamaica,  trinidad and  tobago†  1.50  1.48 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the University of  the West Indies, Barbados, for  sustainable water management  under climate change in small  island states of the Caribbean.     261  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2011–2012  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2011–12 (continued)  Benin, Bolivia,  Burkina Faso,  ethiopia,  Honduras, Mali,  nepal, senegal,  east timor*   2.09 2.07 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support for the Unitarian  Service Committee—Seeds of  Survival  2010–2015 program.  Bolivia* 0.43 0.43 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water and  sanitation  Support to the Université du  Québec à Montréal for building  capacities in community- based eco-development  and environmental health  in connection with water  and sanitation.  Bolivia† 1.08  1.07 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to Agua Sustentable for  strengthening local capacity for  adaptation to climate change in  the Bolivian Altiplano.  Cambodia† 1.50  1.48 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Cambodia  Development Resource Institute  for improving water governance  and climate change adaptation.  Cambodia,  Ghana, Kenya,  Mozambique,  Zimbabwe*  1.38 1.36 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the Canadian Hunger  Foundation for providing  improved food and economic  security for communities who  are among the poorest and  most vulnerable people in  their societies.  Caribbean  countries*   2.04 2.02 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting the implementation  of the CARICOM’s disaster  risk management framework,  including the improvement  of the capacities of national  governments and local  communities to respond to and  manage natural disasters.  Chile† 1.30  1.29 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Centro de Cabio  Global, Pontificia Universidad  Catolica de Chile,for  vulnerability and adaptation to  climate variability and change  research in the Maipo Basin.    262  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 7(b) Provision of Public Financial Support: Contribution through Bilateral, Regional and Other Channels, 2011–12 (continued)  2011–2012  Recipient  Country/Region  Total Amount  (in millions)  Status Funding  Source  Financial  Instrument  Type of  Support Sector Additional Information  Climate Specific  CAD USD  Chile, Colombia,  Dominican  Republic, Mexico†  0.45 0.45 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Waste and  Landfill  Support to the Center for  Clean Air Policy for supporting  the development of policy  frameworks and projects for  waste management, including a  series of measures for the whole  waste stream that will reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants such as black carbon  and methane.  China† 1.50 1.48 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Chinese Center  for Agricultural Policy of the  Chinese Academy of Sciences for  water resources and adaptation  to climate change research in  North China Plains and Poyang  Lake Region.  China, Nepal,  Pakistan†  1.53 1.51 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Kunming  Institute of Botany of the  Chinese Academy of Sciences,  China, for building effective  water governance in the Asian  Highlands.  Colombia, Mexico† 1.10 1.09 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Energy Support to the Petroleum  Technology Alliance Canada  for providing technical advice  to countries to help them  establish implementable  mitigation actions in the Oil and  Gas sector, including actions  that will significantly reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants, notably black carbon  and methane.  Congo Basin  Region*  0.50 0.49 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  The project supports the  implementation of the Central  Africa Forests Commission  (COMIFAC) Action plan,  including supporting a fair  and sustainable management  of natural resources in Congo  Basin countries.    263  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2011–2012  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2011–12 (continued)  Congo Basin  region†  0.14 0.14 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forests Support for the Congo Basin  Forest Partnership.   Costa rica,  dominican  republic,  Honduras*  0.05 0.05 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Helping communities restore  degraded forests and addressing  livelihood issues of local  landowners in areas with high  levels of rural poverty.  Costa rica,  Guatemala,  nicaragua†  1.48  1.46 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Centro  Agronómico Tropical de  Investigación y Enseñanza,  Costa Rica, for research on  the adaption of community- based water supply to a  changing climate.   Costa rica, Mexico,  peru†   0.50  0.49 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Housing Support to the Energy Efficiency  Exporters Alliance for providing  technical advice to countries to  help them establish mitigation  actions in the Housing sector.   Cuba* 0.07 0.07 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Coastal zone  management  Enhancing municipal  environmental management  practices and the quality of life  of the communities in coastal  zones.  dominican  republic,  Guatemala†  1.49  1.47 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Centro del Agua  del Trópico Húmedo para  América Latina y el Caribe,  Panamá, for water security  and climate change research  in Central America and  the Caribbean.   ethiopia* 1.50 1.48 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Increasing agricultural  productivity for smallholder  farmers.  ethiopia, Jamaica,  philippines*   1.44 1.42 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the Canadian Urban  Institute's International Urban  Partnerships Program for  advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions, consistent  with the countries' national  development agendas.    264  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2011–2012  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2011–12 (continued)  Haiti† 2.93  2.90 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support for climate change  adaptation and local risk  management.  Haiti* 0.19 0.19 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed  in the border zone between  Haiti and the Dominican  Republic.  Honduras† 0.15  0.15 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to Engineers Canada  for building capacity to assess  infrastructure vulnerability.  Honduras* 4.70 4.65 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Enhancing food security  through improved agricultural  productivity, diversity and  the promotion of sustainable  natural resource management  practices.  india† 1.50  1.48 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Ashoka Trust  for Research in Ecology and the  Environment for research on  adaption to climate change in  urbanizing watersheds.  indonesia* 1.30 1.29 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Coastal zone  management  Enhancing the livelihood  security and well-being of  vulnerable coastal communities  on the west coast of South  Sulawesi.  latin america and  the Caribbean*   0.21 0.21 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Improving capacities for energy  planning and regulation across  countries in the region.  Mali* 0.04 0.04 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support to the Office du  Niger for supporting the  development and rehabilitation  of the agricultural irrigation  infrastructure.  Mexico† 0.34 0.34 Provided ODA Grant  Mitigation Cross- cutting   Support for clean energy and  mitigation projects through the  Commission for Environmental  Cooperation.     265  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2011–12 (continued)  2011–2012  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  nicaragua* 1.10 1.09 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support  to CUSO International  and International Coach  Federation for supporting  sustainable economic growth in  rural areas and increase access  to safe, nutritious food for poor  communities.  nigeria† 0.61  0.60 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting effective climate  change governance.  philippines* 0.70 0.69 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Improving the investment  climate for sustainable economic  growth.  thailand† 1.23  1.22 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Faculty of Social  Science, Chiang Mai University,  for inland aquaculture and  adaptation to climate change  research in northern Thailand.  thailand† 1.43 1.41 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water Support to the Thailand  Development Research  Institute for improving flood  management planning.   † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ *  Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2012–13  2012–2013  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  africa* 3.16 3.13 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forests Support for the African Model  Forest Initiative through the  International Model Forest  Network.  africa, asia† 0.15 0.15 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the World Resources  Institute for capacity building in  tracking climate finance.  africa, asia† 16.05 15.88 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the International  Development Research Centre  for adaptation and climate  resilience research.    266  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2012–2013  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2012–13 (continued)  africa, asia, latin  america and the  Caribbean, and the  Middle east*   10.08 9.97 Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forests Support to the Canadian  International Food Security  Research Fund.  Benin, Bolivia,  Burkina Faso,  ethiopia,  Honduras, Mali,  nepal, senegal,  east timor *   2.21 2.19 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support for the Unitarian  Service Committee—Seeds of  Survival 2010–2015 program.  Bolivia* 0.71 0.70 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Water and  sanitation  Support to the Université du  Québec à Montréal for building  capacities in community- based eco-development  and environmental health  in connection with water  and sanitation.  Bolivia, ethiopia,  Ghana, Mali*   1.11 1.10 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to CARE Canada for  improving livelihood security  and resilience.   Burkina Faso† 2.50  2.47 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Improving food security through  the sustainable development  of agriculture. Support  provided to the “union des  producteurs agricoles” through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.   Cambodia,  Ghana, Kenya,  Mozambique,  Zimbabwe*  0.73 0.72 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support provided to the  Canadian Hunger Foundation  for providing improved food  and economic security for  communities who are among  the poorest and most vulnerable  people in their societies.  Cambodia,  indonesia, laos,  philippines,  thailand, Vietnam*   2.61 2.58 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to the Asian  Development Bank to reduce the  impact of disasters on vulnerable  populations by providing  support to governments and  civil society to manage and  reduce disaster risk.    267  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2012–2013  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2012–13 (continued)  Cameroon† 2.72  2.69 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Increasing access to sufficient,  nutritious and safe food, and  the economic well-being of  producers in model forests, and  improving climate resilience  capacities. Support provided to  CUSO International through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.  Caribbean  countries*   2.10 2.08 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting the implementation  of the CARICOM’s disaster  risk management framework,  including the improvement  of the capacities of national  governments and local  communities to respond to and  manage natural disasters.  Chile† 0.33  0.33 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Agriculture Support to the Instituto de  Investigaciones Agropecuarias  for the development of  a Nationally Appropriate  Mitigation Action proposal  based on atmospheric carbon  capture by soils, and support  for research on climate  change adaptation.   Chile, Kenya,  Mexico  3.30 3.26 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Building the capacity of  protected-area agencies to  enhance the resilience to climate  change of ecosystems and local  communities that depended on  them.  Chile, Colombia,  Mexico, dominican  republic†  2.70  2.67 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Waste and  landfill   Support to the Center for  Clean Air Policy for supporting  the development of policy  frameworks and projects for  waste management, including a  series of measures for the whole  waste stream that will reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants such as black carbon  and methane.     268  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2012–2013  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2012–13 (continued)  Colombia† 0.32  0.32 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Risk  management  Support to the Corporación  Autónoma Regional del  Alto Magdalena for the  implementation of an  environmental education  program for risk management  to support climate  change adaptation.   Colombia, Mexico† 1.90  1.88 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Energy Support to the Petroleum  Technology Alliance Canada  for providing technical advice  to countries to help them  establish implementable  mitigation actions in the Oil and  Gas sector, including actions  that will significantly reduce  emissions of short-lived climate  pollutants, notably black carbon  and methane.   Congo Basin  Countries*  0.50 0.49 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  The project supports the  implementation of the Central  Africa Forests Commission  (COMIFAC) Action plan,  including supporting a fair and  sustainable management of  natural resources in Congo Basin  countries.  Congo Basin  Countries†  0.78  0.77 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Capacity  building  Support to the International  Institute for Sustainable  Development for capacity  building in 10 countries  located in the Congo Basin  Region to help identify and  develop Nationally Appropriate  Mitigation Actions.  Congo Basin  region†   1.86 1.84  Provided ODA Grant Cross- cutting  Forests Support to the Congo Basin  Forest Partnership.  Costa rica, Mexico  peru†  3.00 2.97 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Housing Support to the Energy Efficiency  Exporters Alliance for providing  technical advice to countries to  help them establish mitigation  actions in the housing sector.     269  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2012–2013  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2012–13 (continued)  Cuba* 0.64 0.63 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Enhancing municipal  environmental management  practices and the quality of life  of the communities in coastal  zones and strengthening  local capacities to implement  industrial agricultural  techniques that reduce the  need for imported energy  and resources.  democratic  republic of Congo†  1.75 1.73 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Reducing poverty and  increasing food self-sufficiency.  Support provided to the  University of Guelph through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.  ethiopia† 1.81  1.79 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Increasing economic, social  and ecological resilience of  smallholder Ethiopian farmers  to climate change. Support  provided to the Canadian Co- operative Association through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.  ethiopia† 1.87  1.85 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Increasing the food security of  Ethiopian households. Support  provided to the Canadian  hunger foundation through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.  ethiopia* 5.34 5.28 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Increasing agricultural  productivity for smallholder  farmers and supporting market- led approach to development for  increased food consumption and  higher incomes.  ethiopia, Jamaica,  philippines*   0.87 0.86 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Support to the Canadian Urban  Institute’s International Urban  Partnerships Program for  advancing sustainable economic  growth and development in  urban regions, consistent  with the countries’ national  development agendas.     270  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2012–2013  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2012–13 (continued)  Ghana* 1.00 0.99 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Supporting climate resilient  agriculture capacity building for  smallholder farmers.   Ghana† 2.08  2.06 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Implementing measures to  ensure sustainable access to  food and livelihoods. Support  provided to Feed the Children  through the Canada Fund for  African Climate Resilience.  Ghana† 2.10  2.08 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Increasing resilience of the  vulnerable households to  climate change. Support  provided to the Canadian  Hunger Foundation through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.  Guatemala† 0.66 0.65 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Forest Support to the International  Union for Conservation of  Nature for reducing socio- environmental vulnerability to  climate change.  Haiti† 0.50  0.49 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support for climate change  adaptation and local risk  management.  Haiti* 0.48 0.47 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting the rehabilitation of  the Artibonite River watershed  in the border zone between  Haiti and the Dominican  Republic.  Honduras* 2.87 2.84 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Enhancing food security  through improved agricultural  productivity, diversity and  the promotion of sustainable  natural resource management  practices.   Honduras† 0.60 0.59 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Support to Engineers Canada  for building capacity to assess  infrastructure vulnerability.  indonesia* 1.33 1.32 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Coastal zone  management  Enhancing the livelihood  security and well-being of  vulnerable coastal communities  on the west coast of South  Sulawesi.     271  C a n a da’s  F i r s t  B i e n n i a l  r e p o r t    ]  2012–2013  recipient  Country/region  total amount  (in millions)  status Funding  source  Financial  instrument  type of  support sector additional information  Climate specific  Cad Usd  table 7(b) provision of public Financial support: Contribution through Bilateral, regional and other Channels, 2012–13 (continued)  latin america and  the Caribbean*   0.17 0.17 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Improving capacities for energy  planning and regulation across  countries in the region.   Mexico† 0.13 0.13 Provided ODA Grant Mitigation Cross- cutting  Support to Eco Perth for  technical support for GHG  emission inventory.   nicaragua* 2.05 2.03 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Cross- cutting  Supporting sustainable  economic growth in rural  areas and increase access to  safe, nutritious food for poor  communities.  peru† 0.30  0.30 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Capacity  building  Support to the United Nations  Development Programme for  climate change adaptation  integration in the poorest  communities.   rwanda† 2.24  2.22 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Increasing access to sufficient,  nutritious and safe food among  those most vulnerable to climate  change. Support provided to  the Adventist Development  and Relief Agency through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.  senegal† 3.02  2.99 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Reducing poverty by improving  the ability to adapt to climate  change. Support provided to the  “Cégep de la Gaspésie et des Îles”  through the Canada Fund for  African Climate Resilience.  tanzania† 3.11  3.08 Provided ODA Grant Adaptation Agriculture Improving market-led  agricultural production  and market and processing  knowledge. Support provided to  World Vision Canada through  the Canada Fund for African  Climate Resilience.  † Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ * Contribution targeting the Rio Conventions as a ‘significant objective’    272  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  7.B  Technology Development and Transfer   Canada is committed to a broad range of actions to  advance the development and deployment of clean  technologies globally. Additional details are included  in Canada’s 6th National Communication, and some  examples are highlighted below. A portion of Canada’s  fast-start climate change financing has also focused  on the development and deployment of clean energy  technologies. Additional details of projects and  activities funded under Canada’s fast-start financing  can be found in Chapter 7: Financial Resources and  Transfer of Technology of Canada’s 6th National  Communication, and in Biennial Report Table 7B. • Canada’s RETScreen Clean Energy Project Analysis   Software is the world’s foremost clean energy  decision-making software. It has helped significantly  to reduce costs associated with identifying and  assessing potential energy projects. It is estimated  that RETScreen has helped spur the installation of at  least 24 gigawatts of installed clean energy capacity  worldwide with a value of approximately $41 billion.  • The Generation IV International Forum (GIF) is  an international treaty-supported research and  development (R&D) collaboration that is working  to develop and promote advanced generation  (Generation IV) nuclear-based clean energy  systems. Canada provides funding of approximately  $4 million annually to support its contributions to   GIF collaborative R&D, as well as in-kind support  from Canadian national labs and participating  university partners.  • Canada supports the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change’s (UNFCCC) Climate  Technology Centre and Network (CTCN). The CTCN  will provide tailored advice and technical assistance to  developing countries to support the implementation  of technology actions for mitigation or adaptation  objectives. With a seat on the CTCN advisory board,  Canada is actively participating in the development of  this key institution.  • Canada led the development of the Global Early  Warning System for Wildland Fire under the Global  Observation of Forest Cover and Landcover Dynamics  (GOFC-GOLD) Fire Implementation Team. This  system contributes to the Global Multi-Hazard Early  Warning System evolving under the auspices of the  United Nations International Strategy for Disaster  Reduction. Canada is collaborating with the European  Commission’s Joint Research Centre to enhance the  current system. Regional early warning products using  more detailed local data are also in development.  • The Canadian Forest Service undertakes a broad range  of cooperation with international partners to advance  GHG mitigation and forest management adaptation  goals, including activities such as software training  and scientific and technical mentoring and guidance  in a range of countries.    273  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 8 Provision of Technology Development and Transfer Support   Recipient  Country and/  or Region Targeted   Area  Measures and  Activities Related to  Technology Transfer Sector  Source of the  Funding for  Technology   Transfer  Activities  Undertaken   By Status  Additional   Information  Global Mitigation Development and  dissemination of the  RETScreen Clean  Energy Project Analysis  Software.  Energy Public &  private  Public Implemented Canada has developed  RETScreen, the  world’s foremost  clean energy  decision-making  software. Additional  details are contained  in Chapter 7 of  Canada’s 6th National  Communication and  at the RETScreen  website: www. retscreen.net  China,  Euratom (the  European  Atomic  Energy  Community),  France,  Japan, Russia,  South Korea,  South Africa,  Switzerland,  and the U.S.   Adaptation Canada supports  international  collaboration through  the Generation IV- International Forum  (GIF).  Measures and  activities include:  workshops, reports,  publications, and  ongoing collaborative  R&D projects.  Energy Public Public Planned Sharing of  knowledge, resources  and infrastructure  through the GIF,  has enabled GIF  participants to reduce  individual costs  and financial risks  while enhancing  their mutual R&D  capabilities.  Global Mitigation & adaptation  As a member of  the Advisory Board  (AB) of the Climate  Technology Centre  and Network (CTCN),  Canada supported the  operationalization and  work of the Centre in  2013.   Other Public Public Implemented With other AB  members, Canada  actively engaged  in the elaboration  of the CTCN’s  administrative  procedures, project  prioritization and  network membership.  These will ensure  that the CTCN  will strengthen  capacity for climate  technology transfer;  foster collaboration  and access to  information to  accelerate climate  technology transfer;  and, manage requests  from developing  countries and deliver  responses.    274  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 8 Provision of Technology Development and Transfer Support (continued)  Recipient  Country and/  or Region Targeted   Area  Measures and  Activities Related to  Technology Transfer Sector  Source of the  Funding for  Technology   Transfer  Activities  Undertaken   By Status  Additional   Information  China,  Mexico,  Poland,  Korea,  Australia,  Italy, Russia  Mitigation &  adaptation  Forest GHG emissions  mitigation and  forest management.  Adaptation:  software training and  scientific and technical  mentoring and guidance.  Other Public Public &  private  Implemented  & Planned  This program  will target forest  GHG emissions  mitigation and  forest management  adaptation. The Canadian Forest  Service undertakes  a broad range of  cooperation with  international partners  to advance GHG  mitigation and  forest management  adaptation goals.  Additional details  are contained in  Chapter 7 of Canada’s  6th National  Communication.  United  Nations  International  Strategy  for Disaster  Reduction  (global),  southeast  Asia and  Southern  Africa Regions   Mitigation &  adaptation  Canada led the  development of the  Global Early Warning  System for Wildland  Fire under the  Global Observation  of Forest Cover and  Landcover Dynamics  (GOFC-GOLD) Fire  Implementation Team. Current activities include  information sessions and  a website.  Other Public Public Implemented  & planned  Additional details  are contained in  Chapter 7 of Canada’s  6th National  Communication.    275  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Capacity Building Canada undertakes a range of actions to support  capacity building for climate change in developing  countries. Capacity building needs are also addressed  through many of Canada’s activities focused on  technology development. This includes building  capacity through the dissemination of software and  tools developed by Canada, the provision of support to  help partners effectively use those tools, and research  and development collaboration. Additional details are  included in Canada’s 6th National Communication,  and some examples are highlighted below. A portion  of Canada’s fast-start climate change financing has  also focused on developing institutional and technical  capacity in developing countries. Additional details of  projects and activities funded under Canada’s fast- start financing can be found in Chapter 7: Financial  Resources and Transfer of Technology of Canada’s  6th National Communication, and in Biennial Report  Table 7B. • Canada’s RETScreen Clean Energy Project Analysis   Software is the world’s foremost clean energy  decision-making software. It has helped significantly  reduce costs associated with identifying and  assessing potential energy projects. It is estimated  that RETScreen has helped spur the installation of at  least 24 gigawatts of installed clean energy capacity  worldwide with a value of approximately $41 billion.  • Canada has also developed forest carbon accounting  software called the Carbon Budget Model of the  Canadian Forest Sector (CBM-CFS3). This forest  carbon accounting software, developed by the  Canadian Forest Service, helps forest managers  meet criteria and indicator reporting requirements  for sustainable forest management and forest  certification, and understand how their actions affect  the net carbon balance of their forest estate.  • Natural Resources Canada has supported Engineers  Canada to lead the development of a standardized  methodology tool to assess the engineering  vulnerability of infrastructure in a changing climate  in Canada. After testing in Canada, it was introduced  at a regional workshop in Brazil in 2010. Since then,   it has been successfully applied in two infrastructure  risk assessments, in Costa Rica and Honduras.  • The International Model Forest Network (IMFN) is a  global learning network of 60 member Model Forests  around the world, which together cover more than  100 million hectares. Canada has hosted the IMFN  Secretariat since its inception in 1995, and works with  international partners to advance the sustainable  management of forest-based landscapes through the  Model Forest approach.   • Canada led the development of the Global Early  Warning System for Wildland Fire under the Global  Observation of Forest Cover and Landcover Dynamics  (GOFC-GOLD) Fire Implementation Team. This  system contributes to the Global Multi-Hazard  Early Warning System evolving under the auspices  of the United Nations International Strategy for  Disaster Reduction. Canada is collaborating with the  European Commission’s Joint Research Centre to  enhance the current system. Regional early warning  products using more detailed local data are also  in development.  • The Generation IV International Forum (GIF) is an  international treaty-supported R&D collaboration  that is working to develop and promote advanced  generation (Generation IV) nuclear-based  clean energy systems. Canada’s participation in  collaborative R&D through the GIF facilitates  the development of leading edge technology and  knowledge through sharing of confidential and  protected data, resources and infrastructure, shared  training of highly qualified people, and through the  undertaking of collaborative research.   • The Clean Energy Ministerial (CEM) is a high-level  process focused on clean technology to address  climate change. Canada works through the CEM with  22 other governments, including major emerging  economies, with the goal of facilitating the transition  to a global clean energy economy. Canada is an active  participant in four of the CEM’s technical initiatives:  the Carbon Capture, Use and Storage Action Group;  the International Smart Grids Action Network; the  Global Superior Energy Performance Partnership;     276  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  and the Super-Efficient Equipment and Appliance  Deployment Initiative.  • The International Partnership on Energy Efficiency  Cooperation (IPEEC) also facilitates capacity  building in the area of energy efficiency, promoting  information exchange on best practices. Canada  participates in both the Executive and Policy  Committees of IPEEC. Canada is the current IPEEC  Policy Committee Chair.   • Canada supports the UNFCCC’s CTCN, which will  play a key role in supporting capacity building in   developing countries. Canada made a $2.5 million  fast-start financing contribution to support CTCN,  which will provide tailored advice and technical  assistance to developing countries to support the  implementation of technology actions for mitigation  or adaptation objectives. Canada’s contribution will  support start-up costs of the Centre as well as specific  capacity-building activities. Canada also sits on the  advisory board of the CTCN.  Table 9 Provision of Capacity-building Support  Recipient Country/Region Targeted Area Program or Project Title Description of Program or Project  Global Multiple areas RETScreen Clean Energy  Project Analysis Software  World’s leading clean energy decision-making software  and has helped significantly reduce costs associated with  identifying and assessing potential clean energy projects.  Provided to users free-of-charge and in multiple languages,  and includes comprehensive training materials. More  information available at www.retscreen.net  China Multiple areas Carbon Budget Model of the  Canadian Forest Sector (CBM- CFS3) Technology Transfer  CBM-CFS3 Training Workshop and project planning,  scientific and technical guidance.  Mexico Multiple areas Carbon Budget Model of the  Canadian Forest Sector (CBM- CFS3) Technology Transfer  Potential CBM-CFS3 Training Workshop. Guidance with  estimation of Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry  (LULUCF) GHG emissions and removals, development  of measuring reporting and verification system and  related reducing emissions from deforestation and forest  degradation (REDD+) activities.  Poland Multiple areas Carbon Budget Model of the  Canadian Forest Sector (CBM- CFS3) Technology Transfer  Planning CBM-CFS3 Workshop and project meetings.  Scientific and technical guidance.   Republic of Korea Multiple areas Carbon Budget Model of the  Canadian Forest Sector (CBM- CFS3) Technology Transfer  Scientific and technical guidance.  China, Euratom (the  European Atomic Energy  Community), France, Japan,  Russia, South Korea, South  Africa, Switzerland, and the  United States  Adaptation &  Technology  development  and transfer  Generation IV International  Forum  The Generation IV International Forum is a treaty- supported international collaboration that includes several  developing and developed countries The Forum supports  the establishment and sharing of existing and new  knowledge and infrastructure needed for the development  of advanced nuclear-based clean energy systems with  enhanced safety, improved sustainability, improved  economics and enhanced proliferation resistance and  physical protection.  http://www.retscreen.net   277  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 9 Provision of Capacity-building Support (continued)  Recipient Country/Region Targeted Area Program or Project Title Description of Program or Project  Latin America, South-East  Asia, Central and North  Africa  Multiple areas International Model Forest  Network   The International Model Forest Network (IMFN) is a  global learning network whose members work toward a  common goal: the sustainable management of forest-based  landscapes through the Model Forest approach. The IMFN  is comprised of 60 Model Forests around the world, which  together cover more than 100 million hectares. Canada has  hosted the IMFN Secretariat since its inception in 1995. During the reporting period, Canada provided targeted  support for climate change initiatives in Model Forests  which focused on: 1) Forest management through reforestation and applied  research on climate change impacts on forests;  2) Capacity building through research extension and,  communications activities to increase awareness of the  need to adapt to the impacts of climate change; and,  3) The development and ground-truthing of policy options  based on research conducted in Model Forests.  Association of Southeast  Asia Nations, Southern  Africa Development  Community  Multiple areas GOFC-GOLD Global Early  Warning System for Wildland  Fire  Global and regional systems developed collaboratively with  various government agencies; ongoing consultation and  advice.  International Partnership  for Energy Efficiency  Cooperation Members: G8  countries, the European  Commission, Australia,  Brazil, China, India, Mexico  and South Korea   Multiple areas International Partnership for  Energy Efficiency Cooperation   The International Partnership for Energy Efficiency  Cooperation aims to promote information exchange on  best practices and facilitate initiatives to improve energy  efficiency. Canada transfers its policy, program and  technology-related best practices via Committee discussions  and through its participation in two task groups—the  Super-efficient Equipment and Appliance Deployment  Initiative and the Global Superior Energy Performance  initiative. Canada’s specific expertise related to minimum  energy performance standards, energy labelling and  industrial capacity building have been shared.  Various Technology  development  and transfer  Carbon Capture Use and  Storage Action Group—Clean  Energy Ministerial  The Carbon Capture Use and Storage Action Group aims to  create greater political momentum to advance the level of  carbon capture and storage deployment required to meet  the global GHG mitigation challenge.  Non-Annex I members of  the Global Superior Energy  Performance Initiative   Technology  development  and transfer   Global Superior Energy  Performance Initiative   Canada actively participates on Global Superior Energy  Performance Initiative Energy Management Working Group,  which aims to pursue continuous improvements in energy  performance, primarily through sharing information, the  development of tools, reporting mechanisms, common  accreditation systems, resources and credentialing processes.  To date, Canada’s participation in the Initiative has been  in-kind, including the implementation of three ISO 50001  Energy Management Systems Standard pilot projects, as well  as commitments to share expertise and information.    278  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  Table 9 Provision of Capacity-building Support (continued)  Recipient Country/Region Targeted Area Program or Project Title Description of Program or Project  When operational,  developing countries will be  the recipient of the Climate  Technology Centre and  Network’s assistance.  Multiple areas Canada’s support for the  Climate Technology Centre  and Network. As a member  of the Advisory Board of  the Climate Technology  Centre and Network,  Canada supported the  operationalization and work of  the Centre in 2013.   Canada has also made a $2.5 million fast-start financing  contribution to support the United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change’s Climate Technology  Centre and Network. The Network will provide tailored  advice and technical assistance to developing countries  to support the implementation of technology actions for  mitigation or adaptation objectives.  Canada also sits on  the Advisory Board of the Climate Technology Centre and  Network, thereby supporting the operationalization and  work of the Centre.   References 1  Canada’s National Inventory Report: Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks in Canada 1990–2011 is available online at: http://www.ec.gc.ca/   ges-ghg   2  In this explanatory text, estimates referring to Table 4(a)I are expressed in kt CO2 eq, and rounded to two significant figures.  3  Canada’s 2011 Submission of its Forest Management Reference Level can be accessed on the UNFCCC website portal: http://unfccc.int/  files/meetings/ad_hoc_working_groups/kp/application/pdf/canada_frml_en.pdf  4  See Section 7.3 of Canada’s 2013 National Inventory Report. Like the historical FLFL estimates shown in Table 7.5 of the National Inventory   Report, the RL assumes a pool of HWP carbon starts in 1990 from domestically harvested wood and includes emissions of carbon from the   pool over time.  5  Canada’s shift to the use of FLFL as the basis for accounting is treated as a methodological change.  6  The RL included in 2/CMP.7 mistakenly excluded the emissions associated with slash burning in British Columbia in 2020, although slash   burning emissions were included for the province in every other year, and were included for other provinces for all years including 2020.   This error has been corrected in the updated RL.  7  This low, constant level of natural disturbance is based on the assumption that 95,000 hectares of managed forest will burn each year,   based on data from the past 51 years (1959–2009), which shows that at least this amount burned during 90% of the years. Using this   approach, Canada has ensured that the RL has been derived without the expectation of net debits or credits.  8 Statistics Canada [internet database]. 2002–2008. National income and expenditure accounts, quarterly estimates. Available online at:   http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=13-001-X&CHROPG=1&lang=eng   9 Statistics Canada [internet database]. 2012. CANSIM Table 380-0002 Gross domestic product (GDP), expenditure-based, quarterly. http://  www5.statcan.gc.ca/cansim/a26?lang=eng&retrLang=eng&id=3800002&paSer=&pattern=&stByVal=1&p1=1&p2=49&tabMode=    dataTable&csid=   10 Finance Canada, 2012. Economic and fiscal implications of Canada’s aging population. Ottawa (ON): Department of Finance Canada.   http://www.fin.gc.ca/pub/eficap-rebvpc/index-eng.asp   11 Statistics Canada [internet database]. 2010. Population projections for Canada, provinces and territories. catalogue no. 91-520-XWE.   Available online at: http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=91-520-XWE&lang=eng    12 Statistics Canada, Canadian Economic Observer, Vol. 24, no. 6 (11-010-x, free) June 2011. Available online at: http://www.statcan.gc.ca/   daily-quotidien/110817/dq110817b-eng.htm   13 Finance Canada, 2012. Economic and fiscal implications of Canada’s aging population. Ottawa (ON): Department of Finance Canada.   http://www.fin.gc.ca/pub/eficap-rebvpc/index-eng.asp   14  All figures are in Canadian dollars unless otherwise stated.  http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges.ghg http://unfccc.int/files/meetings/ad_hoc_working_groups/kp/application/pdf/canada_frml_en.pdf http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=13-001-X&CHROPG=1&lang=eng http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/cansim/a26?lang=eng&retrLang=eng&id=3800002&paSer=&pattern=&stByVal=1&p1=1&p2=49&tabMode=dataTable&csid= http://www.fin.gc.ca/pub/eficap-rebvpc/index-eng.asp http://www5.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=91-520-XWE&lang=eng http://www.statcan.gc.ca/daily-quotidien/110817/dq110817b-eng.htm http://www.fin.gc.ca/pub/eficap-rebvpc/index-eng.asp   279  CANADA’S FIRST BIENNIAL REPORT   ]  15  Including over $112 million of contributions made to projects   with a primary focus on climate change (i.e. marked as targeting   the Conventions as a ‘principal objective’ under the OECD/  DAC Rio markers), and over $236 million to projects with a   significant climate change component (i.e., marked as targeting   the Conventions as a ‘significant objective’ under the OECD/  DAC Rio markers). Canada has not included every contribution   reported as targeting the Conventions as a ‘significant objective’   under the OECD/DAC Rio markers to ensure this report focusses   on the most relevant contributions to climate action. For exam-  ple, core contributions made to multilateral organizations are   not reported on in this report.    Canada’s Sixth National Report on Climate Change  TABLE OF CONTENTS   1 Introduction  National Circumstances  Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory  Policies and Measures  Federal Policy Making Process  Government of Canada’s Sector-by-Sector Regulatory Approach  Cross-sectoral, Clean Energy Investments and Other Complementary Measures  Modifying Long-term Trends in GHG Emissions and Removals   Projections  Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Measures  Finance  Technology and Capacity Building  Research and Systematic Observation of Climate Change  Education and Public Awareness  Reference    2 Canada’s National Circumstances  2.1 Introduction  2.2 Governance Structure  2.3 Addressing Climate Change in Canada  2.4 Population  2.5 Geographic Profile  2.6 Climate Profile  2.7 Economic Profile  2.8 Energy   2.8.1 Energy Reserves, Production, and Trade   2.8.1.1 Crude Oil   2.8.1.2 Natural Gas  2.8.1.3 Coal  2.8.1.4 Electricity   2.8.2 Energy Consumption    2.9 Transportation   2.9.1 Road Transportation  2.9.2 Aviation  2.9.3 Rail  2.9.4 Marine   2.10 Industry Profile  2.11 Waste   2.12 Building Stock/Urban Structure  2.12.1 Residential  2.12.2 Commercial/Institutional   2.13 Agriculture  2.14 Forest  References    3 Canada’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory  3.1 Canada’s 2011 Greenhouse Gas Emissions  3.2 Trends in Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Removals, 1990–2011  3.3 Greenhouse Gas Trends by IPCC Sector, 1990–2011  3.3.1 Energy—2011 GHG Emissions, 572 Mt  3.3.1.1 Energy Industries—2011 GHG Emissions, 155 Mt  Public Electricity and Heat Generation—2011 GHG Emissions, 93 Mt  Petroleum Refining and Upgrading—2011 GHG Emissions, 16 Mt  Fossil Fuel Production—2011 GHG Emissions, 45 Mt   3.3.1.2 Manufacturing Industries and Construction—2011 GHG Emissions, 44 Mt  3.3.1.3 Transport—2011 GHG Emissions, 199 Mt  3.3.1.4 Other Energy Sectors—2011 GHG Emissions, 77 Mt  3.3.1.5 Fugitive Emissions from Fuels—2011 GHG Emissions, 60 Mt   3.3.2 Industrial Processes—2011 GHG Emissions, 54 Mt  3.3.3 Solvent and Other Product Use—2011 GHG Emissions, 0.25 Mt  3.3.4 Agriculture—2011 GHG Emissions, 54 Mt  3.3.5 Waste—2011 GHG Emissions, 22 Mt  3.3.6 Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry—2011 Net GHG Emissions, 87 Mt (not included in national totals)   3.4 Uncertainties  3.5 National Inventory Arrangements  3.5.1 Institutional, Legal, and Procedural Arrangements  3.5.2 Process for Inventory Preparation  3.5.3 Quality Assurance and Quality Control  3.5.4 Key Categories  3.5.5 Process for Recalculations of Estimates   Annex I Summary GHG Estimates from Common Reporting Format (CRF) Tables  References   4 Policies and Measures  4.1 Overall Policy Context  4.2 Policy Making Process  4.2.1 Description of Inter-Jurisdictional Decision-Making Bodies  4.2.2 Federal Legislative Instruments  4.2.2.1 The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999  4.2.2.2 The Energy Efficiency Act, 1992  4.2.2.3 Canada Shipping Act, 2001  4.2.2.4 Aeronautics Act  4.2.2.5 Railway Safety Act    4.3 Federal Monitoring and Reporting Mechanisms  4.4 Federal Policies and Measures and their Effects  4.4.1 Regulations under the Sector-By-Sector Approach  4.4.1.1 Transportation Sector  Light-Duty Vehicle Regulations  Heavy-Duty Vehicle Regulations  Renewable Fuels Regulations  Marine Vessel Fuel Efficiency Regulations  Aviation Regulations   4.4.1.2 Electricity Sector  4.4.1.3 Oil and Gas Sector  4.4.1.4 Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Sectors  4.4.1.5 Cross-Sectoral Measures  Regulations under the Energy Efficiency Act    4.4.2 Federal Investments in Clean Energy Technology  4.4.2.1 Sustainable Development Technology Canada  4.4.2.2 ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative  4.4.2.3 Carbon Capture and Storage   4.4.3 Other Federal Complementary Measures  4.4.3.1 ecoENERGY for Aboriginal and Northern Communities Program  4.4.3.2 ecoENERGY Efficiency program  4.4.3.3 Clean Transportation Initiatives   4.4.4 Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) Sector  4.4.5 Addressing Short-Lived Climate Pollutants   4.5 Provincial and Territorial Polices and Measures and their Effects   4.5.1 Provinces  4.5.1.1 Newfoundland and Labrador   4.5.1.2 Prince Edward Island   4.5.1.3 Nova Scotia   4.5.1.4 New Brunswick  4.5.1.5 Quebec   Quebec’s energy strategy for 2006–2015 (May 2006)   The 2013–2020 Climate Change Action Plan  2006 –2012 Quebec Public Transit Policy   4.5.1.6 Ontario   Green Energy, Conservation and Efficiency  Transportation  Land Use and Stewardship   Agriculture and Waste   4.5.1.7 Manitoba  The Manitoba Climate Change and Emissions    4.5.1.8 Saskatchewan   Green Initiatives  Carbon Capture Storage   4.5.1.9 Alberta  4.5.1.10 British Columbia   Clean Energy and Innovation in British Columbia     4.5.2 Territories  4.5.2.1 Yukon   4.5.2.2 Northwest Territories   4.5.2.3 Nunavut    4.6 How Policies and Measures are Modifying Long-Term Trends in Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Removals  References   5 Projections and the Total Effect of Policies and Measures  5.1 Introduction  5.2 Comparing Activity Sector Categories to Economic Sectors  5.3 Historical Emissions Trends  5.4 GHG Emissions Projections by Economic Sector and Gas  5.4.1 National Emissions Projections  5.4.2 Emissions Intensity  5.4.3 Per Capita Emissions  5.4.4 Emissions by Gas  5.4.5 Emissions Projections by Sector  5.4.5.1 Transportation  5.4.5.2 Oil and Gas  Upstream Oil and Gas Production  Box 5.1 Potential Oil Sands Technology/Method Improvements  Petroleum Refining and Upgrading   5.4.5.3 Electricity Generation  5.4.5.4 Emissions-Intensive and Trade-Exposed Industries  5.4.5.5 Buildings  Residential  Commercial   5.4.5.6. Agriculture  5.4.5.7 Waste and Others  5.4.5.8 Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry   5.4.5.9 Foreign Passenger and Foreign Freight    5.5 Emissions by Province6  5.6 Assessment of Aggregate Effect of Policies and Measures  Annex 1 Baseline Data and Assumptions  Key Economic Drivers and Assumptions  Baseline Data and Assumptions  Economic Growth  Population Dynamics and Demographics  World Crude Oil Price  Energy and Electricity Production  Emissions Factors  Federal, Provincial and Territorial Measures    Annex 2 The Contribution of the Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Sector  Contribution of the LULUCF Sector to 2020 Projected Emissions  Subsector Emissions Trends and Methodologies   Annex 3 Modeling and Methodological Differences from Canada’s 5th National Communication  Annex 4 Alternate Emissions Scenarios  Annex 5 Methodology for Development of Emissions Scenarios   Up-to-date Data and Key Assumptions  The Without Measures Scenario  Energy, Emissions and Economy Model for Canada   Treatment of Interaction Effects  Additionality  Free ridership   The rebound effect  Policy interaction effects  Simulation of capital stock turnover  Model Limitations   Annex 6 Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Modeling Methodology   Forest Land Converted to Other Land Categories   Forest Land Remaining Forest Land and Land Converted to Forest Land   Canada’s National Forest Carbon Monitoring, Accounting and Reporting System   Cropland Remaining Cropland   Annex 7 Further Sources  References   6 Vulnerability Assessment, Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation Measures  6.1 Introduction   Key developments since 2010   6.2 Canada’s Changing Climate  6.2.1 Temperature and Precipitation  6.2.2 Extreme Events  6.2.3 Arctic Sea Ice  6.2.4 Permafrost  6.2.5 Coastal Zones  6.2.6 Transportation Infrastructure  6.2.7 Agriculture   6.3 Building the Knowledge Foundation  6.4 Setting Direction: Adaptation Policies, Plans, and Frameworks  6.4.1 Federal  6.4.2 Provincial and Territorial  6.4.2.1 Quebec  6.4.2.2 Ontario  6.4.2.3 Manitoba  6.4.2.4 British Columbia  6.4.2.5 Yukon, Northwest Territories, and Nunavut   6.4.3 Municipal   6.5 Fostering Effective Collaboration  6.6 Implementing Adaptation Measures  6.6.1 Natural Environment  6.6.2 Natural Resources  6.6.3 Water Resources  6.6.4 Coastal Zone Management  6.6.5 Municipalities and Infrastructure  6.6.6 Agriculture and Food Production  6.6.7 Human Health and Well-being   6.7 Contributing to International Initiatives   6.7.1 Research and Science  6.7.2 Regional and Bilateral Collaboration   6.7.3 Development Assistance, Multilateral Instruments and International Aid Partnerships   6.8 Conclusion   References   7 Financial Resources and Transfer of Technology  7.1 introduction  7.2 Financial Resources  7.2.1 new and additional Resources  7.2.2 Geographic Distribution   7.2.3 sectorial distribution   7.2.4 Financial support to the global environment Facility  7.2.5 adaptation by the Poorest and Most Vulnerable countries  7.2.6 Clean Energy  7.2.7 Forests and Agriculture  7.2.8 Mobilising Private Sector Investments   7.3 Transfer of Technology  7.3.1 Developing and Sharing Knowledge and Tools  7.3.2 Engaging Multilaterally  7.3.3 Working with Bilateral Partners    References   8 Research and Systematic Observation of Climate Change  8.1 Introduction  8.2 Funding and Priorities  8.2.1 Overview  8.2.2 Funding within the Government of Canada  8.2.2.1 Clean Air Agenda  8.2.2.2 Canadian Space Agency Programs  Government Related Initiatives Program  Earth Observation Application Development Program   8.2.2.3 Program of Energy Research and Development   8.2.3 Research Granting Agencies and Funded Initiatives in Canada  8.2.3.1 Climate Change and Atmospheric Research Grants  8.2.3.2 Networks of Centers of Excellence  ArcticNet  Marine Environmental Observation Prediction and Response Network    8.2.3.3 Canada Research Chairs  8.2.3.4 Canada Excellence Research Chairs   8.2.4 Other Initiatives  8.2.4.1 International Polar Year  8.2.4.2 Beaufort Regional Environmental Assessment  8.2.4.3 Canadian Foundation for Climate and Atmospheric Sciences    8.3 Systematic Observation  8.3.1 Overview  8.3.2 Monitoring Networks  8.3.2.1 Atmosphere   Surface Weather and Climate  Upper Air Networks   Atmospheric Composition   8.3.2.2 Oceans  Pacific and Atlantic Ocean Monitoring  Arctic Ocean Observations  Sea Levels  Ocean Observations Data Management   8.3.2.3 Cryosphere  Sea Ice  Lake and River Ice  Snow on Ground  Permafrost  Glaciers    8.3.2.4 Terrestrial Systems   Hydrometric Monitoring  Forests   Agricultural Soils and Vegetation and Agroclimate    8.3.3 Space-based Observations  8.3.3.1 Canadian Satellites and Missions  SCISAT-1 Atmospheric Chemistry Experiment  RADARSAT  RADARSAT Constellation Mission   8.3.3.2 Canadian Instruments aboard International Satellites and Missions  CLOUDSAT  Measurements Of Pollution In The Troposphere (MOPITT)  Optical Spectrograph and InfraRed Imaging System (OSIRIS)  New InfraRed Sensor Technology (NIRST)  Surface Water and Ocean Topography   8.3.3.3 Canadian Involvement in International Missions    8.4 Research  8.4.1 Overview  8.4.2 Trends and Variability  8.4.2.1 Atmosphere  Climate Data Analysis and Research   8.4.2.2 Oceans  Marine Ecosystems  Ocean Climate   8.4.2.3 Cryosphere  Snow and Ice  Permafrost  Glaciers   8.4.2.4 Forests  Canadian Wildland Fire Information System  Climate Impacts on Productivity and Health of Aspen    8.4.3 Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks  8.4.3.1 Agricultural Ecosystems  8.4.3.2 Forest Ecosystems  8.4.3.3 Ocean systems   8.4.3.4 Observation-based Approaches to Carbon Source Estimation   8.4.4 Climate Processes  8.4.4.1 Land and Cryosphere  8.4.4.2 Oceans  8.4.4.3 Biophysical Sensitivities  8.4.4.4 Atmospheric Physics and Chemistry   8.4.5 Climate Modelling and Applications  8.4.5.1 Ocean Modelling  8.4.5.2 Global Climate Models  8.4.5.3 Regional Climate Modelling and Scenarios  8.4.5.4 Seasonal to Inter-Annual Prediction  8.4.5.5 Detection and Attribution of Climate Change    8.5 Climate Science Assessment  References  Websites   9 Education, Training, and Public Awareness  9.1 General Policy Towards Education, Training and Public Awareness   9.2 Primary, Secondary and Post-secondary Education   9.2.1 Primary and Secondary Education  COOL 2.0   9.2.2 Post-secondary Education   9.2.3 Networks of Centres of Excellence  9.2.4 Research Granting Agencies in Canada   9.3 Public Access to Information   9.3.1 Web and Social Media   9.3.2 Conferences and Trade Shows   9.4 Resource and Information Centres  9.4.1 Providing Energy Efficiency Information  Energy Efficiency Labelling Programs    9.5 Training Programs   Municipal Training Workshops on Climate Change Action   9.6 Public and Non-Governmental Organizations   Selection of climate change focused non-governmental organizations in Canada   9.7 Provincial and Territorial Activities  9.8 Participation in International Activities  International Co-operation on Energy Efficiency Initiatives    Reference   Annex 1: Canada’s First Biennial Report  Section 1 Introduction  Section 2 Information on Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Trends   National Inventory Arrangements   Section 3 Economy-wide Emission Reduction Target  Table 2(d): the LULUCF Sector    Section 4 Progress in Achievement of Quantified Economy-wide Emission Reduction Targets and Relevant Information  4. A Mitigation actions and their effects–Policies and Measures   4. B Reporting on Progress  4. C Estimates of Emission Reductions and Removals and the Use of Units from the Markets-Based Mechanisms and Land Use, Land-use Change and Forestry Activities  Overview   Canada’s general approach to including LULUCF in accounting   Forest Land Remaining Forest Land   Category definition  Reference level   Exclusion of natural disturbance impacts   Cap  Land Converted to Forest Land   Cropland   Forest Land converted to Other Land categories  Harvested Wood Products     Section 5 Projections  Table 6 (b) Notes:    Section 6 Provisions of Financial, Technological and Capacity Building Support to Developing Country Parties   6. A Finance  Effectively Addressing Developing Countries Needs  New and additional resources  Mobilising Investments   7. B Technology Development and Transfer   Capacity Building     References      