                                            Po lic  y  B  ri ef  Are the Dutch going green?  Climate politics in the low lands  heading towards crunch time  JANUARY 2019  Pa ul   H of  hu is   &  L  ou is  e  va  n  Sc  ha ik  Since autumn 2017, a new wind has been blowing in the Netherlands on the topic  of climate and energy policy. The new government pledged to become a European  climate frontrunner with an emission reduction target of 49% by 2030 compared  to 1990 levels. This decision was made in the context of angry citizens protesting  against domestic natural gas production leading to earthquakes, and a court ruling  urging the government to step up short-term climate action in line with climate  science. Now, at the start of 2019, we are witnessing the end game of a typical  Dutch bottom-up negotiating process – known as ‘polderen’ – leading to a national  Climate and Energy Agreement, involving government, industry and civil society.  It is increasingly questioned if this process is suitable to deliver broad-based societal  consensus on how to tackle climate change towards 2030 and beyond. This policy  brief discusses the political context and policy proposals made. It points to some dark  clouds hanging over the realisation of the ambitious objectives.  Introduction  The centre-right Cabinet Rutte III, which  came to power in October 2017, is profiling  itself as the greenest Dutch Cabinet ever.  Integrated climate and energy policy is  one of the four key issues in the 2017- 2021 Policy Agenda (‘Regeerakkoord ’).  Guided by the slogan ‘Confidence in the  future’, the government’s strives to engage  all stakeholders in tackling major societal  challenges.  Dutch climate and energy policy is rooted  in the national commitment to implement  the UN Paris Climate Agreements of 2015.  And as an EU Member State, the country  must also adhere to its EU commitment  to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by   at least 42% by 2030, as compared to 1990  levels. When the new government took  office in 2017, this EU target was -40%.  At that time, the Dutch government  acknowledged that -40% would be  insufficient to contribute to limiting the  global temperature rise to 2 degrees Celsius.  Therefore the Regeer akkoord set an ambition  for the Netherlands to achieve a reduction  of 49% by 2030. The new government  also indicated it wanted to be a European  frontrunner, by seeking support among  European partners to enhance the overall  EU ambition to -55% in 2030. Should that  ambition not be realised, the Netherlands  would still try to find agreement on an  additional effort with like-minded countries.    2  Clingendael Policy Brief  A broad consensus-based policy  agreement and a Climate Law  For centuries, societal actors in the  Netherlands have cooperated closely to  fight against flooding and reclaiming land  from the sea (so-called polders). Since the  20th century, consensus-oriented stakeholder  engagement in policy making (‘polderen’)  has become a hallmark of Dutch government  policy development. In order to reach a  national Climate and Energy Agreement  in 2019, it was therefore logical to engage  stakeholders from five key economic  sectors: electricity production, industry, built  environment (houses, office buildings, etc),  mobility and transportation, agriculture and  land use. The negotiation process towards  broadly supported climate and energy  policies would provide transparency and  reliability among key economic sectors,  different levels of government and non- governmental organisations (NGOs).  Additionally, the process would cement  a permanent platform for further policy  development and monitoring. As icing on the  cake, the policy process would be completed  with a Climate Law, a novelty in Dutch  legislation. This law would establish the  regulatory framework to guide and monitor  the main climate and energy policy targets  for the medium and longer term.  Earthquakes bringing an end to  international gas hub aspirations  and an unexpected court ruling  To gain a better understanding of how the  debate is unfolding at present, it is helpful  to identify some of the topics of the past  decade, most notably the political unrest  created by earthquakes in the north of  the country (Groningen) and the Urgenda  Court ruling. These developments have  changed the focus of Dutch energy policy,  which previously was centred around an  ambition to become a natural gas hub in  north-western Europe, since it undermined  a narrative on natural gas being a more  reliable and less polluting energy source  than oil or coal.  In the first decade of this century, the  Netherlands still wanted to profile itself  as a regional gas hub, potentially with gas  from Russia being imported and temporarily  stored in (already earlier emptied) gas  fields in the north of the country. However,  tensions with Russia over the capturing of a  Greenpeace ship in the Arctic, the downing  of flight MH17 on Ukrainian soil, and the  annexation of Crimea complicated fulfilment  of this ambition. Moreover, increasing  occurrences of earthquakes in the northern  region of the country added to the idea that  the gas exploration was perhaps less of  a blessing than previously thought.  An effect was a higher policy priority for  energy saving and renewables, resulting in  2013 in the Energy Agreement for Sustainable  Growth. This agreement was a consensus- based ‘contract’ with stakeholders, in line  with the ‘polder ’- process mentioned above.  Parties to the contract agreed to implement  2050 targets on: i) energy efficiency: on  average +1.5% per year, and 100 Petajoule  overall in 2020; ii) the use of renewable  energy: up to 14% in 2020, and to 16%  in 2030; and iii) job creation of at least  15,000 new jobs. Implementation of the 2013  Agreement is still ongoing in 2019. Progress  is measured periodically, although not much  attention is given to it.  In 2015, the Urgenda Foundation filed a  climate case against the Dutch government.  The case was brought on the basis of  900 citizens holding their government  accountable for ‘contributing to dangerous  climate change’. On 24 June 2015, the  District Court of The Hague ruled that the  government must cut national greenhouse  gas emissions by at least 25% compared to  1990 levels by the end of 2020. The ruling  required the government to immediately take  more effective action on climate change.  In September 2015, despite calls from leading  scientists, lawyers, citizens and companies  that the Court’s ruling should be accepted,  the Dutch government decided to appeal  the judgment. It made this decision even  though it was taking steps to meet the target  set by the Court, and it further claimed that  procedural and not substantial reasons had  motivated the decision to appeal.    3  Clingendael Policy Brief  On 9 October 2018 the Hague Court of  Appeal ruled in favour of the Urgenda  Foundation: ‘Failure to implement the verdict  of 2015 would amount to a violation of the  rights of Dutch citizens.’ More specifically,  the new ruling was based upon citizens’  rights as stipulated by the 1953 European  Convention on Human Rights. On 16 November 2018 the Dutch government  announced its intention to appeal again.  It would now ask the Supreme Court for  a ruling on the question of whether a  political decision by the government can  be overthrown by a court verdict. In the  meantime, the government has indicated  it will undertake action to meet the target  set by the Hague Court of Appeal. In doing  so, it set aside an extra 500 million euros to  cover the necessary expenses.  In March 2018 – after a series of new  earthquakes – the Cabinet took the historic  decision to scale down and ultimately end  the mining of natural gas in Groningen as  soon as possible. This extensive natural gas  field has been exploited since its discovery  in the 1960s. Since then, it has provided a  major contribution to the energy needs of  the Dutch (and European) economy. The  Cabinet’s decision to scale down the mining  is based on the scientific knowledge that  continuation of gas mining cannot ‘guarantee  the safety and safety experience of (the  population of) Groningen’. The earthquakes  are causing damage to houses and other  buildings, and are triggering feelings of  insecurity by people who live and work in  the region. This decision has a far-reaching  impact on how the Dutch economy will  need to organise its energy supply for the  middle and long term. And by extension, it  has unmistakably accelerated support for an  energy and climate transition.  Towards a consensus-based  Climate and Energy Agreement,  and parliamentary initiative for  a Climate Bill  In February 2018 the government began  the ‘polder ’-process of fleshing out with  stakeholders the aspired Climate and Energy  Agreement. Representatives from over   100 stakeholder organisations were invited to  participate at five negotiation ‘tables’ led by  independent chairs with a strong reputation  on the subject. As indicated above, the  tables would develop policies for five key  sectors: industry, mobility/transportation,  built environment, electricity production,  agriculture and land use. The overall process  coordination is conducted by a so-called  Climate Council, made up of the chairs of  the five tables and independent experts.  The Council itself is chaired by former  Minister of the Environment Ed Nijpels, who  also chairs the monitoring committee of  the 2013 Energy Agreement for Sustainable  Growth (mentioned above). Ed Nijpels  formerly was a minister of the liberal- conservative party VVD, home to Prime  Minister Rutte and currently the largest party  in Parliament, holding 21% of the seats.  The 2017 Regeerakkoord included an  indicative 2030 greenhouse gas emission  reduction target for each of the five sectors  (see table below).  The mission of the five negotiating tables  is to reach agreement on concrete policies  and measures to achieve the specific target  for their sector, by focusing on reducing  emissions on Dutch territory, and by defining  cost-effective solutions. To start with, the  Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy  Analysis (CPB) together with the Netherlands  Environment Assessment Agency (PBL)  provided an inventory of options for policies  and measures per sector, including data on  their cost-effectiveness.  First results of the table negotiations were  presented on 1 July 2018.1 Each table  presented policy options by which its sector  could contribute to the targeted emission  reduction of 49% in 2030. Subsequently, PBL  and CPB were asked to assess the emission  reduction potential of the proposed policy  packages. The proposals were criticised  by commentators for lacking specificity.  Probably, as a result, PBL and CPB   1 The chair of the Climate Council delivered the  document Proposals for main lines of the Climate  Agreement to the Minister of Economic and  Climate Affairs.    4  Clingendael Policy Brief  concluded on 28 September 2018 that the  policy proposals seemed to ‘offer sufficient  potential to realise a 49% reduction in 2030’,  and in addition that ‘they could not assess,  as of yet, the actual emission reduction of  the proposed packages’. Both agencies  advised the government to prioritise the swift  continuation of table negotiations on (more)  concrete policy instruments and measures by  which the reduction targets could be realised  (such as standard setting, levies, subsidies,  new regulations, binding agreements, and  setting budgetary priorities).  Hence, in a second phase of the process,  the government asked the tables to identify  concrete policy instruments to implement  their proposals. And they were asked  to define more explicitly their individual  commitment and concrete contribution to  achieving the necessary emission reductions.  To speed up the process, the government  also offered clarity on its own commitment  and role, by defining a framework for the  aspired Agreement: In addition to emission  reductions on national territory and  cost-effectiveness, the policy proposals  of the tables would need to be clear on  affordability, i.e. the effects on income  distribution (‘who would have to pay for  what’). Furthermore, the negotiated outcome  would need to secure broad-based and  strong commitment for concrete policies   and measures. Along with this framework,  the government defined specific guidelines  for discussions at each of the five tables, in  the form of a list of 29 points.  The second round of negotiations ended  on 21 December 2018, when Ed Nijpels  presented the Draft Climate Agreement  to the Minister of Economic Affairs and  Climate, Eric Wiebes. One day earlier,  the green NGOs, the Labour Union FNV  and the association of green industry  CSR Netherlands walked away from  the negotiations. Their view on the  Draft Agreement is that ‘without equal  burden sharing it will be an agreement  without power’. They added that the Draft  Agreement ‘does not contain the structural  changes needed to tackle climate change  appropriately; and on paying the costs, the  big polluters can wave their hats’.  At the presentation of the agreement to  the press one day later, Ed Nijpels and Eric  Wiebes stated they regretted the walking  away, adding that ‘the job is not finished, yet’.  ‘The green NGO’s are welcome to re-join the  negotiations later, anytime’. The chair of the  powerful employers association VNO-NCW  had his regrets, too. But he added that ‘we  can also reach an agreement without the  green NGOs’, and that they ‘play no major  role in implementing it’.  Indicative allocation per sector of overall -49% emission reduction in 2030   (in Mton CO2 equivalents)  Sector/negotiating table Emission Indicated reduction  Emission 2015 Ceiling 2030 compared to   emission 2015  compared to   reference 2030  Electricity production 52,8 12,4 40,4 20,2  Industry (incl. waste processing,  oil refineries, extraction sector)  55,1 35,7 19,4 14,3  Built environment 24,4 15,3 9,0 3,4  Transportation/mobility 35,5 25,0 10,5 7,3  Agriculture and land use 27,3 22,2 5,1 3,5  Total 195,1 110,6 84,5 48,7  Source: Michiel Hekkenberg en Robert Koelemeijer (eds), Analyse van het voorstel voor hoofdlijnen  van het Klimaatakkoord, Netherlands Environment Assessment Agency (PBL), 28 September 2018, p. 47   (table data translated in English)    5  Clingendael Policy Brief  On the Draft Climate Agreement itself:  The document contains – more than 500 –  negotiated proposals for policies and  measures, to be implemented in the five  key sectors. Now, it is once again up to  PBL and CPB to assess the budgetary  and income-distribution effects and, more  importantly, the emission reductions set out  in the negotiated proposals. The assessment  may trigger adjustments of the package,  ‘to safeguard the desired minimum emission  reduction of 49% in 2030 ‘. In addition, policy  adjustments may be necessary, if and when  the assessment brings forward disputable  income-distribution effects. It is expected  that the overall package, including these  assessments, could be available for final  decision making (i.e. a debate in Parliament)  ‘before the end of the first quarter of 2019’.  Simultaneously, the parliamentary discussion  on the Climate Bill is proceeding. On  21 December 2018, just moments before the  Draft Climate Agreement was presented,  a vast majority (117 out of 150 seats) in the  Second Chamber of Parliament adopted the  Bill. A first version of the Bill was submitted  to Parliament in September 2016. The  proposal was the initiative of two political  parties, the Green Party (Groen Links) and  the Social Democrats (Partij van de Arbeid).  At that time, the Social Democrats were part  of the parliamentary coalition that formed the  Rutte II government. So, the foundation stone  of the Climate Bill was an initiative of both a  government and an opposition party. In line  with the 2015 Paris Agreements, this first  version of the Bill had high ambitions: a set of  legally enforceable targets of -55% emission  reduction in 2030 and -95% in 2050, and  increasing the share of renewable energy  up to 100% in 2050. After negotiations with  other political parties and after the 2017 start  of the Rutte III Cabinet (which is a four-party  coalition), the now adopted version of the Bill  has the support of a parliamentary majority  of nine parties: the two initiators, Groen  Links and Partij van de Arbeid, now both in  opposition; three other opposition parties  (Socialist Party, 50Plus and DENK ) and the  four coalition parties (Liberal-Conservatives  – VVD, Christian Democrats – CDA,  Christian Union – CU, Liberal Democrats  – D66). In order to generate this majority  support, the recently adopted version of   the Bill has somewhat lowered ambitions:  establishing a framework for negotiations  on policy development towards greenhouse  gas emission reduction up to 95% in 2050,  a policy intention to achieve 49% emission  reduction in 2030, and 100% CO2-neutral  electricity production (i.e. using biomass)  in 2050.  Final steps in the process to turn the Bill into  Law are a second debate in the Senate and  a contra signing by His Majesty the King.  Best guess is that this process will end in the  first months of 2019, well before the regional  elections of 20 March 2019 when (indirectly)  a new seat allocation in the Senate will be  assigned.  How the Dutch plans compare  to the EU’s 2030 ambitions  As highlighted above, the 2017 Regeer- akkoord indicated that the Netherlands  would become a climate frontrunner in the  EU. In Brussels, the country would advocate  for an increase in EU targets for 2030  and 2050 of -55% and -95% respectively.  The Netherlands would try to organise a  group of frontrunners supporting these  ambitions, in order to prove that achieving  these ambitious targets was both politically  and economically feasible. In line with this  ambition the Netherlands is very active,  not only in communicating its ambition  in general, but also in integrating it into  ongoing European policy development for  key sectors such as energy production,  industry, transportation, agriculture,  built environment and financial services.  In December 2018, at the UN Climate Summit  in Katowice, Prime Minister Rutte repeated  the Netherlands’ preference to increase  the EU target for 2030 to -55%, and he also  indicated his expectation that ambitious  Dutch national climate policies would be  agreed upon soon.  In the meantime, the Dutch government  had put together its first Integral National  Energy and Climate (INEC) report. According  to new regulations in the context of the EU  Energy Union, all EU Member States must  produce a first draft of such a report for the     6  Clingendael Policy Brief  European Commission by the end of 2018.  The INEC monitors Member States’ progress  in achieving the targets of the EU energy and  climate policies, especially those regarding  decarbonisation, energy efficiency and  the use of renewable energy. The recently  available Dutch INEC report outlines the  current national (and European) climate and  energy ambitions. It includes the key national  policy focus on developing cost-effective  policies and measures on national emission  reduction. Since the ambitions are not yet  translated into policy and measures, the  Dutch INEC focuses on the supposed effects  that the Climate and Energy Agreement will  deliver, once it is in place.  So far, the Netherlands’ actual contribution  to the implementation of key EU climate  policy targets – e.g. for emission reductions  in sectors not covered by the EU emissions  trading scheme, targets for energy efficiency  and the use of renewable energy – is  mediocre2. The Netherlands is not on its own  here, but other EU Member States joining  the Netherlands in the EU frontrunner group  have a better track record. It is remarkable  that the Dutch INEC report is very quiet on  what the Netherlands intends to do to step  up its plans regarding the 2030 renewables  and energy efficiency targets agreed upon  in Brussels. Unlike the emission reduction  target, these other targets are not legally  binding, but EU Member States need to be  transparant on their policy plans to achieve  these targets. The Dutch INEC seems rather  weak on this point, indicating only that the  energy efficiency and renewables shares  are likely to increase as a side-effect of  policies focusing on cost-effective emission  reductions.  2 See https://www.pbl.nl/en/publications/national- energy-outlook-2017 for Dutch data and https:// www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/  for comparing EU member State data.  The climate negotiations are  reaching their end game, while  societal debate is heating up  In the first half of 2019, policy negotiations  seem to enter their decisive stage.  Firstly, PBL and CPB will again assess  the negotiation results of the five table  discussions, answering two major questions:  will the proposed policies and measures  deliver the aspired emission reductions, and  will the burden sharing of the economic costs  be in line with the polluter pays principle.  So far, the expectation is that the PBL and  CPB assessment will not be available before  the end of February, beginning of March.  If necessary, when the answers to both  questions above are insufficient, the Cabinet  said it will restart the table negotiations.  In other words, planning of final decision  making is unclear so far. The possibility  exists that a negotiation agreement could be  finalised just before the upcoming regional  elections of March 20, but not many see this  as a realistic scenario.  Parallel to the official proceeding of the  process, a societal debate was ignited,  which is quite intense. As of December 21,  an overload of comments, op-eds, columns  on every aspect of the dossier entered the  public domain (and still goes on by date).  The opposition to the climate proposals  by populist newspaper De Telegraaf was  particularly strong, along the line that  ‘ordinary citizens finally will have to pick up  the climate bill’. Overall, the vast exchange  of views mirrors a polarisation of the debate,  if not a multi-polarisation. In particular,  three ‘poles’ compete for their right of way:  i) The Netherlands will economically (and  morally) gain by its front running role and  ambition, ii) The Netherlands is too small to  play an individual leading role; we have to  act in coordination with our European allies,  iii) The ambitions are those of the elite, the  commons are not included but will have to  pay the bill.  Defining a compromise in this complex  landscape seems quite a challenge. Despite  the initial support for the ambitious coalition  agreement by many politicians from  the conservative VVD and the Christian   https://www.pbl.nl/en/publications/national-energy-outlook-2017 https://www.pbl.nl/en/publications/national-energy-outlook-2017 https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/ https://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-maps/indicators/   7  Clingendael Policy Brief  Democrats CDA, their enthusiasm now  appears lukewarm at best, especially  as their competitors on the political  right, notably Geert Wilders and Thierry  Baudet are fuelling fears about the costs  of climate policies for ordinary citizens.  And the liberal-democrats D66 are keen to  underline their green credentials, which to  a somewhat lesser degree, is also the case  for the Christian Union, a smaller coalition  party with a more social Christian profile.  These two parties fear electoral losses  from the Greens (Groen Links), the Social  Democrats (Partij van de Arbeid), and the  Party for the Animals.  With regional elections coming up in March,  the scenery of the debate is clear. The  outcome of these elections will determine  a new seat allocation in the Senate which  is crucial for continuity in parliamentary  support for the Rutte III coalition. The  upcoming two months, politicians face  a major dilemma: Either to opt for a  parliamentary vote on the Climate Agreement  before March 20, thereby risking a loss of  votes in the upcoming regional elections and  loss of future Senate seats, or to postpone  the debate on the agreement until after the  elections, thereby running the risk of losing  votes due to being not transparent enough  on their position in the climate debate to  their potential electorate.  Key issues of debate and  controversy  Several issues are subject to intense public  debate and controversy. At general level, the debate is whether  big industry/multinationals and energy  producers are being ‘left off the hook’ with  regard to the transition costs. Roughly  spoken, the industry, agriculture and energy  production sector emit approximately 60% of  total CO2 emissions; households account for  approximately 15%. So far, no reliable data  are available to answer questions to what  extent the cost sharing across sectors will be  in accordance to their emission contribution.  More specific debates run in the industry,  mobility and housing sector.  With regard to industry, the debate centres  around the introduction of a national  CO2 levy for the sector. The issue was on  the table from the start of the negotiations.  In October 2018, they were triggered  further by a research paper of the Dutch  Central Bank, indicating that introduction  of a substantive national CO2 levy (Euro  50/ton CO2) would be cost-effective and  would have ‘no big consequences for the  national economy’. ‘But – the paper stated –  specific economic sectors might face  major (negative) effects, which could be  neutralised by spending the levy revenues  on financial incentives for investments  in clean technologies’. However, at the  industry negotiation table representatives  of employers association VNO-NCW  successfully blocked the CO2 levy, arguing  that it would set back Dutch industry on  the European level playing field and could  conflict with the European emission trading  scheme ETS. The Draft Agreement of December 21  contains a so-called bonus-malus proposal,  in which each company has to table its  emission reduction plans. Subsequently, the  government agency RVO will assess (and  monitor) the reduction effects of each plan.  The assessment results determine whether  the company may collect a financial bonus or  has to pay a penalty (malus).  With regard to the transport sector, road  pricing proofs the most contested item.  At first, the ‘mobility table’ seemed to  move towards the conclusion that – next to  incentivising electric cars – several modes  of road pricing may be the preferable, cost- effective policy choice. In the first week of  December 2018, the table chair made a plea  for this on public television. However, she  was immediately attacked by Members of  Parliament (MPs) of the Rutte coalition, who  pointed to the 2017 Regeerakkoord, which  rules out road pricing at least until 2021. The presented Draft Climate Agreement of  December 21 includes a proposal to start  a feasibility study on road pricing.  Finally, a politically cumbersome issue is  who will have to pay for the transition costs  in the housing sector. The main focus is that  natural gas for heating and cooking will have  to be replaced by other energy sources.     8  Clingendael Policy Brief  The negotiating table introduced the concept  of a so-called budget-neutral energy pricing  scheme, in which home owners may pay the  costs of a multi-annual investment loan to  change to a gas free house by a yearly lower  energy bill. However, it is unclear yet how a  building-specific loan for a heat pump and  insulation can be financed, while gas and  electricity prices are already rising in 2019.  A question is, to what extent individual home  owners will accept additional tax rises on  natural gas to incentivise energy-efficiency  investments? Hence, the idea is that when  public housing agencies will start large  scale investing in their rental houses, the  market prices of insulation, heat pumps and  induction cooking will go down. But is this a  realistic assumption? And what, if individual  households cannot afford the heavy  investment costs to make their houses gas- free? So far, the indistinctness of the matter  which is frequently cited on television and in  newspaper articles, creates insecurity and  even fear among citizens.  Pressure is mounting, and even  threatening the polder-tradition  and political survival of Rutte-III  In the ongoing debate, even the Dutch  ‘polder ’-process itself has increasingly  put into question. Initially, the government  wanted to profile the Netherlands as a  country that could successfully combine  sustainable responsibility with socio- economic innovation. The bottom-up process  with industry and civil society would ensure  legitimacy and cross-partisan support for  implementation of the policies. But now  industry and the more conservative political  parties are backtracking, in particular by  pointing at the importance of guaranteeing  a European-level playing field. On the  other side, green political parties and  NGOs indicate they will not sign up to an  Agreement which includes high reliance on  carbon capture and storage, and without  a national CO2 levy for industry. And they  are critical on any arrangement that leaves  households paying for the energy transition  rather than industry.  Up front, the government has assessed  the complexity and vulnerability of the  Dutch ‘polder ’-process in the 2017  Regeerakkoord, by pointing out the risk  that the ambition might not be entirely  fulfilled, eventually necessitating its scaling  down. Recently, a debate has opened up  on this particular issue between those who  advocate sticking to the ‘polder ’, even if  a negotiated societal compromise does  not deliver in full, and those who advocate  empowering the government to overrule  the maximum outcome of the negotiations  by means of additional regulations. Can a  well-designed polder process still deliver  an outcome with broad public support or  is it too elitist and short-term oriented to  be legitimate?  Hence, societal support for the outcomes  of the five tables is deteriorating. The  issues are complex, the stakes are high.  Even though there is majority support for  taking urgent action now, it is becoming  clear that proposed policies will affect key  elements of economic life and social welfare.  Moreover, international developments  are feeding and complicating the national  debate. The French (and Belgian) ‘gillets  jaunes’ protests (which until now have been  relatively small in the Netherlands) illustrate  the risk of popular unrest when household  expenditures on for instance energy are  rising, and expose public anger about  growing inequalities between elites and  ordinary citizens. And what might happen  when climate activists join the forces?  Moreover, the Urgenda rulings add  complexity to the upcoming political  decision-making process. Although the  dispute in this case focuses on short- term policies (up to 2020), its societal  impact extends further. Green NGOs in  particular view the way the government  was (and still is) handling the Urgenda  case as ‘somewhat arrogant’. This may well  affect NGOs’ confidence in – and support  for – government policy development over  the longer term. That would undermine  the process of obtaining ‘ownership’ of  the proposals among a wide range of  stakeholders.    9  Clingendael Policy Brief  The decision to end natural gas mining in  Groningen is yet another complication. It  is now a fait accompli for the negotiating  parties at the climate tables, whereas a  majority of people in Groningen still have  little confidence in the government sticking  to its decision. The central government lost  considerable credibility in how it managed  the situation in Groningen, with Shell and  state-owned gas mining company NAM  initially being responsible themselves for  judging claims about damage to properties  (and doing this very reluctantly and slow),  and downplaying the relationship between  the earthquakes and gas exploration.  The challenge for the government is now  to re-establish trust and confidence, by  showing that social inclusion and safety  are important elements of the final policy  packages.  The last, but by no means least complicating  issue is the Climate Bill. Originally initiated  by two left wing parties with a clear view  on why and how to empower central  government to ensure long-term climate  policy commitment, the Bill now seems  to be entangled in the polder-process.  By seeking support from other parties in  Parliament, the original ambitions of the  Bill have been scaled down substantially.  With a Senate debate still coming up, the  risk now is that the process will deliver  a Bill that serves only to facilitate the  polder process, rather than guiding it.  Finally, in short and to conclude:  Climate change policy in the low lands has  become a divisive issue. Political backing  for the compromises reached by around  100 stakeholder organisations is under  immense pressure. However, a complete  failure of the process would make the  decision to stop gas exploration unrealistic.  Moreover, it would also increase the scope  for continued legal action against the state,  and would damage Prime Minister Rutte’s  reputation as European leader in the field  of climate change.    About the Clingendael Institute Clingendael – the Netherlands Institute of International Relations –  is a leading think tank and academy on international affairs.  Through our analyses, training and public debate we aim to inspire  and equip governments, businesses, and civil society in order to  contribute to a secure, sustainable and just world.  www.clingendael.org  @clingendaelorg  info@clingendael.org  The Clingendael Institute +31 70 324 53 84  The Clingendael Institute  About the authors  Paul Hofhuis is Senior Research Associate at the Clingendael Institute.  Louise van Schaik is Head of Sustainability and Climate Change and  Senior Research Fellow at the Clingendael Institute. She is also acting  Head of the EU in the World Unit.  https://twitter.com/clingendaelorg https://www.facebook.com/ClingendaelInstitute/    