                                         climate change - 02.indd   Impacts on People The population of Yukon is approximately 25%  First Nations and 75% non First Nations. While  all Yukon residents will be impacted by climate  change, First Nations people will likely be more  impacted because they generally live closer to  the land.  Infrastructure Infrastructure includes buildings,  roads, pipelines, airports, mines, power  lines, and water supply and disposal   systems. More snow, stronger  winds, and melting permafrost   can damage all of these. As new  infrastructure is designed   and built, the impacts of  climate change must be  taken into account. Also,  Emergency Response Plans  need to be rewritten to   address emergencies caused  by climate change impacts.  Opportunities In some instances, a changing climate  may create new opportunities. As  winters warm and shorten, tourists   might arrive earlier or stay later in  the year.  Farmers may enjoy a longer   growing season.  Traditional Activities  and Culture Fishers and hunters are noticing changes in the   distribution and abundance of fish and wildlife.  New species will move into the region, while   others will decline in health and abundance.  These changes will force people to alter  their usual fishing and hunting practices,  which will interrupt the cycle of passing  on traditional knowledge. Hunter  safety is a growing concern,   as snow, ice and weather  conditions are becoming less   predictable.  Industry Oil and gas, mining, forestry, tourism and agriculture  will all be affected in both positive and negative ways.  It is important that climate change  now be taken into consideration  for development and land use  planning for all activities.  For example, in southwest  Yukon, the Champagne  and Aisihik First Nations  have released a new  forestry management  plan that hinges entirely  on the rapid changes to  their forests due to spruce  bark beetle kill. Industry  will have to consider the  rapidly changing climate  of the North when building ice  roads, pipelines, and other industrial  infrastructure.  Health Climate change  affects the  availability of and  access to country foods  and, ultimately, affects  people’s health. Other  health risks include increased  ultraviolet radiation exposure  and the spread of insect-borne  disease. Regions may not be resilient  to potential outbreaks, as new pests and   diseases migrate north.   Cumulative Impacts Climate change is already affecting seasonal weather,  wildlife behaviour, and entire ecosystems. These  changes are affecting local economies and community  well being. These and other impacts accumulate,  resulting in even greater stress on people, regions, and  governments. Solutions will only be successful if they  address the impacts as a whole, and involve and have  the support of the local people.   CLIMATE CHANGE PROGRAM, Department of Environment  Tel:  (867) 667-5683    web:  http://www.environmentyukon.gov.yk.ca/climate.html   FOR MORE INFORMATION CONTACT:   Climate Change in Yukon:     