                                            PROTECTING AND EMPOWERING CANADIANS TO IMPROVE THEIR  HEALTH  SCIENCE NARRATIVE  CLIMATE CHANGE   IMPACTS ON THE   HEALTH OF CANADIANS    TO PROMOTE AND PROTECT THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS THROUGH LEADERSHIP, PARTNERSHIP,   INNOVATION AND ACTION IN PUBLIC HEALTH.   —Public Health Agency of Canada   Également disponible en français sous le titre :   Exposé des faits scientifiques –   Les incidences des changements climatiques sur la santé de la population canadienne  To obtain additional information, please contact:  Public Health Agency of Canada Address Locator 0900C2 Ottawa, ON K1A 0K9 Tel.: 613-957-2991 Toll free: 1-866-225-0709 Fax: 613-941-5366 TTY: 1-800-465-7735 E-mail: publications@hc-sc.gc.ca  This publication can be made available in alternative formats upon request.  © Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, as represented by the Minister of Health, 2017  Publication date: April 2017  This publication may be reproduced for personal or internal use only without permission provided the source is fully acknowledged.   Cat.: HP5-122/2017E-PDF  ISBN: 978-0-660-08106-9  Pub.: 170000    ISCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  SCIENCE NARRATIVE  CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS   ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  Office of the Chief Science Officer     II SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS    IIISCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  TABLE OF CONTENTS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1  1.0 HEALTH IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3  1.1 INFECTIOUS DISEASE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4  1.2 FOOD SAFETY AND SECURITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5  1.3 WATERBORNE DISEASE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6  1.4 EXTREME WEATHER  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6  1.5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, HEALTH SECURITY AND GLOBAL STABILITY . . . . . 7  1.6 CHRONIC DISEASE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8  1.7 MENTAL HEALTH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9  1.8 PHYSICAL ACTIVITY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10  2.0 ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS TO HEALTH . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11  2.1 ADAPTATION MEASURES AND STRATEGIES TO PROTECT HEALTH . . . . . . . . . 11  2.2 HEALTH ADAPTATION IN CANADA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15  2.2.1 ASSESSING IMPACTS AND VULNERABILITIES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15  2.2.2 PREPARING FOR THE IMPACTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16  2.2.3 COMMUNICATING HEALTH RISKS TO THE PUBLIC . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16  2.2.4 HEALTH RELATED RESEARCH NEEDS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17  3.0 SOCIETY, CULTURE AND BEHAVIOUR  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19  4.0 CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH AND AN INTEGRATED APPROACH  . . . . . . . . . . . 21  5.0 FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23  6.0 REFERENCES  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25  CITED REFERENCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25    IV SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS    1SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY There is considerable science-based evidence that the global climate is changing, with  increasing overall temperatures, increasing carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases,  and altered patterns of precipitation. The Lancet Commission (2015) speaks to the many and  serious impacts of climate change on health, and how addressing these could be “the greatest  global health opportunity of the 21st century”. Extreme weather events and increased  climate variability associated with climate change exacerbate current public health challenges  globally, and present new risks to populations. For Canada, various effects of climate change  play a significant compounding factor that negatively affects the health and resilience of  vulnerable communities. Notable direct and indirect impacts include:  • Droughts and flooding and the links with incidence of water-borne diseases and to  psychosocial effects  • Food security and the nutritional status of individuals, which further undermine resistance  to diseases  • Heat-related morbidity and mortality as well as compounding health issues related to poor  air quality such as asthma, allergies, respiratory diseases, cancer, cardiovascular diseases  and stroke   • The spread of disease vectors favouring the emergence and re-emergence of infectious  diseases  • Natural disasters and the loss of land, cultural heritage, natural resources and property with  significant impact on mental health and well-being  • Special challenges and impacts on northern Canadians such as dangerous travel, damaged  infrastructure, threats to traditional food sources, disappearance of drinking water sources  and related psychosocial and cultural impacts  • Sustainable healthcare in a changing climate presents future risks to Canadians as its  capacity is strained in various ways (aging population, resource intensive infrastructure,  budget constraints)    2 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  As the impact of climate change further highlights weaknesses in many systems, a social  determinants of health approach to considering the changing climate would add great value  in national efforts toward reducing vulnerability and risk (e.g. addressing food security,  availability of potable water, safe housing, working conditions, stable income, and sustainable  development). This would support a more integrated or horizontal approach whereby  adaptation frameworks are informed by different perspectives. Many authors argue that most  mitigation and adaptation responses to climate change are “no-regret” options, which lead   to direct reductions in the burden of ill-health, enhance community resilience, alleviate poverty,  and address global inequity. It is important for all sectors to bring their unique positions and  perspectives together to define future considerations in governance and actions towards  successful adaptations for mitigating health impacts of climate change in Canada and globally.     3SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  1.0 HEALTH IMPACTS OF CLIMATE CHANGE Risks to the health of Canadians from climate change include direct and indirect illnesses1 and  deaths related to poor air quality, water- and food-borne contamination, changing patterns of  diseases spread by animals, ticks and insects, and extreme weather events including extreme  heat events and urban heat islands. Human-generated greenhouse gas emissions2 (GHGs)  contribute to climate change and these gas emissions derive in part from aspects of the built  environment3 such as transportation systems and infrastructure, building construction and  operation, and land-use planning (1,2).   Special challenges and impacts on northern Canadians are already being observed such as more  dangerous travel (unusual changes in ice, snow and land conditions), damaged infrastructure  due to permafrost melt, threats to traditional food sources, disappearance of drinking water  sources and related-psychosocial and cultural impacts. Those most vulnerable are facing several  compounding risks such as chronic health conditions, multiple environmental hazard exposures,  the extremes of age, socio-economic deprivation, physical and/or social isolation. Sustainable  healthcare in a changing climate presents further risks to Canadians as its capacity is strained  in many ways such as from the aging population, resource intensive infrastructure, professional  needs and budget constraints (1).   Key areas of health risks linked to climate change are now examined.  1 Such as: asthma, respiratory allergies, and airway diseases, cancer, heat-related morbidity and mortality, human developmental  effects, cardiovascular disease and stroke, mental health and stress-related disorders, foodborne diseases and nutrition, neurological  diseases and disorders, vector-borne and zoonotic diseases, waterborne diseases, weather-related morbidity and mortality.   2 These are gases that trap heat in the atmosphere. 3 The built environment means the buildings, transportation systems, energy systems, open space, and agricultural   lands that make up and support our communities (Toronto Public Health; www1.toronto.ca/wps/portal/ contentonly?vgnextoid=d06e23bf6d481410VgnVCM10000071d60f89RCRD)    4 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  1.1 INFECTIOUS DISEASE There is consensus that climate change is affecting human health. The linkages between public  health and climate change are complex and interact with other factors. Arthropod-borne  diseases are infections spread by insect (e.g. mosquitoes and sandflies) or arachnid (e.g. ticks)  vectors. Major shifts in the epidemiology of several vector-borne diseases and appearances on   new continents have been predicted as a result of climate change (3,4). Climate change   is likely to have both direct and indirect impacts on the burden of West Nile fever, dengue,  Chickungunya fever, malaria, leishmaniasis, tick-borne encephalitis, Lyme borreliosis, Crimean- Congo haemorrhagic fever, spotted fever rickettsioses, Yellow fever, Zika and Rift Valley fever  (5,6). Population mobility is a main factor in globalization of public health threats and risks due to  infectious diseases. Traditional health policy approaches have focused on diseases of global  public health significance such as tuberculosis, Yellow fever, and cholera; however, new diseases  and resistant organisms challenge existing approaches. Clinical implications and health policy  challenges associated with movement of persons across barriers permeable to products,  pathogens, and toxins (e.g. geopolitical borders, patient care environments) are complex.  Outcomes are complicated by high numbers of persons who move across disparate and diverse  settings of disease threat and risk. Existing policies and processes merit an approach to global  public health risk management that integrates population factors with effective and timely  application of policies and processes (7,8).  The incidence, outbreak frequency, and distribution of many infectious diseases are generally  expected to change as a consequence of different factors related to climate change. Temperature  and precipitation patterns influence food- and water-borne diseases. Changes in seasonal  precipitation and temperature influence vector-borne diseases through i. effects on vector survival,  reproduction rates, habitat suitability, distribution, and abundance; ii. the intensity and temporal  pattern of vector activity (biting rates); and iii. rates of pathogen development, survival, and  reproduction within vectors. The projected climate changes may shift the distributional ranges  of vector-borne diseases (5,6). As an example, the number of tick-borne diseases of humans has  increased in incidence and geographic range over the past few decades, and there is concern that  they will pose an even greater threat to public health in the future. Global warming is often cited  as the underlying mechanism favouring the spread of tick-borne diseases, as climate will influence  which tick species are found in a given geographic region, their population density, the likelihood  that they will be infected with microbes pathogenic for humans, and the frequency of tick-human  contact. Changes in climate will influence spread and survival of other insect vectors including  mosquitoes, fleas, sandflies, tsetse flies, and houseflies, known to carry highly pathogenic  microorganisms infecting man. Given the pace of international travel the global consequences  to these changes are currently unknown. Another concern with increasing temperatures is that  ancient bacteria and viruses could re-emerge and revive as global warming melts ice at the poles  exposing long dormant organisms. An example is the August 2016 Anthrax outbreak in the  Russian Federation which was triggered by ice melt in temperatures of 35°C in the Arctic Circle4.  This brought anthrax spores to the surface. Animal contact with those spores and then subsequent  human infection resulted in the hospitalisation of 97 people and a child’s death. These situations  highlight similar potential risks to vulnerable populations living in areas with diminishing ice cover  and thawing permafrost.   4 Anthrax outbreak triggered by climate change kills boy in Arctic Circle. 1Aug2016 The Guardian   www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/anthrax-outbreak-climate-change-arctic-circle-russia. Accessed 5Oct2016    5SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  1.2 FOOD SAFETY AND SECURITY There are other diseases that are likely to be exacerbated in a warmer world including  food-borne and respiratory diseases. It has been shown that reported cases of salmonellosis  and campylobacteriosis peak in the hot summer months and that this association was  observed at temperatures greater than 37.5°C (9). In Canada, some experts may consider  the effect of climate change on food-borne diseases to be minimal providing appropriate  food handling and storage procedures and improved food hygiene (10).  Indigenous Peoples are among the most vulnerable to climate change and experience  distinctive challenges (11), particularly those living in remote locations. A range of factors  that apply to each vulnerability assessment are layered with issues that are unique to  Indigenous communities and culture to varying degrees. These may include reliance on the  rapidly changing natural environment for cultural, social, mental and physical health and  well-being, and livelihoods. Historical legacies have influenced development of Indigenous  communities in Canada. Many have a number of socio-economic challenges, including  disproportionate fiscal and population pressures; sub-standard infrastructure; and limited  access to health services (12). Many of these factors are exacerbated by the more dramatic  impacts of climate change in extreme environments. Food security and access to potable water  are fundamental to health. Store-bought food and water are extremely expensive in remote  areas. This combined with decreased access to traditional food sources and increasingly  expensive and undependable conditions for safe and affordable transportation in remote  regions are deepening existing food and water security concerns (13). Household food  insecurity has been associated with a range of poor physical and mental health outcomes,  including multiple chronic conditions and depression (14,15).    6 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  1.3 WATERBORNE DISEASE Waterborne diseases are also likely to be influenced by climate change. The importance  of climate as a driver of disease risk is derived from observations that waterborne disease  outbreaks are often preceded by heavy rainfall. This link is likely to be most obvious for  inadequately treated water or small rural supplies. Several authors have pointed out links  between cholera and climate variables especially with higher temperature and rainfall,  flooding and major climatic cycles such as El Niño. Cyanobacteria are present in drinking  and recreational waters and most reported human cases were associated with observable  cyanobacterial blooms with known neurotoxicity. The impact of droughts on health through  reduced agricultural productivity and access to water in affluent countries is not clear, but  effects in resource poor countries are likely to be dramatic (16).  1.4 EXTREME WEATHER  Extreme weather events pose particular challenges to populations. The frequency and  intensity of extreme weather events is predicted to rise as a result of climate variability.  Beyond physical damage, effects of disasters such as floods, extreme droughts, storms  and hurricanes on human health seem to be mostly indirect (mediated through vector and  waterborne diseases). Acute injuries, fatalities and mental health illnesses are also significant  public health outcomes and their management and prevention require disaster preparedness  and response planning (17,18).   Disasters significantly impede progress towards sustainable development (19). This is of  particular relevance internationally through the sustainable development goals and nationally  through the revised Federal Sustainable Development Strategy5. Evidence indicates  that exposure of persons and assets in all countries has increased faster than vulnerability   5 Planning for a Sustainable Future: A Federal Sustainable Development Strategy for Canada.   www.fsds-sfdd.ca/index.html#/en/detail/all/    7SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  has decreased, thus generating new risks and a steady rise in disaster related losses, with  a significant economic, social, health, cultural and environmental impact in the short, medium  and long term, especially at the local and community levels. Recurring small-scale disasters and  slow-onset disasters particularly affect communities, households and small and medium-sized  enterprises, constituting a high percentage of all losses. All countries are faced with increasing  levels of possible hidden or unanticipated costs and challenges in order to meet financial and  other obligations (19).  1.5 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT, HEALTH SECURITY  AND GLOBAL STABILITY Between 2008 and 2012 there were 144 million people displaced by disasters (20) with people  in vulnerable situations affected disproportionately. This represents a population larger than the  combined populations of Britain and France. For some disasters the effect of the displacement  can be indirect such as with environmental refugees, or that new conflicts arise due to scarcity of  basic resources (20). The problems of heat stress and heat stress-related mortality are considered  an area of major direct impact because of the severity of the outcome (death) and increased  pressure on governments to respond. An example is the intense 2003 European heat wave, which  caused the death of more than 35,000 mainly elderly persons (21).   Event coincidence analysis was used to investigate data from armed-conflict outbreaks and  climate-related natural disasters for the period 1980–2010 (22). A coincidence rate of 9%  regarding armed-conflict outbreak and disaster occurrence such as heat waves or droughts was  observed. During this period, about 23% of conflict outbreaks in ethnically highly fractionalized  countries robustly coincided with climatic calamities. Although climate-related disasters do not  act as direct triggers of armed conflicts, the disruptive nature of these events seems to play out  in ethnically fractionalized societies in a particularly tragic way. This observation has important  implications for future security policies as several of the world’s most conflict-prone regions,  including North and Central Africa as well as Central Asia. Both of these areas are exceptionally  vulnerable to anthropogenic climate change and characterized by deep ethnic divides (22).   Medical countermeasures (MCMs), such as anthrax vaccine, are therapeutic products (i.e., drugs,  vaccines, and medical devices, as defined by the Food and Drugs Act) which aim to prevent,  mitigate or treat the adverse health effects of a public health event or emergency. Globally,  MCMs play a critical role in addressing all manner of health security threats. This is highly  relevant with regards to climate change impacts on the evolving public health threat and risk  landscape. Increased movement of people and goods leads to increased risk of disease  transmission; emerging and re-emerging infectious disease outbreaks, including antimicrobial- resistant pathogens; and increased risk of terrorism threat agents due to evolving geo-political  landscapes. Ongoing awareness and foresight in ensuring that effective and relevant MCMs  are developed and acquired for use to protect Canadians is a key area of responsibility for the  federal government.   The uncertainty and potentially extreme impacts of these types of events on health security  in Canada and globally are important considerations in emergency preparedness and  response systems’ evolution, innovation and responsiveness.     8 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  1.6 CHRONIC DISEASE There is an emerging literature about the pathways by which climate change can have  an impact on health and non-communicable diseases (18). For example air pollution,  increased heat exposure and changes to agricultural systems (land use) have been linked  to the built environment (23) with aspects such as walkability, travel, and vehicle emissions.  Furthermore, scientific evidence has linked air pollution to cardiovascular diseases (24),  asthma and lung cancer (25), neurological diseases (26), diabetes (26) and symptoms  of depression (27). Air pollution is also associated with decreased physical activity among  adults of normal weight (28).   Extreme heat events have been linked to increases in hospital admissions for respiratory,  kidney and heart-related conditions (28); the effects can be made worse due to the urban  heat island effect and the types of built structures and the materials used (23).  Urbanization, with its high levels of vehicle emissions, extreme temperatures and  westernized lifestyle, is linked to the rising frequency of respiratory allergic diseases and  cardiovascular disease observed over recent decades in most industrialized countries.  Concentrations of air pollutants (mainly ozone and particulate matter) increase with  greenhouse gas emissions and higher temperatures (24). The main driver of respiratory  disease is air pollution itself rather than climate change and the main intervention for  respiratory diseases is emission reduction.   There is a risk of increased exposure to toxic chemicals, known or suspected to cause  cancer, that are released into the environment following thawing permafrost, heavy rainfall  or flooding and by increased volatilization of chemicals under conditions of increased  temperature (25). Cancer, diabetes, cardiovascular disease and respiratory disease are the  leading causes of preventable death and disability in Canada (26). Reducing risk of these  chronic diseases through innovations to the built environment, active living and personal  behavioural change present a unique opportunity for strategic public health innovation (28).  This presents a classic example of possible health adaptations to climate change that both  reduce vulnerability and enhance community resilience.     9SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  1.7 MENTAL HEALTH Climate change affects mental health due to changes in the prevalence and severity of  natural disasters on human settlements. These events can cause anxiety-related responses  and later potentially lead to chronic and severe mental health disorders, with implications  for mental health systems and supports (27). These effects will fall disproportionately on  individuals who are already vulnerable, especially for Indigenous people and those living  in low-resource settings (30). Additionally, individuals might feel a distressing sense of   loss that people experience when their land is damaged and they lose amenities and  opportunity (31). The mental health effects of these losses are becoming evident in many  Indigenous communities where connectivity to the land is integral to psychological, physical  and cultural wellbeing. Changing climatic conditions are causing a variety of changes to  the land, sea and snow environments, which are impacting the security of spirituality, food,  travel and culture (14). Elevated levels of anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress  disorders have been reported in populations who have experienced flooding and during  slow-developing events such as prolonged droughts; impacts include chronic distress and  increased incidence of suicide (32,33). Even in high-income regions where the humanitarian  crisis might be less, the impact on the local economy, damaged homes, and economic losses  can persist for years after natural disasters (34). Government and agencies now emphasise  psychological and psychosocial interventions within disaster response and emergency  management. Social adaptation processes can mediate public risk perceptions and  understanding, psychological and social impacts, coping responses, and behavioural  adaptation (35).    10 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  1.8 PHYSICAL ACTIVITY As the climate changes, various impacts on the ability to be physically active, as well as  impacts on those who are being physically active, are in evidence. Conditions that are known  to be associated with physical activity, such as obesity, pulmonary and cardiac health, and  mental health are thus being influenced both directly and indirectly by climate change.  Outdoor activities can be limited by increased heat and air pollution (36). Longer-term shifts in  environmental conditions, such as shorter seasons with snow and ice, can both provide  opportunities for some outdoor activities (hiking, walking, cycling) or decrease others and their  hazards (skiing, snowmobiling; sunburns, avalanche risk). A significant source of climate  change comes from private motor vehicles emissions and home energy expenditure (e.g.  home heating and cooling). Urban planning, which supports more compact living and  sustainable transportation such as transit and active transportation, would reduce greenhouse  gas emissions and encourage greater physical activity and its associated health benefits (37).  As a result, benefits from policies and programs aimed at mitigating climate change at the  individual level, and particularly in the transportation sector, also have the benefit of increasing  active transportation and as a result physical activity levels (38).    11SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  2.0 ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS  TO HEALTH6 “Much of the potential health impact of climate change can however be avoided through  a combination of strengthening key health system functions and improved management  of the risks presented by a changing climate.”7 As the climate continues to change and  impacts on health are increasingly evident, adaptation is needed to reduce growing risks  to vulnerable populations and communities.   Successful adaptation requires intersectoral collaboration (e.g. health, environment, planning,  transport, infrastructure) on monitoring and surveillance of climate change health outcomes,  addressing root causes that limit preparedness (e.g. poverty), identification of vulnerable  populations, reducing uncertainty through increased research on impacts, educating the  public and decision makers about potential disasters and the benefits of preparedness,  and the financing of needed measures. Adaptations are most effective when they maximize  co-benefits (e.g. increase social capital, improve urban design) that address related health  concerns, and when they are mainstreamed into existing programs and planning. For instance,  federal departments are mandated by the Cabinet Directive on the Environmental Assessment  of Policy, Plan, and Program Proposals (Cabinet Directive) to complete Strategic Environmental  Assessments (SEAs) for all policy, plan, and program proposals (39). Completing a SEA (40)  ensures that decision makers at all levels have taken economic, social, and environmental  considerations into account to make informed decisions in support of sustainable development.   2.1 ADAPTATION MEASURES AND STRATEGIES  TO PROTECT HEALTH There is now a large body of scientific work to frame the concept of adaption in a changing  climate. Decision makers across health issue files and different levels of government have  exchanged knowledge and promising practices in health promotion, public health intervention,  and emergency management. Despite this, Canada does not have a comprehensive and  systematic framework to address the interface between climate change and health. In moving  towards this, it is important to have a shared understanding of key concepts that underpin  this process.  Adaptation to climate change is commonly defined as ‘the process of adjustment to actual  or expected climate and its effects, in human systems in order to moderate harm or exploit  beneficial opportunities, and in natural systems human intervention may facilitate adjustment  to expected climate’ (41).   6 Section 2.0 is adapted from ‘Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation’ (2014). 7 Protecting Health from Climate Change. Vulnerability and Adaptation Assessment. 2013. WHO Report    12 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  Vulnerability is commonly defined as the degree to which a system or person is susceptible  to, or unable to cope with, the adverse effects of climate change (42). This definition considers  demographics, geographical circumstances, effectiveness, and coverage of the health-care  system, pre-existing conditions, and socioeconomic factors such as inequity (43).   Resilience is commonly defined as the capacity of a system to absorb disturbance and  reorganize while undergoing change, so as to still retain essentially the same function, structure,  identity and feedbacks. Resilience has also been referred to as the ability of human communities  to withstand external shocks to their social infrastructure (44). Resilience includes the capacity  of a system to not only absorb a disturbance, but to innovate and transform (45).  Adaptive actions to address climate change in the health sector require action across the whole  spectrum of public health core functions (promotion, protection, prevention, public health  surveillance and emergency preparedness) (46). The scale up of adaptive actions to Federal/ Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) jurisdictions has been currently limited by the breadth and depth  of the knowledge uptake as well as cross disciplinary application, commonly referred to as  “mainstreaming”. Understanding of adaptation options that can be taken by public health and  emergency management officials to build resilience has increased, although information  about adaptation success is limited. Measures identified in recent literature address climate  change risks to health, and build upon the list of public health adaptations presented by Séguin  (2008) (1). Overall, new adaptation areas of focus by public health officials and researchers  include:  • Horizontal cross-cutting needs to understand vulnerability and strengthen resilience such as:  Vulnerability assessments of high risk populations; Actions to address secondary health  effects of climate hazards such as psychosocial impacts; Use of new technologies to facilitate  adoption of individual adaptive behaviours (e.g. use of automated devices in cars to warn  of water depth or landslide early detection systems); Advice to health care providers about  actions they can take to reduce climate-related health risks; Emergency management  planning measures tailored to increase the resiliency of health care facilities from climate  change; and Identification of preventative measures to reduce harmful exposures before  negative health outcomes occur (e.g. infrastructure development such as green roofs to  reduce the urban heat island)  • Extreme heat and air pollution such as: Health impacts from higher temperatures,  increased frequency and severity of heat waves, increased air pollution; Air conditioning,  during extreme events, with the caveat that seasonal use contributes to climate change  and air pollution through greater use of fossil fuel; additionally seasonal use interrupts  the human body’s ability to acclimate to regional weather which increases the individual’s  vulnerability; Better quality housing stock, appropriate infrastructure with the ability  to capture energy and recycle water; Infrastructure development such as green roofs,  reflective road and building surfaces, urban green spaces, interior air sealing, use  of elastomeric roof coating; Public awareness and education campaigns to promote  personal protection from air pollution (e.g. Air Quality Health Index or AQHI8);  Vulnerability assessments of high risk regions/populations; Physician attention   8 Definitions as per Environment and Climate Change Canada. www.ec.gc.ca/cas-aqhi/default.asp?lang=En&n=CB0ADB16-1.  Accessed 3Oct2016    13SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  to vulnerable patients, pre-summer vulnerability assessments, advice on routine  care, education of health risks and appropriate behaviours; Development and use of  vulnerability maps to allow targeting of vulnerable populations; and, Promotion of social  capital development  • Wildfires, such as: Increased contact with fire/fire front and evacuations; Avoid building  in vulnerable locations; Access to appropriate clothing, fire shelters (e.g. bunkers), and  equipment (e.g. particle filtering masks) for high risk areas; and, Infection control, disease  surveillance and appropriate emergency accommodation  • Increases in air pollution, such as: Relocation to clean air locations such as office,  libraries, etc.; Use of air conditioners, especially reverse cycle air conditioners set to  recycle mode to filter air particles; Avoidance of exercise in affected environments;  Spending less time outdoors; and, Use of air masks  • Drought, such as: Distribution of public awareness materials/public service announcements,  public education programs; Decreased availability and quality of water; Physical relocation  of individuals/families to non-drought affected areas; School-based mental health programs  in rural areas, participation of trusted adults who understand drought, early identification  of mental health problems and referral; and, Training in coping mechanisms  • Decreased availability and higher costs for fresh fruits and vegetables (for consumers),  such as: Technological advances to increase production in new climate conditions; and,  Improved food delivery systems   • Increase in water-borne pathogens and water contamination, such as: Boil water advisories;  and, Monitoring of gastroenteritis  • Increase in drought and temperature enabled vector-borne disease such as: Public education;  Vector control (e.g. mosquito spraying); Medical prophylaxis and treatment; and, Vaccination   • Floods, such as: Flood-appropriate building and infrastructure construction standards  for vulnerable areas (e.g. higher level bridges and causeways, water resistant emergency  power); Physical and mental health impacts from increased flood incidence rates and     14 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  severity; Early warning systems based upon weather predictions of flooding, landslides,  river flooding and coastal flooding; Flood evacuation plans, especially for nursing homes,  hospitals, schools; Proper design and siting of health infrastructure; Assessment of the  resiliency of health care facilities to climate change; Education of health risks and appropriate  behaviours by physicians; Mapping of high risk populations with 100- and 500-year flood  zones; Post-flood disease surveillance; Use of automated devices in cars to warn of water  depth, landslide early detection systems; Disaster mental health services that is sensitive  to socioeconomic status, livelihood patterns, local traditions, cultures and languages; and,  Immediate family reunion and support (for families that have been separated)  • Increased mold and respiratory contaminants from mold, bacteria, fungal growth on damp  structures, such as: Inspection of heating, ventilating and air conditioning system (HVAC)  by a professional after a flood; and, Drying out homes using fans or dehumidifiers when  safe to do so  • Zoonoses and vector-borne diseases, such as: Spread of vector-borne and zoonotic diseases,  including exotic diseases; Development of new surveillance methods; Dissemination of  information for public health officials and the public; and, Tools for risk-based decision making  on management (i.e. surveillance, prevention and control) of emerging/re-emerging zoonoses/ VBDs (e.g. Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis), prioritization of zoonoses/VBDs for public health  action, and weather-based forecasting of West Nile Virus  • Food and water quality, such as: Increased water contamination and water-borne diseases,  contamination of food; Protocols for chemical and contaminant risk management;  Monitoring of harmful algae bloom outbreaks; Boil water advisories; Expanding water  reuse systems to offset reduced supply, increased demand, or both; Improving or  expanding water treatment regimes; Adopting alternative energy sources at treatment  plants (e.g. diversifying power sources, adding energy-efficient water pumps); Establishing  collaborative management regimes with power suppliers; and, Abandoning or enhancing  water infrastructure at risk    15SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  2.2 HEALTH ADAPTATION IN CANADA An international comparison of health adaptation activities among developed countries  listed in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)  reported that Canada is further ahead of many countries in efforts to protect health from  climate change (47). Specifically, it is one of the leading countries with respect to the depth  of research being led on vulnerability, to the impacts of climate change and adaptation  options within the health sector. It is also one of the few countries to recognize and  develop specific adaptation options around vulnerabilities of Indigenous Peoples. Health  adaptation efforts ongoing at federal, provincial, territorial and local levels related  to assessing vulnerabilities, preparing for the impacts and communicating health risks to  Canadians were examined. Neither a comprehensive inventory of all local and regional  adaptations (e.g. infectious disease surveillance, emergency management programs), nor  a comprehensive assessment of the state of health adaptation in Canada are available  at this time. However, communities can draw from information from various sources in order  to set priorities, select appropriate strategies and implement them in a sustainable manner  as a complement to existing programs, to protect and enhance health in their respective  jurisdictions.   2.2.1 ASSESSING IMPACTS AND VULNERABILITIES Climate change and health vulnerability assessments help identify populations in a community  or region who are vulnerable to the impacts, gauge the effectiveness of existing interventions  and programs, identify additional measures necessary to respond to climate change, strengthen  capacity to take action, and provide a baseline of information to monitor adaptation progress.  The World Health Organization (WHO) recently released new guidelines for assessing  health vulnerabilities to climate change and adaptation options and Health Canada released  guidelines for assessing the vulnerability of communities and individuals to extreme heat.  Such assessments rely on monitoring and surveillance data illustrating health impact trends  associated with climate variability and change. Gaps in data exist for many climate change  impacts of concern to Canadians. Cheng and Berry (2013) have identified a key basket of climate  change and health indicators that can be used by health authorities to track impacts on health  over time (25). At present, few health authorities at regional and local levels have conducted full  climate change and health vulnerability assessments. Analysis of possible health impacts from  climate change have been undertaken in British Columbia (48). Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy  and Action Plan 2011–2014 (49) recognized extreme heat events as a key health concern and  committed to the creation of a heat vulnerability assessment tool. At the local level, Peel Public  Health (Ontario) used the new WHO guidelines to conduct a health vulnerability assessment  that will contribute to implementation of the Region of Peel Climate Change Strategy (50).  In addition, some public health authorities and their partners are currently undertaking or have  undertaken research projects that contribute to knowledge of local vulnerability to specific  health impacts. Expertise on climate change and health issues is growing and many universities  and organizations across Canada are undertaking research in this area.    16 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  2.2.2 PREPARING FOR THE IMPACTS Protecting health from climate change impacts requires “mainstreaming” climate change  considerations into existing risk assessment and management activities. Mainstreaming is based  on “flexible” adaptation and institutional learning, which is responsive to changing risks to  health, climate surprises, and individual- and community-level vulnerabilities. Mainstreaming  aims to reduce duplication and contradictions between existing public health interventions  and new adaptations developed in response to climate change. Evidence of mainstreaming  in provincial and territorial policies, regulatory instruments and planning tools includes  Strategic Direction 1 in the “Quebec In Action – Greener by 2020: Government Strategy for  Climate Change Adaptation” (51) that integrates climate change adaptation into government  administration by modifying, where needed, the content of laws, regulations, strategies,  policies, and planning tools. In Nunavut, the climate change adaptation plan requires all  departments and agencies to “[...] integrate climate change projections, impacts, and best  practices in all levels of their decision-making in order to implement a comprehensive  response to climate change” (52).  One study in Ontario found evidence of adaptation through the mainstreaming of climate  change into existing public health programs (50). Outside of government, the Insurance  Bureau of Canada is developing a municipal risk assessment tool (53) that can help community  decision makers use climate change information to address infrastructure vulnerabilities to  projected flood events. Other initiatives also contribute to reducing health risks from climate  change. Many health authorities utilize HARS (heat alert response systems), air pollution  monitoring activities, and programs to raise awareness of vector-borne diseases, which helps to  manage a range of climate-related impacts.  For example, the provinces of Manitoba, Quebec, and Nova Scotia have provincial  HARS (50) in place while Alberta is initiating one, and health authorities in Ontario are  collaborating to maximize the effectiveness and integration of local systems. In addition,  some activities that were not developed with the primary purpose of protecting health can  indirectly help to improve health and wellbeing and thereby reduce the impacts of climate  change (e.g. Drought Response Plan by the British Columbia Inter-Agency Drought Working  Group) (54). New approaches and tools have been developed that could facilitate efforts to  assist vulnerable groups in Canada and improve understanding of adaptation options at the  individual and community levels.   2.2.3 COMMUNICATING HEALTH RISKS TO THE PUBLIC There are few formal evaluations of public education efforts to reduce health risks associated with  climate change. Those that have been completed show mixed results. A study of the education  campaign in Montreal, Quebec indicated that people who have been exposed to education  materials were more likely to take protective measures against heat through, for example, the use  of lightweight clothing, avoiding strenuous exercise, taking a shower or bath to cool down,  and hydration. However, other studies suggest that while knowledge of heat warnings is very  broad (>90%), protective actions taken by individuals are inadequate or that perceptions  of health risks are generally low and the adoption of preventative actions is not widespread.     17SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  Research on levels of public awareness and the effectiveness of health promotion campaigns  related to air quality advisories, food safety and reducing risks from vector-borne diseases  show similarly mixed results. Public awareness messaging on climate-related risks can be  contradictory (e.g. exercising later in the day to avoid extreme heat versus not going outdoors  at night to avoid contracting West Nile Virus). To maximize effectiveness, health promotion  programs should develop consistent messaging across health issue areas.  2.2.4 HEALTH RELATED RESEARCH NEEDS Over the last 15 years, calls for expanded research efforts on climate-related health risks have  resulted in a growing body of research to help guide actions to protect the health of Canadians.  Many gaps in health related research areas would still benefit from integration and collaboration  with non-health sectors, as well as across government, academia and the private sector.  Strides have been made in the areas of air quality, extreme heat, and the understanding of some  climate-related infectious diseases. Although it is important to understand and recognize how  far Canada has come, knowledge development has not been uniform among issue areas nor  across regions of Canada. The following examples are recognised gaps where integrated  research could maximise efficient delivery of diversely useful outcomes.   • Air Quality: Estimates of the contribution of black carbon emissions in Canada originating  from sources such as: Open biomass burning and wood stove burning; Identification of the  extent of proliferation, impact and allergenicity of aeroallergen-producing plants as warming  continues; Identification and monitoring of potentially invasive fungal diseases that could  establish with climate change; Understanding of the effects of various GHG mitigation and  adaptation activities (e.g. energy efficiency trade-offs, green roofs) on ambient and indoor  air quality and associated health impacts; Understanding of how heat and poor air quality  interact to impact health and adaptive strategies to reduce health risks; and, Identification  of how dampness and temperature affect degradation of materials in buildings and how  indoor material product design may affect human exposure to chemicals.  • Food and Water Quality: Understanding of the impact of water contaminants on human  health and monitoring of illnesses; Monitoring of food-borne illness cases to reduce  underreporting, including attention to emergence or re-emergence of specific diseases;  Knowledge of the impacts of climate change on food and water security in northern and  southern Canada; Understanding of the capacity and preparedness of water utilities to adapt  to climate change; and, Defining the characteristics of resilient water and food  management systems.  • Zoonoses and Vector-borne Diseases: Surveillance for zoonoses, vectors and vector-borne  diseases, including attention to emergence of novel diseases; Basic and applied research  studies to inform the development of surveillance, prevention and control methods, vaccines  and licensed products for vector control; and, Enhanced capacity to train highly qualified  personnel for both research and public health activities.  • Natural Hazards: Improved projections of extreme weather events due to climate change  and modelling of possible health impacts; Surveillance of direct and indirect health impacts  from extreme weather-related events; Interdisciplinary (psychology, social work, community     18 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  development, health promotion, emergency management) research on the effects of natural  hazards on psychosocial health; and, Understanding of climate-resilient infrastructure that  is protective of human health.  • Vulnerable Populations: Definition of robust environmental health indicators of climate  change to monitor impacts on individuals and communities and develop adaptive measures;  Understanding of how the nature of vulnerabilities to the health impacts of climate change  for specific groups are changing in order to inform new protective measures for such  populations; Understanding how current perceptions and attitudes about climate change  and health risks influence the adoption of adaptations; and, Longitudinal studies across  different demographic groups (children, elderly, urban, rural and outdoor workers) to identify  health impacts from slow developing hazards (e.g. drought) and cumulative effects of climate  change (e.g. extreme heat, drought and wild fires).    19SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  3.0 SOCIETY, CULTURE AND BEHAVIOUR  Global climate change impacts on human and natural systems are predicted to be severe and far  reaching. The most physically and economically vulnerable will be affected disproportionately.  Adaptation and mitigation are two strategies that society can employ to respond to these threats.  Importantly, these approaches must take diversity in society, and cultural norms, practices and  preferences into account to ensure uptake and success. Industry, commerce, and government  play indispensable roles in these actions but outcomes are ultimately dependent on individuals  and receptivity to behavioural changes. Thus, the climate change discourse could be framed from  a health perspective to motivate behaviour change (55). There is however, little evidence on how  to change behaviours that contribute to climate change (56). In considering the broader scientific  discourse on the determinants of behaviour and behavioural change, four themes stand out9.   First, knowledge deficits are not the primary barrier to action; knowing about the causes  and consequences of climate change does not, on its own, motivate people to change  their lifestyles (57). Instead, it is emotions—the feelings that accompany thinking—that are  central (58). Negative emotions, including fear, pessimism, and guilt, can produce passive  and defensive responses, and do little to encourage individuals to change their behaviour and  to press for wider social action. So-called ‘fear appeals’ only work if accompanied by equally  strong messages about how to address the problem (59).   Second, climate change is best represented in ways that anchor it in positive emotions (60),  by framing action in ways that connect with people’s core values and identities. Examples  include framing climate change as: an ethical and intergenerational issue; about safeguarding  ancestral lands and the sanctity of the natural world; or an appreciation of the global injustice  of anthropogenic climate change driven by rich countries but paid for by poorer ones (61).  Aligning climate change to a range of ethical positions and a core set of identities can offer  a way of appealing to diverse social groups, and thus securing a broad and inclusive platform  of public support for action. Avoiding the rhetoric of climate catastrophe could facilitate this,  and emphasise, instead, human capacity to steer a course to a sustainable future, including  lifting the burdens that unmitigated climate change would otherwise impose on future  generations (62).  Third, integral to such an ethical framing of climate change is the implied duty on national  and international organisations to take action. A recurrent finding is that the public sees the  main responsibility for action lying with governments and other powerful institutions, not  least because the options open to individuals to take radical action to cut their own GHG  emissions are often sorely limited by cost or availability (e.g. poor public transport provision).  Public willingness to take action is also contingent on those considered responsible for  climate change, taking action themselves (63). Th e majority of the public in cross-national  surveys believe that their country has a responsibility to take action on climate change,  and that their government is not doing enough.   9 Excerpt from Lancet Commission on Health and Climate Change: Policy responses to protect public health (2015).    20 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  Fourth, many climate-affecting behaviours are habitual and resistant to change. Everyday  domestic energy use (e.g. cooking, heating the home), travel behaviour, and eating patterns  are undertaken as part of a daily routine and without conscious thought. Such behaviours are  resistant to change, even if alternative options are available, and interventions relying on  increasing knowledge have limited effect (64).  While adaptation is largely dependent on the availability of information relevant to climate  change, it appears that motivation for voluntary mitigation is mostly dependent on perceived  susceptibility to threats and severity of climate change or climate variability impacts.  The technological, financial, and behavioural changes needed to meet ambitious long-term  goals are in principle feasible. But they need to be accomplished in the face of highly  diverse social, cultural, economic, and political contexts. Opposing national (and vested)  interests, clashing views of what constitutes fair distribution of effort, and a model  of economic growth that is currently tied to fossil fuel use, can make progress fraught.  Hulme (2011) outlines several key climate change issues that when framed as a health issue,  rather than purely as an environmental, economic, or technological challenge, makes the need  for action that much clearer (65). Health puts a more personal and human face on what can  sometimes seem to be a distant threat. By making the case for climate change as a health  issue, it is hoped that the civilizational crisis we face will achieve greater public resonance.  Public concerns about the health effects of climate change, such as under-nutrition and food  insecurity, have the potential to accelerate political action in ways that attention to carbon  dioxide emissions alone do not.   The scientific literature relates a few avenues for public health engagement in the context  of mitigation: the continued work towards establishing a framework for a strong, predictable,  and international carbon pricing mechanisms; rapidly expanding access to renewable  energy in low-income and middle-income countries; ensuring adequate local capacity and  political support to develop low-carbon healthy energy choices; adopting mechanisms  to facilitate collaboration between Ministries of Health and other government departments  and empowering health professionals; agreeing and implementing an international agreement  which supports countries in transitioning to a low-carbon economy; and investing in climate  change and public health research.     21SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  4.0 CLIMATE CHANGE, HEALTH  AND AN INTEGRATED APPROACH  An integrated approach to addressing climate change and health related issues will require  innovative horizontal program development. Understanding and meeting the different needs  and objectives of participating government departments, provincial partners and various  stakeholders will be critical to effective and ongoing engagement. Grounding this approach  in a climate change framework will require strategic engagement across files that are normally  structured in a ‘silo’ or thematic way in order to enhance common understanding of the  horizontal nature of the health impacts of climate change. Programs can be designed by aligning  work across key activities, with strong integration of the science and policy. This will ensure  best use of limited resources to address the complex and layered issues presented by the health  effects of climate change.   Weaknesses in systems and infrastructures in various sectors are necessarily interconnected,  with a variety of anticipated and unanticipated knock on effects. Climate change is exacerbating  already vulnerable situations, which puts demands not only on the impacted region itself,  but also on external efforts to establish sustainable ways to reduce human health impacts.  Stark evidence of this can be seen in resource poor regions. The recent Ebola health crisis in  West Africa was an extreme example of a tipping point of multiple systems that already had little  to no resilience. In Sierra Leone (the epicenter of the Ebola outbreak) climate change had already  weakened that country’s vulnerable infrastructures and capacity (health, physical, agriculture, etc)  with unusually intense “seasonal droughts, strong winds, thunderstorms, landslides, heat waves,  floods, and changed rainfall patterns” (66). This made all aspects of emergency response to the  emerging disease situation that much more difficult. Ultimately, the cost, both in human lives  and financially, was very high. Globalization in all markets rapidly moves goods, people and  infectious diseases to new areas of the world. This is further complicated by the fact that novel  pathogens are emerging more rapidly, often from areas with high populations, poor sanitation  and nutrition, and greater mobility than ever before. Overarching understanding and awareness  of existing and future risk and trends in various sectors, and how they interact and support each  other, will be critical to adaptive capacity globally. Proposed key areas for effective horizontal  alignment in addressing climate change and health include:  • Education and Awareness: Public communication and education initiatives to establish  healthy behaviours and choices related to the impact of climate change on human health.   • Surveillance and Monitoring: Using research data and analysis gathered from public health  surveillance systems to address health impacts related to climate change including identifying  disease trends and identifying vulnerable individuals and communities.   • Building and Sustaining Healthy Environments: Playing a role in making infrastructure more  resilient by informing and educating the public about health risks, advocating for changes  that promote and improve health, and encouraging the adoption of health-promoting  change in urban planning and community infrastructure.   • Capacity Building: Building community resilience by increasing the capacity of individuals  and communities to cope and adapt to current and anticipated changes in climate.     22 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  • Research and Innovation: Research to increase knowledge and address gaps on potential  climate-related health risks and health resilience including how and which populations and  communities are most vulnerable.   • Emergency Planning: Advancing overall public health preparedness for climate impacts  to enhance public health security related to health, critical public health services  and infrastructure (e.g. enhanced monitoring and surveillance and risk management  measures).   • Leadership: Strengthening partnerships across Canada by engaging Provincial and  Territorial governments and key stakeholders to strengthen the national capacity to deal  with current and future impacts of climate change on public health  • Integrating Adaptation and Sustainable Development into Federal Policy and Planning:  Ensuring that climate change considerations are integrated into and across federal  activities, such as research, policy, and planning processes. These actions also serve to  strengthen accountability and transparency, providing greater public confidence that  decisions in the federal government are being made in full awareness of potential social,  health, economic and environmental impacts.     23SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  5.0 FUTURE CONSIDERATIONS Identified as “the greatest health threat of the 21st century” (8), the global impact of climate  change is a key cross cutting issue of our time that has the potential to cause instability on  an unprecedented scale. Adaptation measures are already required as the effects of climate  change are being experienced today. From a health-based perspective, a number of key  elements should be considered to enhance our knowledge of the impacts of climate change  and develop effective interventions.   There is a need for greater understanding of the leadership role that health has to play  in changing the behaviour of Canadians leading to both effective adaptation and mitigation  efforts while recognizing the importance of implementing health adaptations within the  health systems and increasing the advocacy role of health professionals with their patients.  It is critical to recognize the powerful influence that health considerations have to play in  mitigation. A recent report by researchers at the International Monetary Fund identifies the  omission of health impacts from polluting fuels as the largest of the subsidies provided to  global energy production and use, which will total US$5.3 trillion in 2015 (67). This is larger  than total health spending by all the worlds’ governments. Therefore, the health implications  could and should be more effectively harnessed in efforts to build support for a stronger  response to climate change.   There is a need for horizontal understanding and participation for effective interventions  with multiple co-benefits. The built environment plays a vitally important role in promoting  and maintaining health, so health considerations should be a key component of infrastructure  discussions. A strong health-based vision would be city planning that encourages reduced  air pollution and thus supports and promotes lifestyles that are healthy for the individual  and for the planet. This is relevant to many interventions. For example air pollution, where  encouraging a transition to cities that support and promote lifestyles that are healthy  for the individual and for the planet would have far-reaching impacts on chronic disease  conditions (68).   There is a need to integrate health security considerations into upstream risk mitigation  plans linked to health innovation, national security and climate change to as well as reinforce  the mechanisms and systems to manage health emergency preparedness and response.  Given recognised increases in the frequency and/or intensity of extreme weather events and  emerging infectious disease outbreaks, this preparedness and foresight is critical.  There is a need to define cross-cutting adaptations that provide resiliency to both  outbreaks of infectious disease, and the mounting burden of non-communicable disease.  This can be achieved through the continued development of strong, flexible, and resilient  health systems (69). Moving strategically “upstream” in our common understanding of the  social determinants of health can enable and enhance the health of Canadian populations  with considerations to health equity and patient-centered care. This provides a strategic  approach to scaling up systematic strengthening of the health system through targeted public  health and population health approaches.    24 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  There is a need to develop a long-term vision of health with considerations to the  fundamental need for clean air and clean water to support the health of Canadian  communities. These include the strategic management of biodiversity to both protect  the ecosystem services delivered in or natural environments, and in enhancing our One Health  management of infectious diseases. Adoption of mechanisms to facilitate collaboration  between Ministries of Health and other government departments will empower health  professionals and better integrate health and climate considerations in government-wide  strategies. This must acknowledge and seek to address the extent to which additional global  environmental changes, such as deforestation, biodiversity loss, and ocean acidification,  will impact on human health and decrease resilience to climate change. Ecosystem-based  adaptation utilises ecosystem services, biodiversity, and sustainable resource management  as an adaptation strategy to enhance natural resilience and reduce vulnerability (70). These  interventions can be effective in reducing certain climate change vulnerability as they provide  disaster risk reduction functions and enable improvements in livelihoods and food security,  especially in poor and vulnerable settings.   There is a need to enhance mechanisms to evaluate the effectiveness and ability  of interventions in reducing the burden of high priority climate sensitive diseases and  health conditions. Linkages between public health and climate change are complex  and interact with other factors. It is important to be able to evaluate effectiveness through  various outcome metrics including single interventions with multiple direct and indirect  outcomes. While implementation of effective control interventions is the only way to reduce  the disease burden of climate change, evaluation of the effectiveness of public health  interventions is lacking.   The health and well-being of populations is necessarily dependant on the resilience,  adaptability and strength of interacting systems across all sectors. This complex web of  dependencies has become more acutely emphasised as the effects of a changing climate  become more and more prominent in various dimensions. Actions to mitigate the  potential enormity of these impacts have been relatively slow. Perhaps this is, in part, due  to being stymied by the inherent complexity of how to proceed. However, many authors  argue that most mitigation and adaptation responses to climate change are “no-regret”  options, which lead to direct reductions in the burden of ill-health, enhance community  resilience, alleviate poverty, and address global inequity.   Encouraging and supporting the integration of unique strengths and capacities from different  sectors will address the challenges of complexity and move the agenda forward. Innovation  and foresight in creating and leading these opportunities should define future considerations  in governance and actions towards successful adaptations for mitigating health impacts of  climate change in Canada and globally.     25SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  6.0 REFERENCES  There is a large body of evidence summarizing the multiple impacts of climate change on  health. This technical synthesis collates scientific information on this subject, and presents  considerations pertaining to health and public health. Though health is the focus of this paper,  it is important to encourage a collective and integrated thinking and response from multiple  sectors in addressing, mitigating or adapting to the challenges that are posed. Among the many  references consulted, a few key scientific reports of particular relevance complement this work.  These include: The Chief Public Health Officer’s 2014 report on the state of Public health in  Canada, public health in a changing climate (71); Human health in Canada in a changing  climate: sector perspectives on impacts and adaptation (47); and Health and climate change:  policy responses to protect public health (69), by the Lancet Commission.   CITED REFERENCES 1. Health Canada. (2008). Human Health in a Changing Climate: A Canadian Assessment   of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. Séguin J. (ed). Government of Canada, Ottawa,  Ont., p. 483  2. Natural Resources Canada. (2008). From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing  Climate 2007. Lemmen DS, Warren FJ, Lacroix J. et al. (eds). Government of Canada,  Ottawa, Ont., p. 448  3. Berrang-Ford L, Maclean JD, Gyorkos TW, Ford JD and Ogden NH. (2009). Climate  change and malaria in Canada: A systems approach. Interdiscip Perspect Infect Dis   2009: 385487  4. Bouchard C, et al. (2013). Does high biodiversity reduce the risk of lyme disease  invasion? Parasit Vectors 6: 195-3305-6-195  5. Ogden NH, Mechai S and Margos G. (2013). Changing geographic ranges of ticks and  tick-borne pathogens: Drivers, mechanisms and consequences for pathogen diversity.  Front Cell Infect Microbiol 3: 46  6. Ogden NH, Radojevic M, Wu X, Duvvuri V, Leighton PA, Wu J. (2014). Estimated effects  of projected climate change on the basic reproductive number of the lyme disease  vector. Environ Health Perspect 6 (122) http://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/1307799/   7. MacPherson DW, Gushulak BD, Baine WB, Bala S, Gubbins PO, Holtom P and   Segarra-Newnham M. ( 2009). Population mobility, globalization, and antimicrobial  drug resistance. Emerg Infect Dis 15(11):1727–32   8. Costello A, Abbas M, Allen A, et al. (2009). Managing the health effects of climate  change. Lancet 373(9676) www.thelancet.com/commissions/climate-change  9. Allard R, Plante C, Garnier C and Kosatsky T. (2011). The reported incidence of  campylobacteriosis modelled as a function of earlier temperatures and numbers of  cases, Montreal, Canada, 1990–2006. Int J Biometeorol 55(3): 353–360  10. Kendrovski V and Gjorgjev C. (2012). Climate Change: Implication for Food-Borne  Diseases in Structure and Function of Food Engineering”, ed Ayman Amer   www.intechopen.com/books/structure-and-function-of-food-engineering/  climate-change-implication-for-food-borne-diseases-salmonella-and-food-  poisoning-among-humans-in-r-m    26 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  11. Ford JD. (2012). Indigenous health and climate change. Am J Public Health 102(7):  1260–1266  12. Beaumier MC and Ford JD. (2010). Food insecurity among Inuit women exacerbated by  socioeconomic stresses and climate change. Can J Public Health 101(3): 196–201  13. Ford JD and Beaumier M. (2011). Feeding the family during times of stress: Experience  and determinants of food insecurity in an Inuit community. Geogr J 177(1): 44–61  14. Cunsolo Willox A, Harper S, Ford JD, Landman K, Houle K, Edge VL, Rigolet Inuit  Community Government (2012). “From this place and of this place:” Climate change,  sense of place, and health in Nunatsiavut, Canada. Soc Sci Med 75(3): 538–547  15. Ford JD, Smith TR and Berrang-Ford L. (2011). Canadian federal support for climate  change and health research compared with the risks posed. Am J Public Health 101(5):  814–821  16. Suk JE, Ebi KL, Vose D, Wint W, Alexander N, Mintiens K, Semenza JC. (2014). Indicators  for tracking european vulnerabilities to the risks of infectious disease transmission due to  climate change. Int J Environ Res Public Health 11(2): 2218–2235  17. Rahmstorf, S and Coumou, D. (2011). Increase of extreme events in a warming world.  Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108: 17905–17909  18. Herring S, Hoerling M, Peterson T and Stott P. (2014). Explaining extreme events of 2013  from a climate perspective. Bull Am Meteor Soc 95: S1–S96  19. Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015–2030. (2015). United Nations.   www.unisdr.org/files/43291_sendaiframeworkfordrren.pdf. Accessed 3Oct2016  20. Johnson CA. Governing climate displacement: the ethics and politics of human  resettlement. Env Polit 2012; 21: 308–328  21. Stott PA, Stone DA and Allen MR. (2004). Human contribution to the European heatwave  of 2003. Nature 432: 610–614  22. Schleussner CF. (2016). Armed-conflict risks enhanced by climate-related disasters in  ethnically fractionalized countries. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA Aug 16;113(33):9216–21)  23. Geneau R, Mahendar A, Rodin R. (2015). Draft Working Paper on Built Environment,  Climate Change and NCDs in the Caribbean. Public Health Agency of Canada. Personal  Communication  24. Burgan O, Smargiassi A, Perron S and Kosatsky T. (2010). Cardiovascular effects of   sub-daily levels of ambient fine particles: A systematic review. Environ Health   9: 26-069X-9-26  25. Cheng JJ and Berry P. (2013). Health co-benefits and risks of public health adaptation  strategies to climate change: A review of current literature. Int J Public Health   58(2): 305–311  26. Hess JJ, McDowell JZ and Luber G. (2012). Integrating climate change adaptation into  public health practice: Using adaptive management to increase adaptive capacity and  build resilience. Environ Health Perspect 120(2): 171–179    27SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  27. Fritze JG, Blashki GA, Burke S, and Wiseman J. (2008). Hope, despair and  transformation: climate change and the promotion of mental health and wellbeing.   Int J Ment Health Syst 2: 13  28. Giles LV, Barn P, Kunzli N, Romieu I, Mittleman MA, et al. (2011). From good intentions  to proven interventions: Effectiveness of actions to reduce the health impacts of air  pollution. Environ Health Perspect 119(1): 29–36  29. Åström C, Orru H, Rocklöv J, Strandberg G, Ebi KL, Forsberg B. (2013). Heat-related  respiratory hospital admissions in Europe in a changing climate: a health impact  assessment. BMJ Open Jan 1;3(1):e001842  30. Berry, HL, Bowen, K, and Kjellstrom T. (2010). Climate change and mental health:  a causal pathways framework. Int J Public Health 55: 123–132  31. Albrecht, G, Sartore, GM, Connor, L et al. (2007). Solastalgia: the distress caused by  environmental change. Australas Psychiatry 15: S95–S98  32. Hanigan IC, Butler CD, Kokic PN, and Hutchinson MF. (2012). Suicide and drought in  New South Wales, Australia, 1970–2007. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109: 13950–13955  33. Keshavarz M, Karami E, and Vanclay F. (2013). The social experience of drought in rural  Iran. Land Use Policy 30: 120–129  34. Kessler RC, Galea S, Gruber MJ, Sampson NA, Ursano RJ, and Wessely S. (2008).   Trends in mental illness and suicidality after Hurricane Katrina. Mol Psychiatry   13: 374–384  35. Reser JP and Swim JK. (2011). Adapting to and coping with the threat and impacts of  climate change. Am Psychol 66: 277–289  36. Townsend M, Mahoney M, Jones JA, Ball K, Salmon J, Finch CF. (2003). Too hot to trot?  Exploring potential links between climate change, physical activity and health Journal of  Science and Medicine in Sport 6 (3), pp. 260–265  37. Rissel CE. Active travel: a climate change mitigation strategy with co-benefits for health.  (2009). New South Wales public health bulletin, 20 (1–2), pp. 10–13  38. Maibach E, Steg L, Anable J. (2009). Promoting physical activity and reducing climate  change: Opportunities to replace short car trips with active transportation Preventive  Medicine 49 (4), pp. 326–327  39. Strategic Environmental Assessment. The Cabinet Directive on the Environmental  Assessment of Policy, Plan, and Program Proposals. (2010). Government of Canada   www.ceaa.gc.ca/default.asp?lang=En&n=b3186435-1. Accessed 3Oct2016  40. Training opportunities regarding environmental assessment. www.ceaa.gc.ca/014/  index-eng.aspx. Accessed 3Oct2016  41. IPCC. (2012) Glossary of terms. in: CB Field, TF Stocker, D Qin (Eds.) Managing the  risks of extreme events and disasters to advance climate change adaptation. A special  report of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.  Cambridge University Press, London, UK and New York, NY: 555–564    28 SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  42. Adger WN. (2006). Vulnerability. Glob Environ Change 16: 268–281  43. Patz J, Gibbs H, Foley J, Rogers J, and Smith K. (2007). Climate change and global  health: quantifying a growing ethical crisis. EcoHealth 4: 397–405  44. Adger WN. (2000). Social and ecological resilience: are they related? Prog Hum Geogr  24: 347–364  45. Hackmann H and St Clair AL. (2012). Transformative cornerstones of social science  research for global change. International Social Science Council, Paris; www.icsu.org/ future-earth/who/transition-team/meetings/2nd-transition-team-meeting/documents-1/ ref-7-issc-climate-change-design-project  46. Frumkin H and McMichael AJ. (2008). Climate change and public health: thinking,  communicating, acting. Am J Prev Med 35: 403–410  47. Berry P, Clarke K, Fleury MD and Parker S. (2014). Human Health; in Canada in a  Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) FJ Warren and  DS Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON p. 191–232  48. British Columbia Impacts of Climate Change www2.gov.bc.ca/gov/content/environment/ climate-change/adaptation/impacts. Accessed 3Oct2016  49. Climate Ready: Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan 2011–2014 www.ontario.ca/ document/climate-ready-adaptation-strategy-and-action-plan-2011-2014-0 Ministry of  the Environment and Climate Change. Government of Ontario. Accessed 3Oct2016  50. Paterson JA, Ford JD, Berrang Ford L, Lesnikowski A, Berry P, Henderson J and  Heymann J. (2012). Adaptation to climate change in the Ontario public health sector  BMC Public Health 2012; 12:452   51. Québec in Action Greener by 2020: Government Strategy for Climate Change  Adaptation 2012 Gouvernement du Québec www.mddelcc.gouv.qc.ca/changements/ plan_action/stategie-adaptation2013-2020-en.pdf. Accessed 3Oct2016  52. Upagiaqtavut Setting the Course. Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation in Nunavut  Government of Nunavut http://climatechangenunavut.ca/sites/default/files/3154-315_ climate_english_reduced_size_1_0.pdf  53. Insurance Board of Canada. Municipal Risk Assessment Tool. www.ibc.ca/on/disaster/ water/municipal-risk-assessment-tool/. Accessed 24April2017  54. British Columbia Drought Response Plan. British Columbia Ministry of Environment on  behalf of the Inter-Agency Drought Working Group. (2015). www2.gov.bc.ca/assets/ gov/environment/air-land-water/water/drought-info/drought-response-plan-update- june-2015.pdf  55. Semenza JC, Ploubidis GB and George LA. (2010). Climate change and climate  variability: personal motivation for adaptation and mitigation. Env Health 10:46–54  56. Webb J. (2012). Climate change and society: the chimera of behaviour change  technologies. Sociology 46: 109–125  57. Wolf J and Moser SC. (2011). Individual understandings, perceptions, and engagement  with climate change: insights from in–depth studies across the world. Wiley Interdiscip  Rev Clim Chang 2: 547–569    29SCIENCE NARRATIVE I CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS ON THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS  58. Höijer B. (2010). Emotional anchoring and objectification in the media reporting on  climate change. Public Underst Sci 19: 717–731  59. Witte K and Allen MA. (2000). Meta-analysis of fear appeals: implications for effective  public health campaigns. Health Educ Behav 27: 591–615  60. Markowitz EM and Shariff AF. (2012). Climate change and moral judgement. Nature  Climate Change 2: 243–247  61. Green D, Billy J, and Tapim A. (2010). Indigenous Australians’ knowledge of weather and  climate. Clim Change 100: 337–354  62. Giddens A. (2009). The politics of climate change. John Wiley and Sons, Cambridge;  63. Vignola R, Klinsky S, Tam J, and McDaniels, T. (2013). Public perception, knowledge and  policy support for mitigation and adaption to climate change in Costa Rica: comparisons  with North American and European studies. Mitig Adapt Strategies Glob Change 18:  303–323  64. World Bank Group. (2009). Public attitudes toward climate change: findings from a  multi-country poll. Background note to the world development report 2010. World  Bank, Washington, DC http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTWDR2010/Resources/ Background-report.pdf. Accessed 3Oct2016  65. Hulme, M. Reducing the future to climate: a story of climate determinism and  reductionism. Osiris 2011; 26: 245–266  66. Johnson RG, Kandeh M, Jalloh A, Nelson GC and Thomas TS. (2013). Sierra Leone. In  West African agriculture and climate change: A comprehensive analysis. Chapter 12.  Washington, D.C.: International Food Policy Research Institute. http://ebrary.ifpri.org/ cdm/ref/collection/p15738coll2/id/127456   67. Coady D, Parry I, Sears L and Shang B. (2015). International Monetary fund Working  Paper “How large are Global Energy Subsidies” www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2015/ wp15105.pdf. Accessed 3Oct2016  68. Younger M, Morrow-Almeida HR, Vindigni SM, Dannenberg AL. (2008). The built  environment, climate change, and health: opportunities for co-benefits. Am J Prev Med  Nov;35(5):517–26  69. The Lancet Commission on Health and Climate Change. (2015). Health and climate  change: policy responses to protect public health. Lancet, Vol. 386, No. 10006,   p1861–1914 www.thelancet.com/commissions/climate-change. Accessed 3Oct2016  70. Colls A, Ash N, and Ikkala N. (2009). Ecosystem-based adaptation: a natural response to  climate change. International Union for Conservation of Nature, Switzerland;   http://cmsdata.iucn.org/downloads/iucn_eba_brochure.pdf. Accessed 3Oct2016  71. The Chief Public Health Officer’s 2014 Report on the State of Public Health in Canada.  Government of Canada p110. www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/cphorsphc-respcacsp/2014/index- eng.php. Accessed 3Oct2016     