Prairie Resilience:   
A Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy 

Saskatchewan.caPrairie Resilience:   
A Made-in-Saskatchewan Climate Change Strategy 

Introduction

Saskatchewan people are pragmatic, resourceful, innovative.

Throughout our history, we have faced complex, challenging 
problems imposed on us by geography and climate. Our 
population spread over a vast land has taught us self- reliance 
and resilience.

We’ve learned when we are faced with a challenge, it is up to us 
to solve it.

Today, we face the global challenge of climate change, and 
once again our province is motivated to develop an effective 
response. Our industries are heavily dependent on fossil fuels 
to produce energy, food, fertilizer, products and commodities 
needed around the world.

It’s up to us to come up with made-in-Saskatchewan solutions 
that encourage action to meet the challenges posed by 
climate change.

When faced with a complex problem, there is a temptation 
to reach for the simple, quick answer. Climate change is such 
a problem.

We wholeheartedly support efforts to reduce greenhouse 
gases. But those efforts must be effective and they must  not 
disadvantage one region of Canada more than another. A 
federal carbon tax is ineffective and will impair Saskatchewan’s 
ability to respond to climate  change.

Our opposition to the federal government’s carbon tax should 
not be seen as a reluctance to act. Rather, it is a recognition that 

we must act, and act decisively, with all our economic strength. 
For Saskatchewan, mitigation is not enough.  Our agriculture 
and resource-rich province must also focus on climate 
adaptation and resilience in order to be effective. 

A strong economy is one with the resilience and resources to 
seek solutions and fund the innovations that we simply must 
have to respond effectively to climate change.

We propose a broad and comprehensive approach, one that 
connects the very real global problem of climate change to 
the day-to-day priorities of people. An approach that sets out 
actions people can see and be a part of. An approach that 
allows Saskatchewan to continue to grow and prosper while 
contributing to Canada’s efforts to address climate change.

Saskatchewan people and businesses have already begun 
this monumental task. Their actions range from world-leading 
innovation and technology development in agriculture 
and power generation, to community and infrastructure 
developments that continue to strengthen the resilience of 
our economy and the integrity of our environment.

In this strategy, the Government of Saskatchewan builds upon 
actions we have already taken and introduces measures to 
strengthen our province and build resilience to climate change. 
Our plan is bold, broad and made for Saskatchewan. It is the 
best way for our province to harness our valuable resources 
while contributing solutions to an issue that affects the 
entire world.

1
1

Saskatchewan.caHow did we get here?
Saskatchewan has a demonstrated, long-standing commitment 
to action on climate change. 

In 2015, our provincial utility, SaskPower, set a target of 
doubling its percentage of electricity capacity from renewable 
energy sources. The ultimate goal is to get 50 per cent of our 
power from renewables by the year 2030.

Between 2008 – 2015, the Government of Saskatchewan 
invested $60 million in GoGreen funding through public-private 
partnerships to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, enhance 
biodiversity and educate the public about the effects of 
climate change. 

Saskatchewan continues to be a leader in technologies and 
knowledge about carbon capture use and storage (CCUS).
We have applied that expertise to our provincial electricity 
generation system since 2014, further reducing our emissions 
by more than 1.75 million tonnes of carbon – the equivalent of 
taking 440,000 cars off our roads.
Saskatchewan’s GHG Emissions by Economic Sectors (2015)

Waste and Others

3%

Agriculture

24%

Oil and Gas

32%

Buildings

4%

Heavy Industry

4%

Transportation

14%

Electricity

19%

Sask Total (2015) = 75.0 Mt CO2e

Sources: Canada’s National Inventory Report 1990-2015 (2017)

In December 2015, Canada signed the Paris Agreement on 
climate change. This was the biggest international commitment 
on this issue since the Kyoto Protocol 20 years earlier. It is even 
more significant because of the full inclusion and commitment 
of developing nations. 

Under the Paris Agreement, Canada committed to reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions by 30 per cent below 2005 levels by 
the year 2030. 

In March 2016, Canada’s leaders from the federal, provincial and 
territorial governments gathered in Vancouver to discuss next 
steps, culminating in the signing of the Vancouver Declaration 
on Clean Growth and Climate Change by all partners including 
Saskatchewan.

Saskatchewan did not sign the subsequent Pan-Canadian 
Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change, in large 
part because the Framework promotes a carbon tax as the 
central approach to reducing emissions. A carbon tax would 
not significantly reduce emissions in our province where our 
economy and geography don’t allow for easy alternatives. In 
fact, a carbon tax would make it more difficult for our province 
to respond effectively to climate change because a simple tax 
will not result in the innovations required to actually reduce 
emissions. We believe the challenges we face are complex and 
will not yield to simple measures.

The conversation about climate change must be broader 
than carbon pricing. It must encompass how we as Canadians 
prepare, mitigate and adapt. 

A note on greenhouse gases
Much of the discussion on greenhouse gases centres on 
carbon dioxide, or CO2. This is often shortened further 
to simply, “carbon.” However, there are other important 
greenhouse gases such as methane (CH4) from the petroleum 
industry, livestock and landfills as well as nitrous oxide (N2O) 
from agricultural fertilizers.

To avoid confusion, the term “carbon dioxide equivalent” or 
“CO2e” has been used throughout this strategy. Quantity is 
given in megatonnes or “Mt.” Canada produces about 722 Mt 
per year, about two per cent of the global total. Saskatchewan 
produces about 10 per cent of Canada’s greenhouse gas 
emissions or 75 Mt per year.

2

Saskatchewan.caResilience is the ability to cope with, adapt to and recover from stress and change.

Nevertheless, the Government of Canada announced a carbon 
tax of $10 per tonne to be introduced by 2018, rising $10 per 
tonne annually to $50 per tonne in 2022. Provinces that don’t 
introduce a tax of their own are expected to have a tax imposed 
upon them by the federal government. This ‘backstop’ consists 
of a carbon tax on the combustion of fossil fuels and an output-
based pricing system on industrial facilities.

Money generated from this federal backstop is to be returned 
to the province, but the mechanism for this has not yet been 
explained.

The Government of Saskatchewan continues to be committed 
to action on climate change. We set out our position in October 
2016 with the release of the Climate Change White Paper which 
recommends that we:

•   Capture unrealized value from agricultural and non-renewable 

resource sectors.

•   Elevate the importance of adaptation in the provincial and 

national conversation about climate change.

•   Improve the profile and accounting of carbon sequestration.

•  Get credit for the international transfer of knowledge.

•   Develop regulations for the flaring and venting of methane.

•  Expand use of renewables by SaskPower in electricity generation. 

The White Paper makes clear that our province’s ability to 
adopt lower-carbon technology and innovation as well as 
adapt to climate change are critical to building the resilience 
Saskatchewan must have to respond to climate change.

What is Saskatchewan’s approach to 
climate change?
Resilience is key to Saskatchewan’s approach to climate change. 
Resilience is the ability to cope with, adapt to and recover from 
stress and change. This is essential, as some effects of climate 
change are already underway and unavoidable. 

Resilience is a much stronger indicator of effective climate 
action than simply measuring reductions in greenhouse gas 
emissions, because it measures our overall ability to adapt, 
innovate and even thrive. 

Focusing on resilience will yield a stronger approach for 
Saskatchewan – a growing agricultural and resource-based 
economy not only rising to the challenge, but providing 
leadership through forward-looking policy change.

Saskatchewan has strong motivation to seek solutions. We 
have recently endured many varied and costly climate-related 
events and are acutely aware of our exposure to changing 
climate because the land is integral to our economy. Our 
province is expected to experience more extreme weather 
events, including an increase in the severity and frequency 
of droughts and flooding, and more intense forest fires1,2.  
For Saskatchewan, climate change resilience is critical.

Multiple systems need to be strengthened to improve the 
resilience of the province as a whole. This includes the ability of 
Saskatchewan’s natural systems (including our land, water, and 
forests), infrastructure, communities and economy to adapt and 
thrive in a changing, low-carbon economy. 

What steps will Saskatchewan take?
Critical to a resilience strategy is identifying efforts that can be 
undertaken within specific areas of focus.  The province has 
developed climate resilience policies in several areas, including: 
natural systems, physical infrastructure, economic sustainability 
and community preparedness. These policies cover the ways 
climate change is affecting Saskatchewan. Although many 
policies have implications for more than one area of focus, they 
are identified under the area of best fit. 
 
NATURAL SYSTEMS

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to stewardship 
and responsible development of our province’s remarkable 
abundance of natural resources. How we grow our crops, 
harvest our forests and protect our vital water systems will be 
critically important to how we prepare, respond and adapt to a 
changing climate.

In agriculture, the province is a global leader in low-emissions 
practices. Our soils are an important carbon sink, sequestering 
carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Since the 1980s, our 
growers have been developing, refining and implementing 
zero- and low-tillage practices, increasing the ability of our soils 

1   Wheaton, E., B. Bonsal, V. Wittrock. 2013. Future Possible Dry and Wet Extremes in Saskatchewan, Canada. Prepared for the Water Security 

Agency, SK. 35 p. SRC Pub #13462-1E13.

2   Parisien, M.-A.; Kafka, V.; Flynn, N.; Hirsch, K.G.; Todd, J.B.; Flannigan, M.D. 2005.  Fire behavior potential in central Saskatchewan under 

predicted climate change. PARC (Prairie Adaptation Research Collaborative), Regina, Saskatchewan. 12 p. PARC Summary Document 05-01.  

3

to sequester carbon. Farmers have diversified their crops to 
enhance soil health and manage pests and diseases. Producers 
are implementing 4R nutrient stewardship to enhance fertilizer 
efficiency and adopting new crop varieties that are more 
drought resistant. Producers also implement grazing rotations, 
and adopt beneficial management practices such as seeding 
marginal land to grass. These actions can enhance yield, 
improve carbon sequestration and fortify the climate resilience 
of their operations.

Current tillage practices sequester about 9 Mt of CO2e 
in our soils annually. Saskatchewan’s commercial forests 
store an estimated 3.5 Mt of CO2e every year. Increased 
innovation, stimulated by an offset system, could drive carbon 
sequestration even further.

Crop selection can also have an impact. Planting more 
nitrogen-fixing crops such as lentils and other pulses could 
reduce emissions beyond the 2 Mt CO2e currently being 
sequestered annually.  Pulse crops, for example, have increased 
from 400,000 acres in 1990 to more than seven million acres 
in 2017.  

Agriculture also offers other opportunities to develop co-
products from production that would otherwise go to waste. 
For example, six to eight per cent of Saskatchewan’s canola 
crop is too damaged to be used as a food ingredient, but 
this resource is being used by innovative companies to 
produce biodiesel. 

Another example is the Livestock and Forage Centre of 
Excellence at the University 
of Saskatchewan. Researchers 
there are developing different 
processing, local crops and 
feedstock compositions that 
reduce methane as well as use 
crop co-products that would 
otherwise have little value.

Innovation in 
agricultural and 
forestry management 
practices needs to be 
recognized.

For many decades, 
Saskatchewan has actively 
managed and regulated its 
public and commercial forests – another important carbon sink. 
Forest resilience is a priority, helped along by initiatives such as 
the forest-assisted migration project, under which five million 
Jack pine seedlings have been planted since 2013. These efforts 

add to routine replanting programs that occur as part of normal 
forestry operations. 

Lumber from Saskatchewan forests is used both in our province 
and in export markets to build thousands of homes and other 
durable structures. 

Innovation in agricultural and forest management practices 
could further increase the amount of CO2e removed from the 
atmosphere and stored in our soils and forests. This valuable 
contribution needs to be recognized.

Safeguarding the health of our water systems is another critical 
element in responding to climate change. How we use our 
lands and our actions to preserve and restore wetlands builds 
resilience into our landscapes through greater ability to retain 
carbon and reduce the effects of flood and drought. Our water 
strategy assesses past drought events, identifies where floods 
are most likely to happen and how severe they might be, 
and conducts continued assessment of water resources. This 
knowledge guides planning for infrastructure such as roads and 
highways as well as land use policies.

These are a few of the ways Saskatchewan businesses and 
researchers are demonstrating the resilience our province 
draws upon to meet challenges such as those posed by 
climate change.

It’s important that Canada and its partner nations in the 
Paris Agreement develop accounting systems to credit past 
and future land use and management decisions that help 
sequester carbon.

The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to the health 
of our landscapes and continues to support initiatives in 
agriculture, forestry and water security.

 We will: 
•   Develop and implement an offset system that creates additional 
value for actions that result in carbon sequestration or reduced 
emissions, especially from our soils and forests.

•   Ensure natural and commercially forested lands are 

managed in a manner that enhances the removal and 
storage of carbon from the atmosphere while allowing for 
sustainable harvesting, respecting normal forest cycles and 
fire preparedness.

4

Saskatchewan.ca•   Maintain or restore landscape integrity to optimize ecological 

PHYSICAL INFRASTRUCTURE

goods and services, enhance resilience to extreme weather 
events and manage the risk to biodiversity. 

•   Increase our understanding of future climate trends and 

adaptation options to address impacts that extreme weather 
events such as flooding and droughts could have on future 
water supplies.

•   Advance options to improve Saskatchewan’s ability to measure 

stream flows and provide flow forecasts to aid in adapting 
to the potential effects of climate change on watersheds and 
infrastructure operations.

•   Continue to implement Saskatchewan’s agricultural water 

management framework in the province to help assure 
continued productivity, enhance wetland habitat conservation 
and improve runoff management in times of both drought 
and flood.

•   Advance options to focus on permanent flood damage reduction 

and flood mitigation projects and thereby increase resiliency of 
flood prone areas.

•   Continue to improve the condition and resilience of provincially 

owned dams and water infrastructure. 

•   Commit, in partnership across Canada, to help develop 
a pathway to achieve Canada’s Target 1 and establish a 
coordinated network of parks and conservation areas 
throughout Canada that will serve as the cornerstone for 
biodiversity conservation for generations to come.

Physical infrastructure is how we shelter ourselves, produce 
and move goods and manage the built environment. Our 
infrastructure needs to perform in ways that enable lower 
carbon emissions. Building infrastructure more resilient 
to climate change means moving to more fuel-efficient 
vehicles, machinery and transportation options, cutting our 
reliance on greenhouse gas-emitting electricity generation 
and building more energy-efficient buildings.

Saskatchewan has deep, 
established expertise in 
these areas. Our researchers 
developed the building 
techniques and technologies 
now codified in Canada’s 
R2000 standard for energy-
efficient homes. These 
energy-saving technologies 
are used not only in homes, 
but in commercial, industrial 
and public facilities. They 
continue to be improved through research partnerships with 
Saskatchewan post-secondary institutions – an activity that 
also trains professionals to work in these green industries. 

Saskatchewan is a 
pioneer in developing 
world-leading 
technologies to save 
energy.

Electricity
The province has made significant investment in reducing 
electricity emissions through development and installation 
of the world’s first major post-combustion carbon capture 
use and storage (CCUS) facility at Boundary Dam Unit 3. 
Carbon captured using this technology can be permanently 
sequestered underground, whether in deep saline formations 
or by using it to enhance oil recovery.

CCUS technology could be applied to reduce global electricity 
sector emissions and has the potential for uses in other high-
carbon-emission sectors such as steel and concrete production.

SaskPower has committed to reducing emissions, in part 
through the expansion of renewable energy sources up to 
50 per cent of generating capacity. To maximize the benefits of 
these renewable sources, energy storage, including batteries, is 
needed to help meet the ups and downs of electricity demand. 
Saskatchewan researchers at the Canadian Light Source 

5

Saskatchewan.canational synchrotron facility are already at work on cutting-
edge energy storage technologies. 

-  Updating the provincial electricity dispatch method with 
emissions criteria to support reduced emissions.

Another way to reduce emissions is to modernize the electricity 
grid to integrate more renewable energy.

•   Explore additional energy efficiency and conservation products 

and services to support emission reduction targets.

An equivalency agreement with the federal government 
on electricity sector emissions from conventional coal-fired 
electrical generation in Saskatchewan will enable SaskPower 
to manage reduction of its greenhouse gas emissions 
across its entire fleet rather than on a unit-by-unit basis. 
This agreement will give SaskPower increased flexibility in 
operating its existing coal units, helping to maintain low rates 

for SaskPower customers. At the same time, SaskPower will be 
able to focus investment into lower emitting and renewable 
energy projects and agreements. These will play a key role 
in enabling SaskPower to achieve greenhouse gas emission 
reduction targets.

Actions taken on electricity generation will result in a 40 per 
cent annual reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from 2005 
levels by 2030, representing a reduction of about 6 Mt of CO2e.

•   Determine the viability of extending carbon capture use and 

storage technology to remaining coal power plants while 
continuing to work with partners on the potential application for 
CCUS technology globally.

Transportation and Related Infrastructure
Saskatchewan is a trading province, producing fuel, food, 
fertilizer, products and commodities for consumers in markets 
around the world. Supporting this trade is an extensive 
transportation network including rail lines and roads. 

Our highways are a connecting network for all other 
critical infrastructure and communities, helping increase 
Saskatchewan’s resilience in overcoming climate emergencies. 
All-weather roads support access to northern communities and 
require attention as the climate changes.

This is critical infrastructure, vulnerable to climate change. 
Extreme weather events and longer-term climate changes 
cause floods that overwhelm culverts, wash out roads and 
destroy property.

Saskatchewan has responded with:
•   Improved design of highway systems to reduce the amount 

of maintenance and repairs needed

•   Improved culvert design to protect against events such as 

spring ice flow damage

•   Longer culvert lengths where failures are more likely to occur 

during flood events

  We will:
•   Introduce regulations governing emissions from electricity 

generation by SaskPower and Independent Power Producers. 

•   Increased documentation of water levels at culvert crossings 

during floods to provide historic water level information to 
support new culvert designs

•   Meet the province’s commitment of up to 50 per cent electricity 

capacity from renewables, through:

-  Increasing renewable energy sources, including wind  
and solar

-  Investigating the feasibility of energy storage services to 
expand renewables capacity 

In one industry example, companies participate in the 
SmartWay Transport Partnership.  This voluntary public-
private collaboration aims to reduce fuel costs and improve 
environmental performance in the transportation industry. It 
does this by providing a system to measure, benchmark and 
share information about fuel use and freight emissions. In 

6

Saskatchewan.cadoing so, companies are able to review  and improve logistics 
operations while reducing their carbon footprint.

Although our road and rail network is vital to Saskatchewan’s 
economy, it produces a significant portion of our greenhouse 
gas emissions. We are committed to working towards greater 
efficiency and lower emissions with our own government fleet 
and in partnership with the transportation industry.

We will: 
•    Monitor the highway system for vulnerabilities that could impact 

human health, property and transportation efficiency to help 
prioritize preventative maintenance and redesign.

•   Create a freight strategy to improve delivery times, reduce fuel 

use, and increase efficiency.

•   Increase the use of idle time limiters in government trucks to 

reduce fuel usage.

•   Evaluate government fleet vehicles for lower-carbon technology 

opportunities.

•   Continue to support industry in expanding the size and usage of 

the short haul (short line) rail systems.

•   Expand the Trucking Partnership Program to increase fuel 

efficiency in freight hauling.

•   Facilitate traffic data specific to Saskatchewan to mitigate 

emissions from congestion and idling.

Although exact total emission reductions are not yet counted, 
the benefits are clear. For example, current government-
industry partnerships have already resulted in an estimated 
annual reduction of 50,000 tonnes of CO2e per year.
Homes and Buildings
The Government of Saskatchewan is committed to reducing 
the life cycle costs of new buildings and improving the energy 
efficiency of existing buildings to match the demands of 
geography, climate and conditions specific to Saskatchewan.

We continue to show leadership by enhancing energy 
efficiency and conserving energy use in and around 
government buildings.  For example, in 2016-2017, eight 
government buildings in Saskatchewan received BOMA BEST 
certification, bringing the total number of certified government 
buildings to 47. This independent national certification for 
buildings recognizes excellence in energy and environmental 
management and performance.

7

 We will:  
•    Adopt the 2015 National Building Code, effective January 1, 

2018, with provisions that improve energy efficiency standards 
for houses and small buildings taking effect January 1, 2019.

•   Adopt the 2015 National Energy Code for Buildings, applicable to 

large buildings effective January 1, 2019.

•   Facilitate provisions in the 2015 National Building Code that 
provide for increased use of wood in building construction in 
order to extend carbon storage.

•   Explore options to label buildings for energy performance.

•   Encourage industry to further develop innovative solutions to 

meet energy performance requirements.

•   Increase the number of government buildings with a 

sustainability certification.

•   Require new and renovated government buildings to exceed the 
energy performance requirements of the 2015 National Energy 
Code for Buildings by ten percent.

•   Work with other provincial and territorial governments in 

collaboration with the National Research Council to improve 
standards for climate resilience in building design.

ECONOMIC SUSTAINABILITY

Economic sustainability is our ability to remain competitive in 
a global marketplace, encourage investment and maintain or 
increase personal economic 
well-being. It’s also our ability 
to balance economic growth 
and industrial competitiveness 
with our commitment to 
reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions. 

We will recognize and 
reward companies 
that take the lead 
in reducing carbon 
emissions.

This includes ensuring our 
businesses and industries 
enjoy the support they 
need to develop marketable 
innovations to address climate change. Federal and provincial 
policies must work in concert to ensure Saskatchewan 
continues to be a preferred jurisdiction for investment. 

Saskatchewan.caLarge Industrial Emitters
Large industrial sectors such as mining and manufacturing 
contribute significantly to Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas 
emissions. Saskatchewan’s large emitters produce 6 Mt of 
CO2e every year. (Note: upstream oil and gas, and electricity 
industries are addressed elsewhere in this strategy since they 
are regulated separately). These industries continually improve 
operations to meet international standards while remaining 
competitive in a global marketplace. 

Bringing in provincial performance standards encourages 
industry to further reduce emissions. These standards are most 
effective when accompanied by policies that recognize and 
reward companies that choose to take the lead. By stipulating a 
carbon intensity threshold, the approach rewards performance 
and early action. 

This approach doesn’t put a cap on total industrial emissions, 
which could inhibit provincial economic development and 
growth. Instead, our approach encourages and engages 
Saskatchewan’s industry to produce innovative solutions that 
can reduce the intensity of our emissions and, at the same time, 
stimulate provincial economic development and growth. 

 We will:
•   Implement sector-specific output-based performance 

standards on facilities emitting more than 25,000 tonnes of 
CO2e per year.

•   Obligate facilities that annually emit more than the regulated 

performance standard to take compliance actions. Flexible 
compliance options will allow these facilities to meet 
their obligations in the way best suited to their business 
models through:

•  Making improvements at their facility to reduce 
emissions intensity.

•  Purchasing an offset, representing a reduction in 
greenhouse gas emissions made by a non-regulated 
entity (e.g., in agriculture, forestry or other approved 
offset protocol).

•  Using best performance credits, which will be generated 
by a regulated facility reducing emissions beyond what is 
required in the performance standard. Best performance 
credits could also be purchased from another entity, from 
another facility.

•  Engaging in the market mechanisms outlined in the 
Paris Agreement, specifically internationally transferred 
mitigation outcomes (ITMOs).

•  Paying into the provincial technology fund.

Technology and Innovation
A technology fund is one way regulated emitters can comply 
with their sector’s performance standard. If they are unable to 
meet their sector-specific target through on-site actions, offsets, 
best performance credits or other approved mechanisms (such 
as those adopted from the Paris Agreement) they could make 
up the difference by paying into a technology fund.

The Government of Saskatchewan will use the technology 
fund to invest in industrial innovation. The aim is to stimulate 
and drive innovation to bring down greenhouse gas emissions 
while providing transformative technologies and strategies to 
strengthen our resilience to climate change.

 We will:
•   Enact a provincial technology fund as a compliance 

mechanism to further enable investment in transformative 
technologies and innovation.

Upstream Oil and Gas Industry
Saskatchewan will develop and pass greenhouse gas emissions 
regulations specifically suited to our upstream oil and gas 
industry. These will include reporting requirements and 
emission reduction targets. 

Regulations tailored to Saskatchewan producers need 
appropriate timing and flexibility in terms of investments in 
emission reduction technologies. 

8

Saskatchewan.caThe Government of Saskatchewan’s relationship with First 
Nations and Métis peoples is critical to success in the face 
of climate change. As many of these citizens live in rural 
and remote communities, they are particularly vulnerable 
to the effects of climate change, such as increased forest 
fires. Importantly, they are also keepers of deep traditional 
knowledge that can help us all prepare and adapt.

Individual communities also help to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by managing landfill, waste, and sewage facilities.

A strong provincial resiliency plan must ensure the continued 
well-being of its citizens. We will foster people’s capacity to take 
advantage of new and changing opportunities. This means 
continued efforts to attract, train, and retain qualified people 
for future job growth in diverse and emerging industries.

 We will:
•    Examine current floodplain mapping to identify local 

communities at greatest risk of flooding, fire, and extreme 
weather events. 

•   Encourage family preparedness plans, by making 

emergency preparedness guides and suggested emergency 
kit content lists available through Saskatchewan and local 
government websites. 

•   Maintain and enhance partnerships with First Nations and 

Métis communities to address and adapt to a changing 
climate through actions that are guided by traditional 
ecological knowledge.

•   Encourage communities to develop appropriate plans 

and preparedness to respond and recover from extreme 
weather events.

•   Encourage municipalities to consider disaster mitigation 

projects a priority when applying for infrastructure funding.

•   Promote the upgrading of municipal waste and sewage 

management services to reduce, capture and use GHG emissions 
and biogas that would otherwise be released into the air, by 
making these projects a priority category for support under joint 
federal/provincial funding programs.

Methane from petroleum operations is often burned (flared) or 
vented into the atmosphere, producing the largest source of 
greenhouse gas emissions from this industry sector. To address 
this, policies will be explored aimed at creating market demand 
for this potential resource.

These measures are expected to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions from Saskatchewan’s upstream oil and gas 
industry by 40 to 45 per cent of 2015 levels or between 4 and 
4.5Mt of CO2e.

 We will:
•    In consultation with the oil and gas industry, develop  

regulations to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from oil and gas 
wells and facilities using a results-based system that:

•  Provides each oil and gas operator the ability to efficiently 
prioritize emission reduction investments

•  Supports adoption of innovative emissions reduction 
technologies

•   Firmly establishes provincial regulatory oversight of 
emissions from the oil and gas industry

•   Includes a strategy to support the increased use of 
methane produced in association with oil for heating and 
electricity production, including the establishment of usage 
requirements for this source of natural gas.

COMMUNITY PREPAREDNESS

Our province is one of strong community and family bonds. As 
extreme weather events become more unpredictable, frequent 
and intense, the resilience of Saskatchewan’s communities will 
be vital to their security and growth. This resilience will come 
both from individuals and their communities.

This strategy aims to 
protect our environment 
for everyone’s benefit and 
enjoyment, while ensuring 
people are protected from 
extreme weather events 
such as floods and wildfires. 
It will also support people’s 
livelihoods, helping ensure 
they have stable jobs to 
provide for their families.

We will foster people’s 
capacity to take 
advantage of new 
opportunities.

9

Saskatchewan.caMEASURING, MONITORING, AND REPORTING
Industry Reporting
All climate change policies need a regulatory system for 
measuring, monitoring, and reporting greenhouse gas emissions.

In Saskatchewan, facilities that emit more than 50,000 tonnes 
of CO2e every year are already reporting to the federal 
government. We will modify this to include smaller emitters and 
introduce voluntary reporting to supplement this measure. This 
will give us a more detailed picture and better understanding 
of Saskatchewan’s greenhouse gas sources.

Saskatchewan’s publicly traded companies can move to the 
cutting edge of accounting and investor confidence through 
climate-related financial disclosures. These types of disclosures 
help investors to know how a company may be at risk due to 
climate change, how it is preparing to mitigate those risks, and 
what actions it is taking to make their business more resilient to 
climate change. In future, markets are likely to respond better 
to companies that show how they are reducing emissions 
through their supply chain and efficiency choices. 

This novel approach can help strengthen Saskatchewan’s 
reputation as a forward-thinking player in the global economy.

 We will:
•    Develop annual reporting regulations for industry that apply to:

•  All emitters of more than 25,000 tonnes of CO2e annually
•  A voluntary opt-in for emitters over 10,000 tonnes of 
CO2e annually.

•   Explore options for tracking the import and export of emissions.

•   In conjunction with the business community and the Canadian 
Securities Administrators, develop a draft guidance document to 
require climate-related financial disclosures by publicly-traded 
companies based in Saskatchewan.

Government Reporting
We are committed to tracking and reporting on our progress. 
We will provide an overall integrated score against a 
transparent, easily understood target. This will let people know 
how we are progressing in building our resilience to anticipated 
challenges from a changing climate. Progress will be reported 
annually and targets adjusted periodically (e.g., every five years) 
as we learn more about the effects of climate change. 

This approach will give us a much more comprehensive picture 
of our resilience to climate change than simply measuring 
whether total greenhouse gas emissions are up or down. Our 
approach will show us what effects climate change is having 
on our people and our economy, and how our efforts are 
building resilience.

The specifics of our plan to meet the challenges of climate 
change will be developed over the next several months. This 
will include clearly defined measurement areas, including how 
much weight each one carries in our assessment. 

 We will:
•     Track and report across all areas of focus to convey progress in 

making our province more resilient to climate change.

•   Report to the national and international community, through 
Canada’s annual submission to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, on how Saskatchewan’s actions 
are impacting greenhouse gas emissions and mitigating the 
effects of climate change.

The table on the following page shows the kinds of things 
we could measure to get a better picture of our resilience. 
Note the examples of specific determinants are for illustrative 
purposes only.

10

Saskatchewan.caModel of Saskatchewan Resilience Measure

Examples of Specific Measures

Weighting

Resilience 

Resilience 

Areas

Natural Systems

Percentage of cultivated land managed under zero/low-tillage 
practices
Amount of sequestered carbon generating offsets 

Physical Infrastructure

Percentage of storm water systems constructed to accommodate 
more extreme precipitation events
GHG emissions / MWh of electricity produced

Economic Sustainability

Quantity of GHG emissions from industrial facilities captured 
and used
Saskatchewan pulse exports per acre of farmland against 
estimated potential
Percentage change in crop insurance premiums attributable to 
weather events

Score

tbd

Target

tbd

tbd

tbd

tbd

tbd

tbd

tbd

tbd

Community 
Preparedness

Percentage of communities with local emergency preparedness 
plans completed and tested
Percentage of forest communities meeting standards for FireSmart 
fuel management

tbd

tbd

tbd

Human Well-being

Percentage of First Nations and Métis communities engaged in 
climate change vulnerability assessment
Percentage increase in incidences of vector-borne illnesses

tbd

tbd

tbd

Total 
Score

Total 
Target

This is a model of how the provincial government intends 
to measure the resilience of Saskatchewan to the effects of 
climate change. We look forward to engaging with citizens to 
better refine the indicators we use to measure our resilience. 
At the same time, we hope the adoption and use of this model 
in Saskatchewan will broaden the national conversation about 
climate change, so that all of Canada is better prepared for 

the climatic, economic, and policy changes that we anticipate. 
There may also be some future changes that we cannot yet 
anticipate, and therefore we will need to periodically revisit this 
model to make sure that we continue to adapt our approaches 
as we learn more about the effects of climate change on 
Saskatchewan and the world. 

11

Saskatchewan.caWhat’s next? 
The next step is to move from strategy to action. The 
following milestones include time for consultation on the 
exact regulatory standards to be put in place, time to put the 
appropriate structures in place to implement the system, and 
planning to begin implementation on January 1, 2019.

1.

 Engage on the Strategy: Release strategy for comment
and consultation.

2.

 Proclaim or amend enabling legislation.

As we work toward the overall goal of provincial resiliency and 
reducing global greenhouse gas emissions, we will continue to 
seek input from:

• Emissions-intensive sectors 

• Sectors that may have offsets to offer the market 

• First Nations and Métis peoples 

• Environmental interests 

• Leaders of organized communities

3.

 Release additional documents for consultation.

• Citizens 

Details of how and when contributions to this plan can 
be made will be available at the Saskatchewan Ministry of 
Environment website at saskatchewan.ca/environment

4.

5.

 Refine the plan: Hold consultations to refine the plan and
develop the standards.

 Release regulations and guidance documents: Introduce
resilience measures and regulatory standards.

6. Establish reporting structures.

7. Begin implementation.

In this document, we’ve outlined the province’s strategic 
direction, with the aim of kicking off a new, more 
comprehensive conversation on how Saskatchewan is 
preparing for climate change. Consultations will strengthen 
our ability to apply appropriate and valuable insight so we 
can adopt a plan that fits the needs and characteristics of 
our province.

The Government of Saskatchewan will use existing legislation, 
such as The Management and Reduction of Greenhouse Gases 
Act, to proclaim and/or amend necessary sections to provide 
legislative authority for provincial regulation.

December 2017

12

Saskatchewan.ca