Climate Change mitigation:
a Strategic Approach for Cities

Toronto  and  Region  Conservation  (TRCA)  has  become  a  trusted  source  of  information  on  climate 
change adaptation and mitigation. Getting to Carbon Neutral is one in a series of TRCA publications 
designed  to  encourage  environmental  projects  and  partnerships  for  a  livable,  sustainable  future. 
For  more  information  on  combating  climate  change  and  the  ways  communities,  companies  and 
individuals can reduce their carbon footprints, visit our website at www.trca.on.ca.  

Written by
William Glenn, WM Glenn Environmental Consultants

Based on the report, Getting to Carbon Neutral: A Guide for Canadian 
Municipalities, by the Sustainable Infrastructure Group at the 
University of Toronto for Toronto and Region Conservation

Funding provided by 
Region of Peel 
York Region 
City of Toronto

2010 All rights reserved

An Overview of
getting to Carbon neutral: a guide for Canadian muniCipalities

Using  readily  available,  proven  and  affordable  technologies, 
Canadian municipalities could cut their greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions  by  70  per  cent  or  even  more.  Getting  to  Carbon 
Neutral:  A  Guide  for  Canadian  Municipalities,  commissioned 
by  Toronto  and  Region  Conservation  (TRCA),  demonstrates 
how communities around the world are tackling the root cause 
of climate change. More importantly, it shows how Canadian 
municipalities can do it too.

The detailed guide, developed by the Sustainable Infrastructure 
Group  in  the  University  of  Toronto’s  Department  of  Civil 
Engineering, analyzes a suite of 22 technical options and urban 
planning  policies  that  can  be  used  to  substantially  reduce  a 
municipality’s  greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions.  Canadian 
examples  include  Calgary’s  wind-powered  C-train,  Toronto’s 
deep lake water cooling project, and a bike-to-work initiative in 
Whitehorse. International experiences are captured as well in 
case studies exploring projects such as passive building design 

in Austria or a process for detecting and repairing leaks in Tokyo’s water distribution system.

Getting to Carbon Neutral also provides:

 ›

Guidelines  for  estimating  the  GHG  emission  reductions  that  can  be  achieved  by 
each of the technologies or policies 

 › More  than  70  case  studies  that  illustrate  the  best  practices  in  sustainable  urban 

design and planning in action worldwide

 ›

 ›

Examples of how these options can be utilized to develop a comprehensive strategy 
to reduce a municipality’s GHG emissions 

Examples of methods to overcome barriers to implementation

About 1.6 million tonnes of methane gas is captured by the City of Toronto’s landfill gas collection system each year 
and used to generate enough electricity to power roughly 24,000 homes. By reducing the demand for coal-powered 
electricity, the project offsets the release of 135,000 tonnes of CO2e annually.

1

Getting  to  Carbon  Neutral  does  not  dictate  which  GHG  reduction  options  are  best  or  how  they  must  be 
implemented. Rather, it offers a menu of practical and proven options for cutting GHGs. A municipality can 
develop and evaluate different mitigation scenarios to help it design a unique strategy or action plan, applying 
only those technologies and policy options that best meet local realities and aspirations. The guide helps to 
prioritize the strategies that can be implemented in the short term, while laying the policy groundwork for more 
substantive, long term changes.

Responding to climate Risk
Climate change is emerging as the defining challenge of our time. Greenhouse gases generated by human 
activity – primarily carbon dioxide, as well as methane, ozone and several others – have risen sharply as the 
world’s  population  expands,  industrialization  spreads  and  the  consumption  of  resources  accelerates.  The 
inescapable consequence of all this growth is an inexorable increase in greenhouse gas emissions, leading to 
a rise in average global temperature, the disruption of climate patterns and the irreversible alteration of the 
ecological balance of our planet. The effects of climate change are pervasive, and left unchecked, could have 
both severe and indiscriminate impacts on our social and economic systems. 

Though daunting, addressing climate change offers a focal point for global collaboration and innovation. A 
well-crafted response to climate change will spur technological advances, create new sources of employment 
and stimulate the economic growth needed to propel us forward into a more sustainable future.  If decisive 
action is taken today, it is still possible to slow the process and mitigate the resulting damage. However, the 
window of opportunity is closing quickly.

What is caRbon neutRality?
The  concept  of  “carbon  neutrality”  is  an  important  benchmark  for  gauging  our  progress  toward  overall 
sustainability.  In a municipal context, it means that all the GHG emissions generated, directly or indirectly, by a 
city and it residents, less those sequestered in the urban forest, stored or offset in other ways, sum to zero. 

Without  balancing  the  rate  of  GHG  emission  generation  with  the  rate  of  sequestration,  climate  change  is 
inevitable. A commitment to work toward “carbon neutrality” is a commitment to live within one’s ecological 
means,  to  make  sustainability  a  priority  and  to  consume  resources  at  a  rate  that  does  not  compromise  the 
legacy we bequeath future generations. 

Achieving  GHG  reduction  targets  –  proceeding  down  the  path  to  carbon  neutrality  –  within  the  necessary 
timeframe  will  require  coordinated  effort  from  all  levels  of  government,  corporations  and  individuals. With 
more than half of the world’s human population living in urban areas, municipalities are uniquely positioned to 
leverage their skill base and financial resources and assume a leadership role in reducing global GHG emissions. 
By individually and collectively embracing the goal of carbon neutrality, municipalities can significantly lessen 
the rate and impact of climate change.

A 1.6 km-long district energy system in Revelstoke (BC) delivers steam to local industry and hot water for space and 
water heating to residents. By burning wood waste from a nearby mill, the system replaces 45,000 GJ of fossil fuels 
and reduces GHG emissions by 3,700 tonnes annually.

2

Tens sTeps To carbon neuTraliTy

Getting to Carbon Neutral offers a set of ten basic strategies that, in combination, would be highly effective at 
bringing reducing a city’s carbon footprint. These recommendations coincide with the key areas identified in the 
guide as having the greatest potential to reduce GHG emissions, such as energy efficiency in buildings and reducing 
vehicle use.  In many cases, maximizing the GHG reduction potential of these strategies will require a collaborative 
effort between multiple levels of government.

1.  Develop  bold,  ambitious  building  codes  and  municipal  by-laws  that  ensure  new  construction  incorporates 
green design and building techniques to conserve energy, reduce demand, and utilize renewable solar and even 
geothermal heat sources. 

2.  Accelerate the retrofitting of the existing energy inefficient building stock to modern building standards and 

incorporate solar and other renewable energy features. 

3.  Build  transit  systems  supported  by  appropriate  land  use  and  sustainable  financing  mechanisms  that  could 

include road tolls, area pricing, higher parking fees and other innovative sources.

4.  Design neighbourhoods that support public transit and where residents love to walk and cycle.

5.  Encourage the use of electric or low-emissions vehicles by greening municipal fleets, regulating taxi fleets and 

providing reduced parking fees or other advantages for green vehicles. 

6.  Green the electricity supply. Reaching carbon neutral will be particularly challenging for those municipalities that 
depend on high carbon intensity electricity. They will need to consider investing in larger scale green electricity 
supply systems based on wind, small hydro, wave and tidal, solar and geothermal power sources.

7.  Harness energy from a variety of community-scale sources, such as aquifer and borehole thermal energy storage, 

combined heat and power facilities, or other energy technologies that tap waste streams.

8.  Keep ‘harvesting’  your  solid  wastes.  Reduce  GHG  emissions  through  recycling,  pursuing  energy-from  waste 

opportunities and capturing methane gas from landfill. 

9.  Seek efficiency in municipal services. Implement energy conservation opportunities in municipal buildings and 

services. Increase the efficiency of water and wastewater systems. 

10.  Green the city. Promoting green roofs, urban agriculture and CO2 enriched greenhouses, while expanding the 

‘urban forest’, will reduce GHG emissions while mitigating the impact of climate change.

WheRe do ouR ghg emissions come fRom?
Many  Canadian  cities  have  already  taken  the  first  step  toward  reducing  carbon  emissions  by  conducting 
an  inventory  of  GHG  emissions.  This  work  has  shown  that  the  ‘big  three’  sources  –  electrical  generation, 
transportation and the combustion of heating fuels – account for up to 95 per cent of a community’s direct GHG 
emissions. The remainder comes from the management and disposal of municipal waste and the emissions from 
certain industrial processes, such as cement production, steel making and chemical processing. This statistical 
breakdown varies from one municipality to the next, depending on a number of factors including the mix of 
heating fuels, the availability of public transit, and the source of their electrical power. For example, coal and gas-

The Enwave district energy system in Toronto, pumping cold water from the bottom of Lake Ontario, provides 
enough cooling for 100 downtown office towers. The water, which also supplies a share of the drinking water needs 
of the city, eliminates 79,000 tonnes of CO2e per year, and reduces electricity demand by 90%.

3

fired generating stations emit large amounts of carbon dioxide and other pollutants, while hydroelectric and 
nuclear facilities produce almost no GHGs, therefore the carbon footprint of a municipality varies significantly 
based on the source of electricity generation.

Carbon inventories are a critical first step to understanding a city’s emissions and to developing appropriate plans 
to address municipal contributions to climate change. Under the Partners for Climate Protection (PCP) program, 
more than 200 Canadian municipalities have agreed to compile accurate inventories of their GHG emissions. A 
joint initiative of the Federation of Canadian Municipalities and ICLEI (founded as the International Council for 
Local Environmental Initiatives), the PCP program ensures that emission sources are quantified in a systematic 
and  comparable  manner. These  comprehensive  inventories  will  provide  a  solid  baseline  for  developing  an 
effective GHG control strategy, tracking subsequent reductions, and participating in carbon trading schemes.

using The MunTag Model 

Getting to Carbon Neutral presents an innovative and user-friendly mathematical model for estimating the per 
capita passengers kilometres travelled in a community and translating them into GHG emissions for the entire 
transportation network. The MUNicipal Transportation And Greenhouse gases – or MUNTAG – model integrates 
the series of individual Estimation Guidelines devised to estimate the impacts of land use, public transportation, 
walking and biking, the various financial policies designed to promote greener transport, and alternative vehicle 
technologies. MUNTAG is a powerful planning tool for assessing the potential GHG reductions that can be achieved 
by addressing urban transportation issues.

Sources of municipal 

GHGs

municipalities leading the Way
Municipalities have the capacity to be powerful agents of change in reducing 
global GHG emissions, and a carbon inventory is a critical first step to assuming 
this leadership role.

But just as the emission profiles of no two communities are identical, there is 
no generic, one-size-fits-all solution for addressing climate change that works 
for every municipality.

Natural gas heating
Gasoline & diesel
Electrical generation
Other

Once we know the origins of our GHGs, we can start targeting the primary 
sources. Organized into four strategic categories – buildings, transportation, 
energy  supply  and  municipal  services  –  the  guide  covers  22  different 
technological and policy options for reducing municipal GHGs. The summary 
table  (on  pages  7-9)  illustrates  the  diversity  and  breadth  of  the  options 
discussed.

The 52 homes in the Drake Landing Solar Community, Okotoks (AB), are connected to a district heating system 
that includes solar collectors and a borehole energy storage system. With 90% of space heating needs met by solar 
energy, the network saves more than 110 GJ of energy and 5 tonnes of GHG per home each year.

4

 ghg Reduction stRategies

Sector

Buildings

Transportation

Description of Approach

Technological and Policy Options

As major consumers of heating fuels 
and electricity, the operation and 
maintenance of buildings account for up 
to 40% of GHG emissions. Fortunately, the 
state-of-the-art in sustainable building 
design is capable of producing carbon 
neutral buildings even in Canada. By 
employing modern technologies, such as 
energy efficient envelopes, photovoltaics, 
solar water and air heaters, passive solar 
design and ground source heat pumps, 
GHG emissions from buildings can be cut 
to nearly zero.

There are two fundamental approaches 
to reducing transport-related GHG 
emissions: (1) reduce automobile use 
by encouraging electric public transit, 
walking and cycling; and (2) promote the 
use of low emission vehicles, including 
electric cars, by providing the necessary 
infrastructure and offering financial 
incentives to vehicle owners to change 
behaviour.

1.  Reduce energy demand by: 

retrofitting residential, commercial 
and industrial buildings to increase 
the level of insulation; upgrading 
windows; minimizing air leakage; 
and installing energy efficient 
appliances and equipment.

2.  Utilize solar energy through 

photovoltaics, solar water and 
space heating and passive solar 
design.

3.  Exploit waste heat through ground 

source heat pumps.

4.  Maintain appropriate land use and 

population densities to reduce 
the average passenger kilometres 
travelled.

5. 

Improve public transportation (i.e. 
bus rapid transit, light rail transit, 
subways and commuter rail).

6.  Support active transport modes, 

such as biking and walking.

7. 

Introduce financial policies to 
reduce vehicle use, including tolls, 
taxes, HOV lanes and increased 
parking fees.

8.  Promote the use of alternative 

vehicles powered by biomass, fuel 
cells and electricity.

In 2002, the Toronto Renewable Energy Cooperative installed the first urban wind turbine in North America. The 
single 750 kW turbine located in Exhibition Place on the shore of Lake Ontario has an average annual production of 
1,400 MWh and displaces up to 380 tonnes of GHG per year.

5

Sector

Description of Approach

Technological and Policy Options

Energy Supply

Municipalities have a wide array of 
options for reducing the carbon footprint 
of their energy supplies. To approach 
carbon neutrality, greater investments 
in renewable energy technology 
will be needed. On a community or 
neighbourhood scale they can promote 
and facilitate the development of 
more efficient district heating and 
cooling, underground thermal storage, 
cogeneration, and combined heat and 
power systems. The same strategic land 
use planning principles that reduce 
transportation emissions – density, 
diversity and site design – resonate in 
planning low-carbon community energy 
systems.

9.  Develop electricity from renewable 

sources, including wind, solar 
radiation, tides, waves, and 
geothermal.

10.  Promote underground thermal 

energy storage that uses aquifers 
or boreholes.

11.  Promote highly efficient district 

heating and cooling systems 
that directly service a group of 
buildings through a network  
of piping.

12.  Promote co-generation or 

combined heat and power systems 
that recover waste heat and 
improve system efficiencies.

13.  Promote integrated community 
energy systems that provide an 
economy of scale for infrastructure 
investment and resource recovery.

The City of Whitehorse’s “Wheel 2 Work” campaign offers prizes to encourage bicycle use by commuters during the 
summer months. In 2006, the program attracted 210 participants who logged about 40,000 km and cut their GHG 
emissions by an estimated 4.5 tonnes.

6

Sector

Description of Approach

Technological and Policy Options

Municipal 
Services

Cities exercise direct control over how 
they manage waste, deliver water, and 
maintain the urban tree canopy. While 
the GHG emissions reductions are 
relatively modest, climate-friendly waste 
management is cost effective, affordable 
and readily available. At the same time, 
greater use of the “3Rs” (Reduce, Reuse 
& Recycle) and waste-to-energy projects 
support diversion targets. Capturing 
methane from landfills helps control a 
powerful GHG, while protecting local air 
quality. And increasing urban vegetation 
sequesters CO2, while reducing energy 
consumption for air conditioning.  

14.  Support the 3Rs and increase 
sorting and recycling to divert 
wastes from landfill and offset the 
demand for virgin materials.

15.  Divert organic wastes from landfill 

to produce biogas and compost.

16.  Support waste incineration and 

gasification that replace fossil fuels, 
divert wastes from landfill and 
recover the Btu value of feedstocks. 

17.  Capture methane from landfills.

18.  Manage water demand and 
increase treatment / delivery 
efficiencies.

19.  Maintain and expand urban 

greenery and the tree canopy.

20.  Support and promote urban 
agriculture and CO2-enriched 
greenhouses.

21.  Investigate geological 

sequestration.

22.  Purchase carbon offsets.

Many cities are finding it difficult to take this next step, translating their inventory data into an effective strategy 
of programs, policies and projects designed to reduce GHG emissions. Getting to Carbon Neutral facilitates the 
transition from data collection to strategic action. 

Nearly  70  case  studies  are  used  to  showcase  the  successful  implementation  of  municipal  GHG  reduction 
technologies and policies. Each example describes the application of a particular control option, weighs the 
advantages,  considers  the  costs,  and  calculates  the  GHG  reduction  benefits  that  have  been  realized.  Before 
investing in its own emission mitigation program, a municipality has a chance to benefit from the experience of 
others, learning how they overcame barriers and solved problems to maximize results.

The C-Train, Calgary’s light rail transit system, is powered by 12 wind turbines installed in the hills of southern 
Alberta to catch the westerly winds coming through the Rockies. The C-Train is now 100% emissions free, saving 590 
kilotonnes of CO2e when compared to automobile use.

7

A climate change action strategy need not be restricted by the size or location of a municipality. The case studies 
in the guide cover the experiences of large, medium and smaller communities selected from across Canada, 
North  America  and  around  the  world. There  is  a  wide  array  of  practical  options  available  to  a  municipality 
attempting to reduce its carbon footprint. Getting to Carbon Neutral lets a municipality select the mix that best 
fits its individual economic, social and environmental conditions.

building a stRong economic case foR action
To provide the environmental rationale for action, Getting to Carbon Neutral lays out a series of basic formulae 
–“Estimation Guidelines” – for calculating the GHG reductions that accrue to each of the selected options. For 
example, these Estimation Guidelines can be used to predict the expected GHG reductions from: installing X 
kilometres of light rail; constructing a gasification plant to process Y tonnes of solid waste; or servicing Z hectares 
of a municipality using a district energy scheme.

Once a municipality has calculated the potential GHG reductions that may be achieved, the guide shows users 
how to integrate different combinations of control options and compare scenarios of multiple GHG reduction 
strategies.  This analysis can assist municipal users in making decisions based on the cost-effectiveness of various 
options to meet their individual emission targets.

The GHG reduction actions described in Getting to Carbon Neutral have already proven effective in municipal 
projects and undertakings throughout the world. They will also make a significant impact on the GHG emissions 
of Canadian municipalities.

Some communities may be in a position to take a more aggressive approach to GHG reduction. Others may 
adopt a more measured, step-wise strategy. To illustrate the practicality and versatility of the various approaches, 
the authors applied the technical matrix to generate two comprehensive GHG reduction scenarios for the City 
of Toronto.

This analysis highlights the potential of combining various reduction options to create an integrated reduction 
strategy  or  action  plan  that  could  be  successfully  applied  in  any  municipality  in  Canada.  Individually,  these 
options have proven to be affordable, feasible and successful in reducing energy use and cutting GHG emissions. 
Integrated into a bold and innovative municipal plan, they will invigorate and renew our urban infrastructure, 
and help Canadian municipalities down the path to becoming carbon neutral.

The Metrus Building in Concord (ON) augments its heating and cooling needs with one of the largest ground source 
heat pump systems in the province. The 28 heat pump units placed throughout the building`s suspended ceiling 
and 88 boreholes beneath the parking lot will cut GHG emissions by an estimated 2,862 tonnes over the life of the 
project.

8

