 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

 

A Practitioner’s Guide to Climate Change 
Adaptation in Ontario’s Ecosystems  
 
 

Version 1.0 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Suggested  citation:  Gleeson,  J.,  Gray,  P.,  Douglas,  A.,  Lemieux,  C.J.,  and  Nielsen,  G.  2011.  A  Practitioner’s  Guide  to  Climate 
Change Adaptation in Ontario’s Ecosystems. Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources, Sudbury, Ontario. 74 p. 

ISBN 978-1-4435-7303-0 (Print) 
ISBN 978-1-4435-7304-7 (PDF) 
 

Cover: Pond in Rock Barren, near gull Creek, Lennox and Addington County - Wasyl Bakowsky, MNR 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources 
935 Ramsey Lake Road 
Sudbury, Ontario, P3E 2C6, Canada 
www.climateontario.ca 
 

Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources – Climate Change Program 
300 Water Street 2nd FL N 
Peterborough, Ontario, K9H 8M5, Canada 
www.mnr.gov.on.ca 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   1 

 

 

 

 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  

Ontario’s climate is warming and becoming increasingly variable. It is possible that temperature, precipitation, and wind patterns will 
continue  to  change  for  decades,  perhaps  centuries,  affecting  the  way  communities  throughout  Ontario  manage  their  natural 
resources  and  infrastructure,  and  changing  the  lives  of  people  who  depend  on  these  assets  for  health  and  well-being.  Currently, 
Ontarians  are  responding  to  the  known  and  potential  impacts  of  climate  change  in  two  ways:  mitigation  through  greenhouse  gas 
emission reductions, and adaptation.  

Integrating  climate  change  adaptation  into  natural  resource  management  requires  an  understanding  of  the  known  and  potential 
impacts of climate change and the  corresponding vulnerability of, and risks to, ecosystems and the people who rely on them. This 
guide was developed to help practitioners respond to and prepare for climate change. It was also prepared in response to the Expert 
Panel on Climate Change Adaptation (2009) recommendations, the commitments contained in Climate Ready: Ontario’s Adaptation 
Strategy  and  Action  Plan  (Government  of  Ontario,  2011)  and  the  Ministry  of  Natural  Resources’  strategic  priorities  on  climate 
change. 

This  guide  introduces  the  concepts  of  climate  change  adaptation,  vulnerability,  and  risk.  It  also  describes  vulnerability  and  risk 
assessment tools and techniques, and a framework that can be used to support adaptive management in a rapidly changing climate. 
Ultimately, the guide seeks to assist natural resource managers to identify ways that climate change vulnerabilities and risks can be 
integrated into decision-making processes that include adaptation action plans, strategies, and policies.  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   2 

 

 

 

 

SOMM AIRE   

Le  climat  de  l’Ontario  se  réchauffe  et  devient  de  plus  en  plus  variable.  Il  est  possible  que  les  configurations  des  vents,  des 
précipitations et des températures continuent de changer pendant des décennies, voire des siècles, ce qui influera sur la façon dont 
les collectivités à la grandeur de l’Ontario géreront leurs ressources naturelles et leur infrastructure et transformera la vie des gens 
qui  dépendent  de  ces  facteurs  pour  leur  santé  et  leur  bien-être.  À  l’heure  actuelle,  la  population  de  l’Ontario  réagit  aux  impacts 
connus et éventuels du changement climatique de deux façons: atténuation des impacts au moyen de la réduction des émissions de 
gaz à effet de serre et adaptation.  

L’intégration  de  l’adaptation  au  changement  climatique  à  la  gestion  des  ressources  naturelles  exige  une  compréhension  des 
incidences  connues  et  éventuelles  du  changement  climatique  et  de  la  vulnérabilité  connexe  des  écosystèmes  et  des  gens  qui  en 
dépendent,  tout  comme  des  risques  qui  les  menacent.  Le  présent  guide  a  été  conçu  afin  d’aider  les  spécialistes  à  réagir  au 
changement climatique et à s’y préparer. Il a également été rédigé pour donner suite aux recommandations du Comité d’experts sur 
l’adaptation au changement climatique (2009), aux engagements énoncés dans le document Faire Face au changement climatique : 
Stratégie d’adaptation et plan d’action de l’Ontario (gouvernement de l’Ontario, 2011) et aux priorités stratégiques du ministère des 
Richesses naturelles en matière de changement climatique. 

Le  présent  guide  présente  les  notions  d’adaptation  au  changement  climatique,  de  vulnérabilité  et  de  risque.  Il  décrit  en  outre  les 
outils  et  les  méthodes  d’évaluation  de  la  vulnérabilité  et  du  risque,  ainsi  qu’un  cadre  pouvant  être  utilisé  à  l’appui  de  la  gestion 
adaptive  dans  un  climat  qui  connaît  une  évolution  rapide.  Enfin,  le  présent  guide  vise  à  aider  les  gestionnaires  de  ressources 
naturelles à cerner des moyens d’intégrer aux processus décisionnels les vulnérabilités et les risques liés au changement climatique, 
notamment par l’adoption de stratégies, de politiques et de plans d’action axés sur l’adaptation.   

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   3 

 

 

 

 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

Support for this publication was provided by the Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources (MNR) Climate Change Program.  

The  following  authors  provided  valuable  input  into  the 
development of this document: 

The  review  of  an  earlier  version  of  this  guide  provided  by  the 
following contributors helped to refine the contents: 

  Jenny Gleeson (MNR) 
  Paul Gray (MNR) 
  Allan Douglas (OCCIAR) 
  Christopher J. Lemieux (University of Waterloo)  
  Gary Nielsen (MNR)  

 

  David Pearson (Co-Chair of the Expert Panel on Climate 

Change Adaptation in Ontario; Laurentian University) 

  Rachelle Lalonde (MNR) 
  Ian Cameron (MNR) 
  Emily Higginson (MNR) 
  Lindsay Kingdon (MNR) 
  Tom Noland (MNR) 
  Karen Dandridge (MNR)  
  Scott MacRitchie (MOE)  
  Jason Edwards (Canadian Forest Service)  

Aspects of this guide are based on, or have been adapted from, the deliberations and work of the Technical Analysis Group, Climate 
Change  Task  Force,  Canadian  Council  of  Forest  Ministers.  Members  of  the  Technical  Analysis  Group  are:  Marie-Eve  Bonneau, 
Michel Campagna, Jason Edwards, Paul Gray, Kelvin Hirsch, Kendra Isaac, Mark Johnston, Aynslie Ogden, Kumiko Onoda, David 
Price, Elaine Qualtiere, Catherine Ste.-Marie, and Tim Williamson. 

We thank Diane Lepage and Jacqueline Richard at the Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts and Adaptation Resources for formatting 
and designing the guide. We also thank Lisa Laframboise for editing the guide.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Note 

 

Climate change adaptation is a rapidly evolving area of practice. Literature and practical guidance continue to be published with new 
and innovative approaches and tools. This ‘living’ guide will be revised as new approaches are developed and tested in Ontario and 
other jurisdictions.  Any questions or comments concerning the guide can be directed to Jenny Gleeson (jenny.gleeson@ontario.ca). 
An evaluation form to provide comments on the framework is also available to inform future versions of the guide. 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   5 

 

 

 

 

CONTENTS 

Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................................................................. 2 

Sommaire ............................................................................................................................................................................................ 3 

Acknowledgements .............................................................................................................................................................................. 4 

1.0 Introduction .................................................................................................................................................................................... 7 

A Changing Climate in Ontario ...................................................................................................................................................... 7 

Adapting to Climate Change in Natural Resource Management .................................................................................................... 9 

Why Was This Guide Written? .................................................................................................................................................... 10 

How Can the Guide Be Used? .................................................................................................................................................... 11 

2.0 An Overview of Climate Change Adaptation Concepts ................................................................................................................. 12 

3.0 A Climate Change Adaptation Framework for Ecosystems .......................................................................................................... 17 

STEP 1:   SET CONTEXT AND BUILD TEAM .................................................................................................................................. 19 

STEP 2:   ASSESS CURRENT VULNERABILITY ............................................................................................................................. 27 

STEP 3:   DEVELOP AND APPLY FUTURE SCENARIOS ................................................................................................................. 32 

STEP 4:   ESTIMATE FUTURE VULNERABILITY AND RISKS .......................................................................................................... 40 

STEP 5:   DEVELOP ADAPTATION OPTIONS ................................................................................................................................. 48 

STEP 6:   IMPLEMENT AND MAINSTREAM ADAPTATION .............................................................................................................. 54 

4.0 Case Study: The Lake Simcoe Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Strategy ...................................................................... 57 

5.0 References................................................................................................................................................................................... 62 

6.0 Glossary ....................................................................................................................................................................................... 66 

Appendix 1: Ecological Response Models to Assess Vulnerability ..................................................................................................... 68 

Appendix 2: Tools for Identifying and Evaluating Adaptation Options ................................................................................................. 70 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   6 

 

1.0 INTRODUCTION 

A Changing Climate in Ontario  

The average annual global temperature warmed by about 0.76oC over the last century (IPCC, 2007a), 
but average warming across Canada was more than double the world average (Environment Canada, 
2011). In the last 63 years, the average temperature in Canada has increased about 1.6oC, although 
there  have  been  differences  in  warming  trends  across  the  country.  For  example,  average  annual 
temperatures  increased  2.3oC  in  the  Mackenzie  region  of  the  Northwest  Territories  and  part  of 
Nunavut,  whereas  Atlantic  Canada  warmed  by  0.5°C  over  the  same  period  (Environment  Canada, 
2011). During this period, average temperatures across Ontario increased by 0.7 to 1.1oC, with higher 
temperatures occurring in the Boreal and Hudson Bay Lowlands regions (Environment Canada, 2011).  

Projections  for  Ontario  suggest  that  average  annual  air  temperature  will  increase,  but  given  the 
uncertainty of human behaviour and associated greenhouse gas emission rates and magnitudes, it is 
not known by precisely how much. Generally, the average global temperature is projected to warm 1.1 
to 6.4oC1 during the next century, with land areas warming more than the oceans and higher latitudes 
warming  more  than  lower  latitudes  (IPCC,  2007a).  The  additional  heat  in  the  atmosphere  will  likely 
increase  variability  in  precipitation  and  wind  patterns.  For  example,  as  more  heat  is  trapped  in  the 
lower atmosphere by additional greenhouse gases, the frequency and size of extreme weather events 
such as ice storms, heavy rains, droughts, and wind storms are expected to increase (IPCC, 2007b).  

Based on a scenario that assumes emissions at the current rate of global output (business-as-usual), 
the  average  annual  temperature  in  Ontario  is  projected  to  rise  by  about  5.1°C  by  the  end  of  the 
century (Figure 1) (McKenney et al., 2010). Other scenarios that assume that action is taken to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions project a change of about 3.6°C. Across Ontario, precipitation is projected 
to increase; however, projections of changes in seasonal patterns of precipitation are uncertain at this 
time.  

                                                

1 The range of temperature change is due to differences in the projected warming for different greenhouse gas emission scenarios. 

 

 

 

Storm Front [Sam Brinker, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   7 

 

 

 

 

Figure 1. Annual mean temperature projections using Canadian Global Climate  Model 2 (A2 scenario) for 2011-2040 and 2071-2100 (McKenney 
et al., 2010).  

The changes in climate that have been projected for this century have major implications for the composition, structure, and function 
of ecosystems and natural resources in Ontario (Varrin, Bowman, and Gray, 2007). Some species will adapt – by migrating, altering 
phenology (e.g., breeding  date), or seeking  alternative food sources. Others that  are less able to adapt to changing conditions will 
disappear from  all  or  parts  of their  current  range  (Chen  et  al.,  2011).  For  example,  it  is  projected  that  the southern  range  of many 
Ontario  species  such  as  moose, gray  jays,  and polar  bears  will  shift  north  (see, for  example, Obbard  et  al.,  2007;  Lemmen  et  al., 
2008).  

Decreases in ice cover and changes to freeze-up and break-up times will have physiological impacts on aquatic species and will alter 
the food-chain dynamics in aquatic ecosystems. Over the past 40 years, a decrease in the maximum amount of ice that formed each 
year  was  observed  on  all  the  Great  Lakes, ranging from  a  17%  decline  to  a  40%  decline  in the percentage  of  each  lake  that  was 
covered  in  ice  annually  (Karl,  Melillo,  and  Peterson,  2009).  Additional  information  on  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  Ontario’s 
natural  resources  is  available  from  reports  in  the  Ministry  of  Natural  Resources  (MNR)  Climate  Change  Report  Series  and  the 
academic literature. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   8 

 

 

 

In  2007,  the  Government  of  Ontario  released  Go  Green:  Ontario’s  Action  Plan  on  Climate  Change,  with  targets  to  reduce 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  to  mitigate  the  impacts  of  climate  change  (Government  of  Ontario,  2007).  The  target  was  to  reduce 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  to  6%  below  1990  levels  by  2014  (a  reduction  of  61  megatonnes  relative  to  business-as-usual),  15% 
below  1990  levels  by  2020  (a  reduction  of  99  megatonnes  relative  to  business-as-usual),  and  80%  below  1990  levels  by  2050 
(Government of Ontario, 2007). These progressive targets were accompanied by a commitment to support adaptation programs to 
help Ontarians prepare for climate change. The Government of Ontario appointed the Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation in 
2007 with a mandate to evaluate current government programs and recommend a path forward. 

The  Panel  released  its  report  in  November  2009  with  59  recommendations,  a  number  of  which  addressed  the  need  for  adaptive 
management supported by vulnerability analyses. For example, recommendation #21 called on the MNR to strengthen its capacity to 
develop  and  plan  adaptation  actions  designed  to  increase  the  climate  resilience  of  ecosystems  and  species  at  risk. 
Recommendations #19 and #28 suggested that Ontario complete vulnerability analyses in support of adaptive management for near-
shore  water  quality  in  the  Great  Lakes  and  in  the  Boreal,  Great  Lakes-St.  Lawrence,  and  Carolinian  forested  ecosystems  (Expert 
Panel  on  Climate  Change  Adaptation,  2009).  The  Panel’s  recommendations  provided  the  basis  for  the  province’s  Climate  Ready: 
Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan (Government of Ontario, 2011).  

This  guide  was  prepared  in  response  to  the  Expert  Panel  on  Climate  Change  Adaptation  recommendations,  the  commitments 
contained  in  Climate  Ready:  Ontario’s  Adaptation  Strategy  and  Action  Plan  and  MNR’s  strategic priorities  on climate  change. This 
guide  is  designed  to  assist  natural  resource  managers  in  their  work  to  integrate  an  adaptive  approach  to  managing  for  climate 
change into policies and programs. 

Adapting to Climate Change in Natural Reso urce Management   

Adapting to climate change involves taking action to reduce or eliminate the negative effects of climate change or to take advantage 
of the positive effects. Adaptation complements commitments to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 

Climate change adaptation may require changes to existing policies and programs, and, in some cases, development of new policies 
and management approaches. Rather than dealing with adaptation in isolation from other management decisions or other factors, it 
is  important to  integrate (or  mainstream)  climate change  adaptation  into ongoing  planning  and  decision-making. This  can  increase 
efficiency in the use of financial and human resources, and deepen our understanding of the interaction between climate change and 
the many other factors and forces that shape our world.  

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   9 

 

Climate change adaptation options come in all forms, shapes, and sizes, and are specific to any one study area. There is no single 
‘correct’  procedure  for  undertaking  climate  change  adaptation.  Each  method  of  developing  adaptive  responses  has  its  inique 
strengths and its usefulness depends on the specific adaptation process and the stakeholders involved. Because of the uncertainties 
associated with some adaptation options, it is also important to build flexibility and ‘learning-by-doing’ approach into decisions.  

 

 

Generally  speaking,  options  can  include  broad  strategies, 
regional approaches, and site-specific management actions and 
tactics that seek to (1) reduce threats; (2) enhance resilience of 
species  and  systems;  (3)  engage  people;  and  (4)  improve 
knowledge.  

This  guide  introduces  a  framework  to  assist  natural  resource 
management  practitioners  to  mainstream  climate  change  into 
decision-making  and  operations,  and,  where  necessary,  to 
develop  new  policies  and  management  approaches. 
It 
describes  tools  and  techniques  for  understanding  the  potential 
vulnerabilities  and  risks  of  a  changing  climate  on  natural 
systems 
to  support  adaptive 
management.  While  many  of  the  tools  described  in  this  guide 
can be used by other sectors, it is not a tool intended for use for 
developing  municipal  or  infrastructure  related  climate  change 
action  plans.  The  guide  is  focussed  on  adaptive  planning  and 
management of social-ecological systems. 

in  Ontario  and  a  process 

Forest fire in Wawa, 2009 [Christine Rosche, MNR] 

 

Why Was This Guide Written?  

Mainstreaming climate change adaptation requires an understanding of the known and potential impacts of climate change and the 
corresponding  vulnerability  of,  and  risks  to,  ecosystems  and  the  people  who  rely  on  them  for  health  and  well-being.  In  natural 
resource  management  sectors  such  as  fisheries,  wildlife,  forests,  parks  and  water  management,  managing  for  climate  change 
includes identifying impacts on natural resources over time and exploring the consequences to and impacts on ecological and social 
systems. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   10 

 

 

 

This  guide  was  prepared  to  help  practitioners  respond  to  and  prepare  for  climate  change,  and  is  organized  around  the  following 
objectives:  

 Introduce climate change adaptation, vulnerability, and risk; 

 Describe vulnerability and risk assessment tools and techniques that can be used to support adaptive management in a 

rapidly changing climate; and 

 Provide examples of assessments with information about how they were used to support adaptive management and decision-

making. 

How  Can the Guide Be Used?  

This guide demonstrates how a suite of tools (e.g., vulnerability assessments) can be 
used  to  inform  adaptation  efforts.  It  is  not  a  prescriptive  ‘must-do’  manual.  It  allows 
practitioners 
their 
organization’s  ability  to  address  threats  and  opportunities  resulting  from  climate 
change that are unique to their location and/or sector (e.g., a forest management unit, 
a fisheries management zone, or a provincial park).  

to  select  and  combine 

tools  and 

techniques 

to  enhance 

Given that assessments will be completed in many locations and on a variety of spatial 
scales  (e.g.,  local  to  regional,  sector  to  ecosystem-specific)  and  will  include  diverse 
expertise from various disciplines, the process is necessarily scalable. For example, a 
vulnerability  assessment  could  focus  on  a  specific  thematic  area,  such  as  water  or 
wildlife,  to  limit  the  size  of  the  assessment  team  and  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  the 
overall  process.  Likewise,  project 
to  highlight  potential 
vulnerabilities and impacts by using the information currently available in literature.  

teams  could  begin 

The  process  described  in  this  guide  provides  a  general  framework  and  examples  of 
tools  that  can  be  used  by  practitioners  from  a  variety  of  disciplines.  Practitioners  are 
encouraged to design their own approaches, based on the questions being asked and 
the context and focus of their assessment.  

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   11 

 

Observing a hawk’s nest, [Scott McPherson, MNR] 

 

 

 2.0 AN OVERVIEW OF CLIM ATE CHANGE  ADAPTATION CONCEPTS  

Adaptation  is  an  adjustment  in  natural  or  human  systems  to  moderate  and  cope  with  the  consequences  of  climate  change.  The 
essence of adaptation is to “learn while doing” (Lee, 1999). Adaptation is characterized by actions that reduce negative impacts and 
risks  caused  by  climate  change  and  increase  the  magnitude  and  likelihood  of  preferred  outcomes  (Williamson  et  al.,  2011).  This 
process  involves  learning  about  vulnerabilities  and  risks,  evaluating  possible  responses,  implementing  adaptation  action,  and 
revising  choices  with  new  learning  (Leary  et  al.,  2008).  Adaptation  can  include  but  is  not  limited  to  specific  actions  (e.g., 
improvements to stormwater management), systematic change to organizational operations, and institutional reform.  

Given the uncertainty of future conditions at specific locations or points in time, adaptive management is important because it is an 
iterative  process  based  on  monitoring,  new  learning,  and  the  re-evaluation  of  management  goals  (Swanston  and  Janowiak,  in 
review). 

Several  interrelated  concepts  of  climate  change  vulnerability,  risk,  and  uncertainty  form  the  basis  for  practical,  hands-on  impact 
assessments.  The  concepts  are  fundamental  components  for  mainstreaming  adaptation  initiatives  into  natural  resource 
management.  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

 

 

   12 

Flooding in Peterborough, 2004 [MNR] 

 

 

Adaptation can take many forms, anywhere along the spectrums below:  

 

Anticipatory    
 
Activities that are taken before impacts are observed 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Planned  

 

 

 

 

Deliberate actions aimed at adaptation 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
  

 

 

 

 

Reactive 

Activities that are taken after impacts have occured 

Autonomous 

Activities to spontaneously cope with climate impacts 

 

Anticipatory  and  planned  ecosystem-based  adaptation  measures  that  use  a  range  of  opportunities  for  sustainable 
management, conservation, and restoration are the focus of this guide.  

The  guide  provides  tools  and  examples  for  identifying  and  prioritizing  adaptation  actions  to  reduce  threats,  enhance 
resilience of species and systems, engage people, and improve knowledge. 

 

 

 

Vulnerability in the context of climate change is defined as “the degree to which a system is susceptible to, and unable to cope with, 
adverse effects of climate change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character,  magnitude, 
and  rate  of  climate  change  and  variation to  which  a  system  is  exposed,  [and]  the sensitivity  and adaptive  capacity  of that  system” 
(IPCC, 2007c). In other words, systems and species that will undergo the greatest change, are sensitive to that change, and have the 
least ability to adapt quickly are the most vulnerable (Lemmen and Warren, 2004).  

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   13 

 

Developing  meaningful  adaptation  strategies  requires  an  understanding  of  the  vulnerabilities  of  species,  ecosystems,  and  social 
systems to climate change. Vulnerability assessments can support adaptation planning in many ways:  

 

 

 

 Identify species and/or ecosystems 
most likely to be most impacted by 
projected changes in climate;  

 Build an understanding of why these 

species and/or ecosystems are 
vulnerable, including the interaction 
between climate change, non-climatic 
stressors, and cumulative impacts;  

 Assess the efficacy of previous coping 
strategies in the context of historic and 
current changes in climate; and 

 Identify and target adaptation measures 

to systems with the greatest 
vulnerabilty. 

 

 

Caribou in the Far North of Ontario [Ken Abraham, MNR] 

Assessing  species’  and  ecosystems’  vulnerability  to  climate  change  is  a  complex  task.  In  addition  to  the  complexity  of  the 
interactions of various components of the ecosystem, assessing climate change vulnerability  involves understanding the degree of 
and  interaction  between  exposure,  sensitivity,  and  adaptive  capacity  to  climate  change  in  a  system,  as  well  as  other  non-climatic 
stresses. Each of these determinants of vulnerability is dynamic: they can vary over time, by type, and by stimulus, and can be place- 
and system-specific (Smit and Wandel, 2006).  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   14 

 

 

 

A  sensitive  species  example  of  vulnerability:  Eastern  Hemlock  (Tsuga 
canadensis) 

Hemlock,  an  important  tree  species  found  in  the  Great  Lakes-St.  Lawrence 
forest  ecosystem,  can  be  used  as  an  example  of  how  the  components  of 
vulnerability relate to one another. Brief definitions introduce each component. 

Exposure:  the  nature  and  extent  to  which  the  species  or  system  is 
exposed  to  significant  climate  variation.  More  extreme  weather  events, 
including extended droughts and heat waves, are projected with climate change 
throughout  Ontario,  including  southern  and  central  Ontario  where  hemlock 
grows.  

Sensitivity:  how  affected  a  species  or  system  is  by  being  exposed  to  a 
stress. Eastern hemlock requires cool, moist sites to regenerate and thrive. It is 
quite sensitive to dry and hot conditions and experiences significant stress under 
these  conditions.  In  addition,  hemlock  is  a  preferred  browse  species  of  white-
tailed  deer;  since  warmer  winters  result  in  less  snow  cover,  hemlock  seedlings 
would be exposed to more browsing pressure. 

Adaptive  Capacity:  the  ability  or  potential  of  a  species  or  system  to 
respond  successfully  to  climate  variability  and  change.  Hemlock’s  natural 
ability  to  adapt  to  climate  change  stresses  is  limited.  Its  slow  growth  rate  as  a 
seedling makes it less adaptable to heat and drought conditions that would limit 
its  growth,  cause  significant  mortality,  and  make  it  less  competitive  than  other 
Great Lakes-St Laurence tree species. Strategies to keep hemlock in the Great 
Lakes-St.  Lawrence  forest  ecosystem  could  include  management  techniques 
such as seeding and planting of hemlock on suitable sites around water bodies 
and assisted migration to appropriate sites further north. 

 

 

 

Hemlock  [Stan Vasiliauskas, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   15 

 

 

 

 

Resilience  is  a  synonym  for  some  of  the  characteristics  of  adaptive  capacity  (the  term  used  in  this  guide).  From  an  ecological 
perspective,  resilience  is  a  tendency  to  maintain  integrity  when  subject  to  disturbance  (UNDP,  2005).  A  resilient  ecosystem  can 
withstand  shocks  and  rebuild  itself  as  necessary.  The  resilience  of  an  ecosystem  in  a  changing  climate  is  determined  by  its 
components,  function,  and  structure,  and  in  particular  by  the  diversity  of  species,  the  genetic  variability  within  species,  and  the 
regional  pool  of  species  and  ecosystems.  Other  influences  include  the  size  of  the  ecosystem  (generally,  the  larger  and  the  less 
fragmented, the better), past land use patterns, and the condition of the surrounding environment. Resistance  is the capacity of an 
ecosystem to absorb disturbances and remain largely unchanged (Holling, 1973). In general, we use the term adaptive capacity to 
capture the system’s ability to prepare for or adjust to stress. 

Risk describes the likelihood (probability of occurrence) and the consequences of an adverse impact as a result of the interactions 
between  climate  change  and  society  (UNDP,  2005).  Risk  assessment  is  based  on  people’s  perceptions  of  the  adverse  effect.  It 
involves identifying and ranking risk issues and selecting the best risk-reduction strategies even when practitioners do not know what 
the future will look like because of climate change and other cumulative impacts. 

Uncertainty is an “expression of the degree to which a value…is unknown. Uncertainty can result from lack of information or from 
disagreement  about  what  is  known  or  even  knowable.  It  can  have  many  types  of  sources,  from  quantifiable  errors  in  data  to 
ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour” (IPCC, 2007b). 

Assessing how vulnerable species and ecosystems are to climate change involves uncertainty. The degree of uncertainty is partially 
based on the data, information, and expert knowledge available to assess that information. Uncertainty is also a function of the fact 
that by using climate models, we are making projections about future climate-induced change based on estimates of greenhouse gas 
emissions, and thus we are exploring what those projections could mean. We don’t know the absolute magnitude of climate change 
and its potential effects or how systems may exactly respond to change. Uncertainty should not limit vulnerability assessment and 
the  development  of  adaptation  options,  however.  The  guide  presents  a  language  for  addressing  uncertainty  and  methods  for 
incorporating uncertainty into vulnerability assessments. 

  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   16 

 

 

 

3.0 A CLIM ATE CHANGE   ADAPTATION FRAMEWORK FOR ECOSYSTEMS 

A climate change adaptation framework (Figure 2) comprises a series of  steps that serve as a roadmap for practitioners seeking to 
mainstream climate change into natural resource management. The framework is based on a conceptual model for adaptation that 
was  derived  from  adaptive  management  principles.  The framework  is  not  strictly  linear. It  begins  with  the formation  of  a team  and 
identification  of  a  focus  for  the  assessment,  and  then  outlines  assessment  of  existing  vulnerabilities  and  the  application  of  future 
climate  scenarios  in  order  to  estimate  future  vulnerability  and  risks.  The  process  then  seeks  to  identify,  prioritize,  and  implement 
adaptation measures. Where new data and learning can be integrated, re-evaluations and changes can be made over time. 

The ability to know when to act and what actions to take depends on understanding and projecting the effects of climate change on 
ecosystems. Uncertainty about future greenhouse gas emissions and the spatial distribution of climate change effects requires that 
we  use  a  dynamic  and  ongoing  approach  through  adaptive  management.  Accordingly,  monitoring  and  the  acquisition  of  new 
knowledge enable practitioners to detect change, assess the success of actions, and modify and adjust decisions over time.  

This  framework  builds  on  existing  frameworks  and  information  in  the 
literature (e.g., Glick, Stein, and Edelson, 2011; Kasperson and Berberian, 
2011;  Alberta  Sustainable  Resource  Development,  2010;  Williamson  et 
al., 2007; Füssel and Klein, 2006; Smit and Wandel, 2006; UNDP, 2005), 
as  well  as  guidance  currently  in  development  in  Canada  and  the  United 
States  (i.e.,  Swanston  and  Janowiak,  in  review;  CCFM,  in  prep).  This 
framework  also  builds  on  the  experience  gained  in  a  pilot  vulnerability 
assessment  project  in  the  Lake  Simcoe  watershed  in  Ontario,  which 
informed  a  local  climate  change  adaptation  planning  process.  The  guide 
illustrates elements of the adaptation framework used in the Lake Simcoe 
pilot in a case study format. 

This  guide  provides  a  step-by-step  description  of  the  framework  and  of 
tools  and  techniques  available  to  practitioners.  Worksheets  provided  in 
guide  are  intended  as  examples  that  practitioners  can  adapt  and  use  to 
meet the specific needs of their sector or planning area.  

Dragon fly, [MNR] 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   17 

 

 

 

Step 1:  

  Define the study area and identify environmental themes (ie., ecological, social, and economic) and 

Set Context and 

indicators  

Build Team 

  Build the team and engage experts, stakeholders, and partners 

Step 2: 

Assess Current 

Vulnerability 

Step 3:  

Develop and Apply 
Future Scenarios 

Step 4: 

Estimate Future 
Vulnerability and 

Risks 

  Describe the system’s current sensitivity and exposure to climate and non-climatic stresses 
  Describe the degree of adaptive capacity of the system  

  Develop and apply future climate scenarios  
  Consider anticipated non-climatic stresses (e.g., human population growth, land use) 

Identify and describe future impacts 

 
  Determine future vulnerability and categorize uncertainty 
  Describe the likelihood and consequences of vulnerabilities through socio-economic, political, and 

environmental evaluations 

  Determine areas at highest risk  
  Communicate initial findings to key organizations 

 

 

S
S
E
C
O
R
P
E
V
T
A
R
E
T

I

I

Step 5: 

Develop Adaptation 

Options 

  Based on the risk analysis, determine potential adaptation options 
  Prioritize  adaptation  options  considering  economic  feasibility,  social  acceptability,  ecological 

suitability, and technical and institutional feasibility (e.g., barriers and opportunities) 

Step 6: 

Implement and 

Mainstream 
Adaptation 

  Determine highest priority adaptation actions for implementation  
  Communicate accomplishments 
  Monitor adaptation actions and vulnerabilities over time  
  Acquire new knowledge, learning, and insights, and modify adaptation actions as required  

Figure 2. A climate change adaptation framework for ecosystems 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   18 

 

 

 

 

STEP 1: 

 

 
SET CONTEXT AND BUILD TEAM 

 
 
 
 

The first step in mainstreaming climate change adaptation is to build the project team, engage stakeholders and partners, and define 
the study area and the environmental themes and indicators that will be the focus of the vulnerability assessment.  

Defining the Study Area, Themes, and Indicators 

People engage in climate change adaptation for many reasons. Some are issue-related, such as losses resulting from an extreme 
weather  event  or  perception  of  future  risk  (e.g.,  frequency  of  flooding  or  drought).  Other  reasons  relate  to  a  desire  to  better 
understand how climate change might affect a particular area, or concerns expressed by resource managers or the public. Identifying 
the reasons motivating the study can help to define the study area and determine the scale at which the issue is best addressed. In 
issue-driven studies, there may be less flexibility in selecting the study area and some data limitations may exist. 

Climate change  impacts occur  across multiple scales. In situations where there is flexibility  in defining the study area, the scale of 
assessment can vary:  

 Local assessments, such as a watershed, ecodistrict, forest management unit, provincial park, fisheries management zone, 

or other resource planning areas;  

 Regional assessments, such as an ecoregion or another regional boundary; and 

 Provincial and jurisdictional assessments. 

A  study  at  the  local  level  can  be  a  useful  scale for  encouraging  a range of  interested  parties to  participate.  Local studies are  also 
more feasible if there are limited resources and/or a desire to gain experience in conducting vulnerability assessments. However, it is 
important to recognize that by its very nature, climate change will require that natural resource managers think and plan within the 
context of larger landscapes, even when adaptive management decision-making may occur on a local scale.  

Geographic  scale  affects  the  usefulness  of  climatic  projections  modelled  for  the  study  area.  At  coarser,  broader  scales,  climate 
projections are more robust, even with the availability of downscaled climate models (refer to Step 3, on models and scenarios). If a 
vulnerability assessment is conducted on a smaller, local scale, it is important to describe uncertainties and avoid over-interpreting 
fine-scale projections (Glick et al., 2011). Whatever level an assessment is conducted at, it is important to consider the geographic 
range of the species being examined, and how they may shift into or out of the study area under future climate scenarios. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   19 

 

Worksheet 1.1: Selecting the Study Area  

Brainstorm the options for project areas, recognizing that boundary delineations can be at different spatial scales and will be uniquely 
affected by the issues motivating the study. Study designers should consider data and information availability. Considering the details 
of  future  implementation  can  also  assist  with  the  establishment  of  project  boundaries  (i.e.,  aligning  with  existing  planning  or 
management units to enable the mainstreaming of adaptation into existing plans).  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Potential project area 

Describe planning or operations 
that are defined by project area 

Describe research sites, data, or 
climate analysis tools applicable 

boundaries 

to the project area 

Identify motivating factors unique 

to the project area 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   20 

 

Within the study area, it is important to identify environmental themes that are pertinent to the assessment. Availability and quality of 
data and availability of expertise should be considered in selecting themes. Examples of themes include:  

 

 

 

 Hydrology;  

 Fish and aquatic habitat; 

 Wildlife; 

 Forests;  

 Wetlands 

 Invasive species; 

 Species at risk; and 

 Parks and protected areas. 

 

 

Broad-leaf defoliator [Will Byman, MNR]    

There are many potential indicators associated with each theme that can be used to focus the assessment. Within the aquatic habitat 
theme for example, potential indicators include distribution of coldwater fish species in streams, or temperature and oxygen regimes 
in lakes and their associated habitat availability for fish species. Similarly, changes in bird species distribution could be an indicator 
within a wetland or forest theme.  

Another  approach  involves  a  biodiversity-focussed  analysis  that  assesses  the  vulnerability  of  various  ecosystem  services  to  a 
changing climate (Patt et al., 2009). Ecosystems provide food and fresh water, climate and disease regulation, cultural services such 
as  recreational  opportunities,  and  nutrient  cycling  and  soil  formation  among  other  services  (Millennium  Ecosystem  Assessment, 
2005). All of these services are potentially vulnerable to climate change. 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   21 

 

 

 

Worksheet 1.2: Selecting Themes and Indicators for Analysis  

List  the  themes  to  be  used  in  the  study  area  and  identify  indicators.  For  example,  within  the  theme  of  hydrology,  indicators  could 
include  water  quality,  water  quantity,  and  stream  flow.  Within  a  forest  theme,  indicators  could  include  forest  health,  growth  and 
productivity, disturbance regimes, and forest composition, among others.  

As  a  starting  point,  investigate  the  themes  and  indicators  used  in  other  assessments,  and/or  review  possible  themes  with 
researchers and experts. Ranking of potential themes can assist project teams in deciding which themes are most important to focus 
on, particularly in cases where there are too many themes to pursue given the resources, capacity, or time available.  

Potential 
themes 

Rank of importance for 

analysis 

Availability of expertise  Potential thematic indicators 

Availability and quality of 

data 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   22 

 

Building a Project Team 

A diverse set  of skills, perspectives,  and expertise will be required to complete a  comprehensive vulnerability assessment process 
and to begin developing and implementing adaptation measures.  

 

 

 

 

 

 Depending on the scale of the project, a team can comprise in-house staff, external experts, and other partners/stakeholders.  

 As the scale and complexity of the assessment increases, greater diversity in expert opinion may be required.  

 All members of the project team will have specific roles and responsibilities.  

 Within the project team, a leader will be required to coordinate the project, work with the assessment team experts that are 

conducting thematic vulnerability assessments, and facilitate meetings.  

 Assessment team contributors can help to identify the scope of the thematic vulnerability assessments and will conduct the 
assessments in their specific areas of expertise. Assessment team contributors will typically be scientific researchers with a 
specific area of expertise. Modelling experience is an important skill for contributors.  

 Teams may also elect team members to engage partners and 

stakeholders.  

 A steering committee made up of decision-makers and 
those who influence them can be formed to guide the 
assessment, help validate the outputs of the assessment, 
and prioritize and implement adaptation options.  

 It is recommended that teams develop a project charter to 
ensure clear understanding of roles, responsibilities, and 
expectations. 

 

Stakeholders 

Partners 

 

Assessment Team 

 

Project Team 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   23 

 

Worksheet 1.3: Building Your Project Team  

To identify the assessment team and to articulate the expectations and activities of each team member, consider the following: 

 

 

Team roles and responsibilities 

What  is  the  collective role  and  responsibility  of 
the project team (e.g., team mandate)? 

Who  is  the  team  leader?  Who  is  the  outreach 
champion?  What  role  do  other  project  team 
members play? 

Who  are  the  contributors  leading  the  technical 
assessments  and  what  resources/expertise  do 
they have? 

 

 

 

 

(Source: adapted from J Edwards; pers. comm.) 

Identifying and Engaging Partners and Stakeholders  

Climate  change  adaptation  is  most  effective  when  framed  as  a  participatory,  iterative,  adaptive  management  process  that  builds 
strong  working  relationships  with  partners  and  stakeholders.  When  vulnerability  assessments  are  participatory,  they  can  enhance 
participants’  understanding  of  the  various  actors’  perspectives;  help  to  develop  and  garner  support  for  adaptation  options,  targets, 
and visions; and build capacity to implement results. In some cases, local participation can also help the project team build a strong 
portfolio of local observations that add value to the process, particularly where monitoring data are limited. Local participation may 
also  allow  recognition  of  interacting  factors  and  stimuli  beyond  climate,  including  political,  cultural,  economic,  institutional,  and 
technological factors (Smit and Wandel, 2006). Many of the challenges of adapting to climate change can be managed by fostering 
effective working relationships with stakeholders and communities. Teams are encouraged to identify stakeholders and partners and 
discuss possible models for engagement.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   24 

 

Engagement  techniques  range  from  participation  through  consultation  and  giving  information,  to  more  interactive  participation 
through joint action planning, to self-mobilization where stakeholders take the initiative (UNDP, 2005). Ultimately, it is important that 
stakeholders and partners understand how they are being involved in the process, how the information they provide will be used, and 
the degree of power they have in influencing decisions in the process. If stakeholders chose to abstain from the process, they may 
ask  for  regular  updates,  which  may  require  a  communication  plan  and  a  team  member  designated  to  oversee  stakeholder 
communications. 

Worksheet 1.4: Identifying Partners and Stakeholders 

 

 

team, 

identify  and 

in  how  climate  change 

As  a 
list  potential  partners  and  stakeholders. 
Stakeholders  can  be  individuals,  communities,  or  groups  that  have  an 
interest 
in  natural  resource 
management  and  who  may  be  responsible  for  formal  and  informal 
dissemination  of  knowledge  and/or 
implementation  of  policies  and 
measures.  Partners  will  play  a  more  active  role  in  the  project  such  as 
contributing  to  vulnerability  assessments  and  helping  to  identify  adaptation 
options. Questions to consider include:  

is  considered 

 How might each stakeholder and partner contribute to the planning 

process? 

 Is there anyone on the partner and stakeholder list that you do not 

already have a relationship with? 

 What information about understanding and acting on a climate 

change impact does the study team need? Who has (or has access 
to) this information? 

 In what areas does the study team have influence? Is there anyone 

who can help the team use that influence? 

 How will stakeholders use the vulnerability assessment information, 

and how will they contribute to reducing climate risk? 

 

Burntbush Lake, Cochrane, [Scott Finucan, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   25 

 

Describe interests/ 
resources/expertise 

Describe existing 

relationship 

Possible role in project 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Describe existing 

relationship 

 

 

 

 

Describe interests/ 
resources/expertise 

Possible role in project 

 

Partner 

Stakeholder 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(Source: adapted from J. Edwards; pers. comm; ICLEI, 2010) 

 
 

 
 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   26 

 

 

 

 

STEP 2: 

 

 
 

ASSESS CURRENT VULNE RABILITY 

 
 
 
 
 
Step 2 involves building an understanding of the study area, including the current exposure and  sensitivity to climate, the adaptive 
capacity of the species or system, and other contextual information. With this information, a comparison to future vulnerabilities can 
be completed later in the process.  

Assessing Current Exposure, Sensitivity, and Adaptive Capacity 

To  assess  potential  future  vulnerabilities,  it  is  necessary  to  understand 
the current vulnerability  of the system. For example,  understanding fire 
patterns and related contributing factors such as high temperature days 
and/or periods without rainfall could help in exploring what might happen 
if future conditions are hotter and/or drier. Additionally, systems that are 
already  stressed  are  more  likely  to  experience  adverse  effects  from 
changing climatic conditions.  

Vulnerability  is determined by the degree of exposure, sensitivity, and 
adaptive capacity in a system.  

Exposure  is  defined  as  the  nature  and  degree  to  which  a  system  is 
exposed to significant climatic variations (IPCC, 2001).  

Sensitivity  is the degree to which a system will respond to a change in 
climatic  conditions.  In  many  cases,  sensitivity  and  exposure  can  be 
characterized jointly (Smit and Wandel, 2006).  

Adaptive  capacity  is  the  ability  or  potential  of  a  system  to  respond 
successfully  to  climate  variability  and  change  (IPCC,  2007c).  This 
concept  is  related  to  many  other  commonly  used  concepts  such  as 
coping ability, robustness, and resilience (Smit and Wandel, 2006).  

 
 

 

Janet Jackson, [MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   27 

 

Worksheet 2.1: Assessing Current Exposure, Sensitivity and Adaptive Capacity 

At this stage, experts on the assessment team will typically begin their assessments of sensitivity, exposure, and adaptive capacity 
using  the  best  available  information  (e.g.,  studies,  observations,  expert  judgement,  datasets,  model  outputs,  etc.).  This  simplified 
worksheet may be used either to guide experts in providing their final results or to summarize the analysis that experts provide.  

To  assess  current  exposure  and  sensitivity,  gather  information  to  describe  the  study  area’s  historic  and  current  climate,  and 
observations  of  change  to  explore  how  climate  has  affected  an  indicator  (or  environmental  theme  more  broadly)  within  the  study 
area. Rank the current exposure and sensitivity to climate as High (H), Medium (M), or Low (L).  

 

 

 High – Exposure and sensitivity to climate is the central driver or plays a 
significant role in the current state, structure or function of the indicator.  

 Moderate – Exposure and sensitivity to climate plays a moderate role in 

the current state, structure or function of the indicator.  

 Low – The indicator is currently not exposed or sensitive to climate. Its 

current state, structure or function shows very limited evidence of a 
relationship to climate.  

The assessment of adaptive capacity is one of the more challenging aspects of 
vulnerability analysis. The measurement of adaptive capacity is a relatively new 
and  evolving  area  of  study;  adaptive  capacity  has  traditionally  been  examined 
from  either  an  ecological  or  a  social  perspective.  Efforts  are  underway  to 
integrate knowledge of adaptive capacity of social and ecological systems  (see 
for example Miller et al., 2010; Turner, 2010). 

One  approach  is  to  examine  multiple  time  periods  before,  during,  and  after  a 
historic climatic event to see whether a system prepared for and/or adapted to 
the  stress.  If the  system  adapted  or  adjusted,  whether  or  not  it  was  negatively 
impacted  to  some  degree,  then  some  capacity  to  adapt  had  to  have  existed 
(Engle, 2011).  

 

Figure  4.  Alberta’s  Climate  Change  Adaptation 
Framework  Manual  illustrates  one  approach  to 
depicting  vulnerabilities.  (Source:  adapted  from 
Alberta  Sustainable  Resource  Development, 
2010.) 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   28 

 

 

 

To  assess  adaptive  capacity,  look  at  ecological  adaptive  capacity  (e.g.,  plasticity,  or  how  changes  in  temperature  cause  different 
genes to be expressed in tree species, dispersal abilities, etc.) and/or human adaptive capacity (e.g., the ability to implement planned 
adaptation measures to cope with changes as a result of economic resources, institutional capacity, infrastructure, technology, etc.).  

For each indicator, rank the current adaptive capacity of the system as High (H), Medium (M), or Low (L).  

 High – The indicator shows a high tolerance to change and a strong ability to adapt to new conditions or stresses.  

 Moderate – The indicator shows a moderate tolerance to change and some ability to adjust or adapt to new conditions or 

stresses.  

 Low – The indicator shows very little or no tolerance to change and limited ability to adapt to new conditions.  

 

Indicator 

Describe current sensitivity and exposure 

to climate 

Rank 

(H-M-L) 

Describe current adaptive capacity 

Rank 

(H-M-L) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   29 

 

 

 

 

Canada Goose goslings [Scott Taylor, MNR] 

Assessing Current Non-climatic Stresses 

Assessing  the  vulnerability  of  species  and  ecosystems  to  climate  change  should  also  recognize  the  influence  of  non-climatic 
stresses.  This  assists  in  clarifying  the  relationships  between  various  species  and  ecosystems,  and  their  vulnerabilities  to  current 
climatic  and  non-climatic  factors  and  stresses;  it  also  helps  to  provide  a  foundation  for  the  assessment  of  future  vulnerabilities. 
Looking  at  climate  change  in  isolation  from  the  impacts  of  other  stresses  on  a  system  may  result  in  a  failure  to  recognize  the 
cumulative and synergistic effects that result from the interaction between climate change and other factors. 

In some cases, there will be human activities that contribute to system stresses, such as changes to population and demographics, 
economic growth or diversification, land-use, or market fluctuations.  

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   30 

 

Worksheet 2.2: Describing Current Non-climatic Stresses 

If  possible,  consider  historical  growth  patterns  in  the  project  area,  economic  shifts,  and  historic  and  recent  land-use  changes. 
Information on existing stresses, as well as professional judgement and expert opinion, can help when considering many of the non-
climatic  factors  that  influence  the  current  status  of  a  system.  Depending  on  what  other  non-climatic  stresses  may  be  present,  a 
description  of  the  stresses  may  be  qualitative  or  quantitative.  Describe  whether  and  to  what  degree  the  non-climatic  stresses  are 
impacted by climate change.  

 

 

Indicator 

Describe current non-climatic stresses 

Relationship to climate 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

With the information from Worksheets 2.1 and 2.2, a comparison to future vulnerabilities can be completed later in the process. 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   31 

 

 

 

STEP 3: 

 

 
DEVELOP AND APPLY FUTURE SCENARIOS   

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Step  3  incorporates  projections  of  future  climate  and,  where  possible,  projections  of  other  non-climatic  factors  such  as  population 
growth  and  development.  All  projections  vary  spatially  and  temporally,  ranging  from  large  scale  global  climate  scenarios  showing 
long-term changes to average temperature, precipitation and other variables, to impact assessments that integrate climate factors in 
regional or more localized ecological response models.  

Climate Models and Scenarios  

Climate models project the effect of higher concentrations of greenhouse gases based on increasing amounts of heat trapped in the 
atmosphere. Increased heat affects virtually all aspects of weather, including precipitation, wind, and humidity (Colombo et al., 2007). 
There are many ways to explore Ontario’s future climate with global models that project change to a variety of climatic variables. For 
example,  since  climate  change  varies  with  the  time  of  year  and  location,  practitioners  can  use  seasonal  climatic  variables  (e.g., 
summer  and  winter) for different  time  periods (e.g.,  2011-2040)  and  different  spatial frameworks (Figure  3).  Each  climate  model  is 
unique, is based on different assumptions, and produces somewhat different projections of future climate when provided the same 
data. In total, 24 international centres  provided Global Climate Model (GCM) data for the last IPCC assessment in 2007.  

Accessing Climate Models  

Models are readily available online at:  

Canadian  Forest  Service  at 
http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/subsite/glfc-climate; and  

the  Great  Lakes  Forest  Centre  website,  Sault  Ste  Marie,  Ontario: 

Canadian  Climate  Change  Scenarios  Network  website  maintained  by  Environment  Canada,  Toronto,  Ontario: 
http://www.cccsn.ca. 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   32 

 

Future levels of greenhouse gas in the atmosphere can be modelled with scenarios that describe different possible ways the world 
may develop in response to human activities. Forty scenarios have been approved by the IPCC for use in climate change impact and 
vulnerability  assessments.  Each  scenario  has  a  unique  set  of  assumptions  about  future  social  and  economic  conditions.  For 
example, the A2 scenario (one of the more commonly used scenarios) anticipates higher greenhouse gas levels by 2100, reaching 
1,320 parts per million by volume (ppmv) in CO2 equivalents2 compared to 915 ppmv for the B2 scenario (Nakićenović et al., 2000). 
In the A2 world, the human population reaches 15 billion by 2100, and reliance on fossil fuels is higher than in the B2 world, which 
projects  a  world  population  of  10.4  billion  people  by  2100.  In  addition,  environmental  protection,  resulting  in  lower  greenhouse 
emissions, is more important in the B2 scenario than in the A2 scenario (Nakićenović et al., 2000).  

 

 

 
It  is  important  to  note  that  current  global 
anthropogenic  greenhouse  gas  production 
exceeds  levels  used  in  the  business-as-usual 
A2  scenario  (IEA,  2011),  and  A2  is  now 
considered to be somewhat conservative.  

to 

global 

population, 

Scenarios  are  possible  outcomes,  not 
predictions,  since  the  amount  of  greenhouse 
gas  in  the  future  depends  on  variable  factors 
related 
human 
behaviour,  technological  development,  and 
the 
of 
ecosystems.  Even  if  we  could  accurately 
predict  the  future  amounts  of  greenhouse 
gases  in  the  atmosphere,  different  climate 
models produce varying projections.  

sink/source 

carbon 

behaviour 

 

Alvar Grasslands [Wasyl Bakowsky, MNR] 

                                                

2 A CO2 equivalent expresses the energy-trapping properties of any greenhouse gas and the length of time it remains in the atmosphere in terms 
of the equivalent amount of CO2 that would be required to produce the same effect. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   33 

 

 

 

CLIM ATE  
MODELS  

SCEN ARIOS  

CLIM ATE 

V ARI ABL ES  

TIMES  

LOC ATIONS  

Cou ntr y 

Can adian  

Hadle y 

CSIRO  

 

Etc.  

A1  

 
 
 

A2  

 
 

B1  

 
 
 

B2  

 
 

Etc. 

Summer  Temp eratu re  

Winter Temperat ure  

1971-2 000  

Pro vin ce  

Warm Seas on Pr eci pitation  

2011-2 040  

Regio n  

Cold Seas on Pr ecip itation  

2041-2 070  

District  

Isothermalit y  

2071-2 100  

Tow nship 

Grow ing Seas on  

Degr ee da ys  

 

 

 

 

 

 

Etc.  

 

 

 

Etc.  

Etc.  

 

Figure 3. Examples of climate presentation options available to practitioners (Source: Colombo et al., 2007). 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   34 

 

 

 

Accordingly, climate scientists are recommending the use of an ensemble of models to capture the range of potential climate change. 
Numerous studies show that the best approach when using models is to use an ensemble because, although each GCM represents 
the  best  effort  of  each  modelling  team,  there  are  biases;  the  use  of  an  ensemble  (mean/median)  of  models  tends  to  converge 
towards a best estimate by reduction of strong biases in single models. In addition, ensemble results can provide some indication of 
where the different models agree and disagree (Comer, 2009). 

The  IPCC  has  recommended  that  analyses  should  use  at  least  30-year  averaging  periods  for  GCM  output  data.  Typically,  model 
output is calculated according to a number of fixed time horizons (e.g., 2011-2040, 2041-2070, and 2071-2100). 

The IPCC’s fifth assessment report — due to be published in 2014 — will introduce a new approach. The current practice of starting 
with qualitative storylines of human behaviour will be replaced with a new generation of scenarios that will start out with greenhouse 
gas emissions trajectories known in IPCC terminology as representative concentration pathways (RCPs). The report is expected to 
focus on four emissions trajectories that produce different levels of  heating at the end of the century — 8.5, 6, 4.5, and 2.6 watts per 
square metre (W m−2). IPCC chose four trajectories to avoid the common misconception that the middle scenario is the most likely 
(Inman, 2011). Given the trends in human behaviour, the range covered by the representative concentration pathways is wider than 
that  presented  by  earlier  scenarios,  reflecting  a  general  shift  in  outlook  to  more  extreme  future  emissions  trajectories  than  were 
expected a decade ago.  

Worksheet 3.1: Determining Climate Model Needs 

Projections may already have been developed and applied to Ontario and for the selected study area. The assessment team should 
select projections and associated climatic variables that have the most relevance to the environmental themes and indicators  being 
studied. To aggregate the results of multiple vulnerability assessments and determine adaptation options, project teams may seek to 
ensure that, wherever possible, experts use the same models (e.g., the Canadian Global Climate Model and an ensemble of other 
models),  scenarios,  and  time  periods  (e.g.,  2011-2040,  2041-2070,  and  2071-2100)  for  modelling  and  reporting  on  vulnerabilities. 
However, it is also important to recognize that some thematic analyses may require use of projections not used in other themes. 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   35 

 

To assist in determining what climate model inputs are required for the analyses, consider the following questions: 

 

 

Climate model considerations (sample) 

What climate models and scenarios are available? 

What climatic variables do assessment team 
experts require (e.g., minimum and maximum 
monthly temperatures, annual mean temperature, 
annual precipitation, growing season length in 
days, and isothermality)? 

In what format do assessment team experts 
require climate projection data and information? 
(e.g., maps, and tabular data)? 

What projection scale(s) are preferred? 

How should the data be presented (e.g., 
percentage change, and incremental change)? 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   36 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Downscaling Global Climate Models and Use of Regional Climate Models 

 

A number of methodologies also exist for downscaling global climate model (GCM) outputs for regional and local level 
analyses (refer to the Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network website for more details).  

An  alternative  to  downscaling  using  statistical  techniques  is  the  use  of  a  Regional  Climate  Model  (RCM)  such  as  the 
Canadian  Regional  Climate  Model,  which  is  available  at  a  resolution  of  approximately  50  x  50  km.  These  numerical 
models are similar to GCMs, but are of higher resolution and may  contain a better representation of, for example, the 
underlying  topography  within  the  model.  In  some  cases,  there  can  also  be  better  representation  of  some  weather 
extremes.  

Despite the improvements in the spatial detail provided by the RCM scenarios, however, there are still limitations to their 
use  (Comer,  2009). The  use  of  regional  models in  generating  climate scenarios  can  be  computationally  demanding  if 
the modelled area is large, since the required spatial resolution is very high and the RCM must run for long time periods 
(i.e.,  greater  than  20  years)  and  is  dependent  on  the  number  of  emission  scenarios.  Overall,  global  model  results  – 
particularly  when  based  on  an  ensemble  of  models  –  are  generally  recognized  as  the  best  available  method  for 
projecting future climate conditions.  

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   37 

 

 

 

Impact Assessment Methodologies and Tools  

Assessing  the  vulnerability  of  species  and  ecosystems  to  climate  change  can  involve  a  range  of  methodologies,  from  qualitative 
assessments  based  on  expert  knowledge,  to  highly  detailed  quantitative  analyses  using  ecological  models  that  integrate  climate 
models.  The  choice  of  approach  may  depend  on  many  issues,  including  the  availability  and  quality  of  information,  the  level  of 
expertise, time and budget constraints, and other factors.  

While  a  growing  number  of  models  are  available  for  Ontario  and  other  jurisdictions  to  project  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on 
ecosystems,  the  ability  to  conduct  more  detailed  analyses  such  as  modelling  the  dynamic  ecological  responses  among  diverse 
species  within  and  among  ecosystems  is  still  relatively  limited  (see,  for  example,  Glick  et  al.,  2011).  If  possible,  integrating  local 
knowledge  and  science-based  methods  is  recommended  to  provide  a  more  comprehensive  and  effective  basis  for  analysis 
(Williamson et al., 2007).  

 

 

Shorebirds in Flight [Kim Bennet, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   38 

 

 

 

Quantitative  analyses  involve  the  formal  assessment  of  climate,  impacts,  and  outcomes  within  a  modelling  framework.  Ecological 
response models provide a way to assess the sensitivity and potential adaptability or resilience of species, habitats, and ecosystems 
to climate change (Glick et al., 2011). Models should be suited to the local geographic and biophysical characteristics of habitats and 
ecosystems. Different types of response models can be used as part of a vulnerability assessment (see Appendix 1). The academic 
literature of individual disciplines also discusses how to carry out assessments, and relevant information can also be found in several 
reports in the MNR Climate Change Report Series. Rapid assessment tools also exist for some areas that can be used in conjunction 
with other analyses (for example, vulnerability ratings for Canadian tree species [Johnston et al., 2009]). It is important to note that 
models do have limitations and may not account for other factors that can affect vulnerability to climate change such as changes in 
interactions  between  species,  including  competitive  interactions  and  disease,  nonlinear,  complex  responses,  and  interactions 
between climate change and other important stressors such as land-use change.  

Qualitative analyses can be completed using a number of methods, such as ranking  information  in order of importance, identifying 
critical  control  points  within  relationships,  and  quantifying  interactions  through  sensitivity  analyses  (e.g.,  through  workshops,  focus 
groups  and  questionnaires)  (UNDP,  2005).  Engaging  local  communities  through  surveys  using  structured  questionnaires  can  also 
provide information about observed changes and vulnerabilities. In many cases, scientific knowledge and expertise can be accessed 
by consulting with scientists and practitioners working for government agencies, industry, academic institutions and organizations.  

An example of a qualitative analysis was conducted as part of the Kamloops Future Forest Strategy in British Colombia. The analysis 
used  GCMs  to  project  changes  and  impacts  on  12  biogeoclimatic  subzones  in  the  Kamloops  Timber  Supply  Area.  Ecological 
sensitivities  were  discussed  and  assessed  qualitatively  in  expert  workshops.  Input  and  advice  were  provided  by  local  ecologists, 
resource  specialists,  practitioners,  and  academics.  The  study  team  synthesized  this  information  into  “ecological  narratives”  to 
generate plausible stories of how ecological conditions within these subzones may change over time with a warming climate, and the 
ecological sensitivities that could emerge (Zielke et al., 2009). 

Assessing Non-climatic Factors 

In  addition  to  climatic  factors,  project  teams  are  encouraged  to  assess  non-climatic  factors  wherever  possible  as  part  of  future 
vulnerability. In some cases, non-climatic factors such as habitat fragmentation may have greater impact on species and ecosystems 
than climatic factors. From a social perspective, teams can, for example, consider using local/regional population growth projections 
from  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Ontario  Ministry  of  Municipal  Affairs  and  Housing  (where  available),  or  local  planning 
authorities. Other factors can include information on economic shifts and anticipated land-use changes. For a review of the benefits 
and challenges of integrating non-climatic factors and methodologies for looking at regional economic impacts and landscape values, 
refer to Williamson et al. (2007). 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   39 

 

 

 

 
STEP 4: 

 

 

 
ESTIMATE FUTURE VULNERABILITY AND RISKS  

 
 
 
 

Step 4 builds on earlier steps during which current vulnerability was assessed and climate scenarios were applied. It combines the 
results of those analyses to develop estimates of future vulnerability.  

Worksheet 4.1: Describing Future Exposure, Sensitivity, and Adaptive Capacity 

Fill out the worksheet with the results of the analyses in Step 3 for each  indicator. Depending on the analytical and methodological 
approach technical experts take in applying future climate scenarios, results describing potential future vulnerabilities will come in a 
variety of forms. With the results, work with technical experts to rank each indicator’s anticipated exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive 
capacity  to  climate  change  as  High  (H),  Medium  (M),  or  Low  (L).  Use  ranking  descriptions  included  in  Step  2.      Descriptions  can 
include specific impacts that may occur. Estimates of future adaptive capacity are not meant to include adaptive assistance that will 
be developed from this process. 

 

 

 

 

 

Indicator 

Describe future exposure and 

sensitivity to climate 

Rank 

(H-M-L) 

Describe future adaptive capacity 

Rank 

(H-M-L) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   40 

 

Worksheet 4.2: Describing Other Future Existing Stresses 

Depending  on  what  non-climatic  existing  stresses  may  be  projected,  a  description  of  the  stresses  on  each  indicator  may  be 
qualitative  or  quantitative.  Assessments  can  consider  human  population  growth  patterns  in  the  project  area,  economic  shifts,  and 
historic  and  recent  land-use  changes. Wherever possible,  rank the  degree  of  sensitivity  to  the  stress  as  High (H),  Medium  (M), or 
Low (L). 

 

 

Indicator 

Describe non-climatic existing stresses 

Rank 

(H-M-L) 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   41 

 

Worksheet 4.3: Estimating Overall Future Vulnerability 

To assign an overall vulnerability ranking, project teams rank each indicator’s future vulnerability High (H), Medium (M), or Low (L), 
based on the collated rankings from Worksheets 4.1 and 4.2.  

 

 

 

 

 High – Impacts are expected to cause widespread and severe-
to-catastrophic damage to ecosystems, and ecosystems will be 
limited in their ability to buffer these impacts. Impacts will disrupt 
important ecosystem functions, alter species distribution and 
abundance,  and lessen their ability to provide key 
environmental benefits.  

 Moderate – Impacts are expected cause substantial damage to 
ecosystems, which may be isolated or widespread. Ecosystems 
will be limited in their ability to buffer these impacts, but some 
reversal of effects may be possible with major effort.  

 Low – Impacts are expected to cause minor changes to 

ecosystems, but these changes can be reversed.  

Because vulnerability is a function of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive 
capacity,  it  is  helpful  to  consider  the  interactions  between  these  three 
components.  Project  teams  may  consider  describing  vulnerabilities 
graphically (see Figure 4 for example) or using other approaches.  

Understanding and Addressing Uncertainty 

Figure 4. Alberta’s Climate Change Adaptation 
Framework Manual illustrates one approach to 
depicting vulnerabilities. (Source: Alberta Sustainable 
Resource Development, 2010.) 

 

At  their  core,  vulnerability  assessments  involve  the  synthesis  of  scientific  information,  experiments,  and  modelling  efforts.  In  many 
cases, there will be healthy and lively discussions  about analysts’ confidence in the results of the assessments. As such, the team 
should consider approaches for acknowledging and communicating uncertainty.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   42 

 

 

 

The  IPCC (2007b)  defines  uncertainty  as  an  “expression  of the  degree to  which  a  value…is  unknown.  Uncertainty  can result from 
lack  of  information  or  from  disagreement  about  what  is  known  or  even  knowable.  It  may  have  many  types  of  sources,  from 
quantifiable errors in data to ambiguously defined concepts or terminology, or uncertain projections of human behaviour.”  

Uncertainty  can  thus  be  described  by  quantitative  measures  (e.g.,  a  range  of  values  calculated  by  various  models)  and/or  by 
qualitative  statements  (e.g.,  reflecting  the  judgement  of  a  team  of  experts).  Regardless  of  the  method  used,  it  is  essential  that 
practitioners consistently communicate uncertainty across vulnerability assessments completed for the study.  

Depending on the level of detail in the assessment and the capacity of the team, qualitative descriptions of uncertainty are likely the 
most  applicable  here.  Qualitative  descriptions  communicate  the  relative  amount  and  quality  of  the  evidence  (i.e.,  “lacking,”  “not 
reported,” “not available,” “good quality,” “anecdotal,” and “expert opinion”) and the degree of agreement (Table 1) with other results 
in  the  literature  (i.e.,  “high  agreement  –  much  evidence,”  and  “high  agreement  –  medium  evidence”)  (IPCC,  2007b).  Avoid  vague 
and/or overly broad statements that are difficult to support or refute.  

 

Level of 
Agreement 

 

High Agreement, limited evidence  

High agreement, medium evidence 

High agreement, much evidence 

Medium agreement, limited 
evidence  

Medium agreement, medium evidence 

Medium agreement, much evidence 

Low agreement, limited evidence  

Low agreement, medium evidence 

Low agreement, much evidence 

Amount of evidence (number and quality of independent sources) 

Table 1. Qualitative terminology for uncertainty (Source: adapted from IPCC, 2007b). 

Several quantitative techniques are available to describe and communicate uncertainty. Wherever possible, experts should seek to 
describe results in terms of likelihood of occurrence and degree of confidence in being correct. The IPCC’s report (2007b) provides a 
comprehensive discussion of language for describing uncertainty and levels of confidence in climate change assessments, including 
quantitative terminology.  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   43 

 

 

 

Some general strategies for describing uncertainty include the following:  

 Identify the most important factors (e.g., processes, variables, data, interdependencies); 

 Document ranges and distributions in the literature;  

 Describe the state of the scientific information on which the conclusions and/or estimates are based; and 

 Prepare a “traceable account” of how the estimates were constructed (Moss and Schneider, 2000).  

An adaptive planning process, including vulnerability assessment, is an iterative process that allows the inclusion of new science and 
data  that  will  reduce  uncertainty  over  time.  Even  though  uncertainty  exists,  it  should  not  limit  the  exploration  of  vulnerabilities  and 
implementation of no-regrets and priority adaptation options.  

Assessing Risk 

Risk  is  the severity of the consequences of climate change impacts and the likelihood that impacts  will occur. Risk assessment is 
based  on  people’s  perceptions  of  adverse  effect  and  involves  exploring  what  we  should  do  about  the  vulnerabilities  identified  for 
projected  future  climates.  It  can  help  to  inform  how  we  deploy  limited  resources  to  deal  with  climate  compared  to  other  priorities. 
Through ranking methods, the project team builds an understanding of where to focus adaptation action.  

In  many  cases,  risk  assessment  is  a  qualitative  exercise  involving  the  project  team,  expert  panels,  and  input  from  stakeholders, 
partners, and other specialists. A workshop or other collaborative format may be a suitable way to conduct the activities in the risk 
assessment or validate results of a risk assessment. Other tools, including quantitative assessments such as cost-benefit analysis, 
are described in Appendix 2. Worksheet 4.4 employs a qualitative approach to risk assessment. 

Worksheet 4.4: Assessing Risk  

For each indicator, consider the consequences of its vulnerability in a matrix like the example below. Other criteria can be developed 
for  the  evaluation  as  needed.  A  consequence  is  an  outcome  that  leads  to  the  general  decline  of  a  social-ecological  system  or 
species. There will be consequences in several areas, such as strategic, financial, operational, and environmental. Project teams can 
determine which potential consequences to rate and may identify other consequences (e.g., cultural consequences) not listed in the 
sample  matrix.  To  assess  risk,  first  determine  the  consequence  rating,  based  on  the  numerical  value  in  the  first  column.  Then, 
determine the likelihood of this particular climate change impact occurring.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   44 

 

 

 

CONSEQUENCES (samples) 

Rating 

Strategic 

Financial 

Operational 

Environmental 

Public Perception 

Safety 

Insignificant 

(1) 

No impact.  

No impact on 
financial resources.  

No impact on 
execution of 
plans. 

No impact on environment, 
ecosystem services, or 
resources. 

Limited impact on public 
image. No media 
coverage. 

No impact on 
human health 
or safety. 

Minor change in 
strategic direction. 

Minor impact on 
financial resources. 

Minor 

(2) 

Minor impact on 
execution of 
plans. 

Minor impact on 
environment, ecosystem 
services, or resources. 
Easily rectified. 

Some impact on public 
perception. Local media 
coverage for short period. 

Minor injury or 
illness. 

Reasonable 

(3) 

Multiple changes 
in strategic 
direction. 

Moderate impact on 
financial resources. 

Moderate impact 
on execution of 
plans. 

Moderate environmental 
impact with limited long-
term effects on ecosystem 
services or resources . 

Moderate impact on 
public image. Regional or 
national media coverage 
for a limited period. 

Lost time, injury 
or illness. 

Major 

(4) 

Substantive 
revision to strategy 
required. 

Substantive impact 
on financial 
resources affecting 
some programs. 

Substantive 
impact on 
execution of 
plans. 

Impact on environment, 
ecosystems services, or 
resources requires > 25 
years to rehabilitate. 

Substantive impact on 
public image. Regional or 
national media coverage 
for long period of time. 

Permanent 
damage caused 
by injury or 
illness. 

Severe 

(5) 

Complete change 
in strategic 
direction and 
organizational 
objectives. 

Significant impact on 
financial resources 
affecting multiple 
programs. 

Critical 
implications for 
execution of 
plans. 

Catastrophic impact on 
environment, ecosystem 
services, or resources 
requires > 100 years to 
restore, or is irreversible. 

Severe impact to public 
image. Extended national 
or international coverage 
in media. 

Fatality or other 
catastrophic 
impact to 
human health 
and safety. 

Likelihood 

Rating 

Rare 
(1) 

Unlikely 

(2) 

Possible 

(3) 

Likely 

(4) 

Almost Certain 

(5) 

Note: Time 
horizon X 

should match 
time horizon 

Very low 
probability that this 
risk will occur in 
the next X years. 

Less than 50% 
chance that this risk 
will occur in the next 
X years. 

50/50 chance 
that this risk will 
occur in the next 
X years. 

More likely than not that 
this risk will occur in the 
next X years. 

Very high probability that 
this risk will occur in the 
next X years. 

 

 

LIKELIHOOD 

in 

assessment 

Table 2: Sample risk assessment matrix 

(Source: adapted from Alberta Sustainable Resource Development, 2010) 
 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   45 

 

 

 

Indicator 

Consequence 

Consequence rating 

Likelihood of occurrence 

Likelihood rating 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Worksheet 4.5: Describing Risk 

With  information  on  the  severity  of  consequences  and  likelihood  of  impacts,  assign  a  qualitative  classification  of  risk  for  each 
indicator as High (H), Medium (M), or Low (L).  

Teams should use judgement when applying numerical risk ratings. Some risks that are classified as “low” may be safe to ignore or 
can be dealt with at a later time. However, it is important to remember:  

  Several low risks can cumulatively pose significant challenges to the organization;  

  There may be non-linear ecosystem responses as a result of impacts rated as low risk; and  

  Over time risks may become more severe. Therefore, even low risk climate change impacts may require monitoring. 

Project teams could consider describing risks graphically or using other approaches. 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   46 

 

 

 

Communicating Findings  

Throughout  the  process,  it  is  important  to  communicate  findings  to  key  organizations,  staff,  and  decision-makers  so  that  they  are 
aware  of  the  potential  climate  impact  within  their  spheres  of  influence  and  responsibility.  Action  will  be  required  by  government 
agencies, industry, communities and organizations. Engaging these groups early in the process will help build support for adaptation 
planning and implementation.  

At this stage, the team can develop impact statements of vulnerability and risk to communicate findings to key organizations. Teams 
can elect to host a workshop to present findings of the vulnerability and risk assessment. Alternatively, teams may decide to briefing 
notes to communicate findings. Both options can also be used to communicate with stakeholders and at other stages in the process 
to ensure transparency. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

 

 

   47 

Communicating and discussing findings [MNR] 

STEP 5: 

 

 
DEVELOP ADAPTATION OPTIONS 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

Step 5 identifies potential adaptation options to help practitioners 
reduce or eliminate vulnerabilities and risks. Measures can seek 
to  reduce  sensitivity  and  exposure  or  to  enhance  adaptive 
capacity.  As  part  of  the  process,  adaptation  options  can  be 
assessed 
feasibility,  practicality,  and  other 
consideration  that  meet  the  unique  needs  of  their  organization. 
Ultimately,  practitioners  select  and  prioritize  a  suite  of  options 
that will be implemented.  

for  desirability, 

Identifying Adaptation Options 

Climate  change  adaptation  options  come  in  all  forms,  shapes, 
and  sizes,  and  are  specific to  the  study  area.  Likewise,  there  is 
no  single  ‘correct’  procedure  or  process  for  generating  adaptive 
responses to the identified climate vulnerabilities and risks. Each 
method  of  developing  adaptive  responses  has  strengths  and, 
consequently,  each  method’s  utility  depends  on  resources,  the 
specific adaptation process, and the stakeholders involved.  

Generally  speaking,  options  can 
include  broad  strategies, 
regional  approaches,  and  site-specific management  actions  and 
tactics  that seek to (1) reduce threats; (2) enhance resilience of 
species  and  systems;  (3)  engage  people;  and  (4)  improve 
knowledge.  Because  of  the  uncertainties  associated  with  some 
adaptation  options,  it  is  also  important  to  build  flexibility  and 
‘learning-by-doing’ into the measures.  

 
 

 

 

Electrofishing [Nick Jones, MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   48 

 

 

 

Examples of Adaptation Approaches and Examples of Specific Measures in Natural Systems  
 

Reduce Threats  

 

Climate  change  will  exacerbate many  existing  vulnerabilities  in  natural  ecosystems  and  species 
and  will  contribute  significantly  to  cumulative  effects.  Existing  threats  may  be  reduced  through 
such measures as invasive species research, prevention, and education. 

Enhance Resilience  

 

An  ecosystem’s  resilience  in  changing  environmental  conditions  is  determined  by  its  biological 
and  ecological  resources,  including  diversity  of  species,  genetic  variability  within  species,  and 
condition  and  connectivity  with  other  ecosystems.  Measures  to  reduce  habitat  fragmentation 
enhance  species’  access  to  critical  habitats  (e.g.,  access  to  coldwater  refuges,  and  spawning 
areas) and can facilitate species’ ability to shift ranges as climatic conditions change. Measures 
to  maintain  genetic  and  species  diversity  in  ecosystems  can  have  a  positive  effect  on  adaptive 
capacity. 

Improve Knowledge 

 

Communities and agencies that take proactive steps to prepare for climate change will be more 
resilient  to  change.  Engage  people  and  focus  on  identifying  the  most  important  impacts  and 
investing in adaptive capacity.  

Engage People  

 

Acquiring  new  knowledge  and  experience  over  time  is  an  important  component  of  adaptive 
management. Monitor impacts of climate change and effectiveness of adaptation measures; seek 
out new data, and scientific and local knowledge and perspectives. 

Adaptation options falling into the no-regrets and low-regrets categories may be the most implementable of all options.  

No-regrets actions provide benefits regardless of the rate and magnitude of climate change and can be further justified when there is 
no cost or risk of negative impact. For example, increasing tree species diversity within a forest range could improve the resilience of 
a  forest  to  climate  change  by  reducing  the  threat  of  an  insect  outbreak  targeting  a  particular  species.  Similarly,  increasing  the 
connectivity  between  habitats  can  be  considered  a  no-regrets  adaptation  option  with  multiple  benefits,  including  greater  ability  for 
populations to shift and protection of essential ecosystem services. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   49 

 

Low-regrets  actions  are  those  made  because  of  climate  change,  but  at  a  minimal  cost  or  risk  of  negative  impact.  In  other  words, 
there  is  low  regret  if  the  investment  or  change  in  management  practice  proves  redundant  or  impractical  under  future  climate 
conditions.  

Some adaptation actions have mitigation  co-benefits. These measures simultaneously reduce vulnerability to climate change and 
decrease greenhouse gas emissions or sequester carbon from the atmosphere, and therefore may be desirable options. 

 

 

Tools for Identifying Adaptation Options 

Several  approaches  are  available  to  help  identify  adaptation  options  and  support  strategic  thinking.  Idea-generation  tools 
such as a policy Delphi tool can solicit suggestions regarding adaptation options from experts, partners, and stakeholders. 
Project  teams  may  also  prepare  a  menu  of  possible  adaptation  options  in  order  to  solicit  feedback  relating  to  identified 
vulnerabilities.  

Tools and resources to identify and evaluate adaptation options are described in Appendix 2. Many of these techniques can 
be used in various combinations.  

 

Project  teams  should  carefully  select  tools  to  identify  adaptation  options  that  best  match  the  needs  and  expectations  of  the 
stakeholders and organizations responsible for implementation. Every situation and strategic planning process is unique.  

Worksheet 5.1: Developing Adaptation Options 

For the vulnerabilities and risks identified in the assessment, list possible adaptation options.  The four general categories – reduce 
threats, enhance resilience, engage people, and increase knowledge – are intended to guide the identification of adaptation options 
for each theme. To stimulate ideas, it may also be useful to consider measures relating to legislation and policy, strategic planning 
processes, and management and operations. An example of a critical risk and potential adaptation options is given below.  

Once adaptation options have been identified, the team should collate all of the options and eliminate redundancies and overlap in 
ideas before proceeding to evaluate adaptation options.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   50 

 

 

 

High 

vulnerabilities/ risks 

Introduction  of  new 
forest 
pests/pathogens  

 

(example) 

Adaptation approach 

Possible adaptation measures and tactics 

Timeframe 

Reduce threats 

1. Adjust rotation age lengths to alter age-class distribution  

Long-term 

2.  

3.  

 

 

Enhance resilience 

1.  Maintain  or  improve  tree  species  diversity  and  native  species 
that  are  under-represented  and/or  better  adapted  to  future 
conditions 

Ongoing 

2.  

3.  

Engage people  

1.  Develop an education and outreach program for public to assist 

in detection 

2.  

3.  

Increase knowledge  1.  Share  information  and  experience  with  other  local,  provincial, 

and federal agencies/sectors 

2.  

3.  

 

 

Short-term/ 
ongoing  

 

 

Short-term/ 
ongoing 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   51 

 

Evaluating Adaptation Options  

Once  a  list  of  potential  adaptation  options  is  developed,  each  must  be  assessed.  A  range  of  assessment  perspectives  can  be 
applied:  

 

 

  Implementation costs;  

  Technical and institutional feasibility;  

  Likely benefits 

  Social acceptability;  

  Ecological suitability; and 

  Degree of risk in acting on adaptation options 
compared to the consequences of not acting.  

Several  methods  can  be  used  to  prioritize  adaptation 
options.  Worksheet  5.2  (below)  provides  criteria  for 
evaluating adaptation options. It is important to recognize 
and  attempt  to  mitigate  potential  shortcomings  (e.g.,  low 
participation, skewed expertise) of any evaluation. At this 
stage,  the  project  team  may  want  to  call  on  select 
stakeholders who may be responsible for implementation 
though not previously engaged in the process. Appendix 2 
lists  several  evaluation  and  prioritization  methodologies, 
such  as  cost-benefit  analysis,  expert  judgement,  multi-
criteria analysis, and cost-effectiveness analysis.  

Worksheet 5.2: Evaluating Adaptation Options 

Workshop, [Lyn Thompson, MNR] 

To evaluate adaptation options, participants assess each option against the criteria in a matrix like the example below. Other criteria 
can be developed for the evaluation as needed. Participants  are asked to exercise expert judgement and/or use their professional 
experiences  to  inform  their  evaluations.  The  project  team  then  collates  the  input  to  determine  which  adaptation  options  should  be 
considered first-order priorities. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   52 

 

 

 

 

Feasibility Ranking (High [1] to Low [4] 

Criteria (sample) 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Priority 

First-order priority:  
A most relevant point; has 
direct bearing on major 
issues; must be resolved, 
dealt with or treated. 

Second-order priority:  
Relevant to the issue; has 
significant impact but not until 
other items are treated; does 
not have to be fully resolved. 

Third-order priority: 
Insignificantly relevant; has 
little importance; not a 
determining factor to major 
issue. 

No priority; no relevance: 
No measurable effect; 
should be dropped as an 
item to consider. 

Definitely affordable: 
Can be implemented within 
current fiscal realities . 

Feasibility: 
Affordability 

AND/OR 

High cost-sharing 
opportunities. 

Some indication adaptation is 
affordable: 
Possibility that adaptation can 
be implemented within current 
fiscal realities. 

Some indication adaptation 
is unaffordable: 
Additional financial resources 
or reallocation required to 
implement. 

AND/OR 

Some cost-sharing 
opportunities. 

AND/OR 

Low cost-sharing 
opportunities. 

Definitely unaffordable: 
Adaptation cannot be 
implemented within current 
fiscal realities. 

AND/OR 

No cost-sharing 
opportunities. 

 

Feasibility: 

Legal, political, 
institutional, and 

social barriers 

No identifiable internal or 
external: 
Can definitely be 
implemented. 

Some identifiable internal or 
external barriers: 
Barriers most likely can be 
overcome.  

Some identifiable internal 
or external barriers: 
Barriers too significant to 
overcome. 

Obvious and significant 
internal or external 
barriers: 
Cannot be implemented. 

No risk: 
Rigorous science and 
information show no 
ecological risk in 
implementing.  

AND/OR 

Vulnerability assessment is 
highly certain. 

 

Degree of 
ecological 

suitability (risk) 

 

 

Low risk: 
Some information is available 
showing potential ecological 
effects of option. 

Moderate risk: 
No information on the 
ecological effect of this 
option for local conditions. 

High risk: 
Little to no information at 
all on the ecological effect 
of option.  

AND/OR 

AND/OR  

AND/OR 

Vulnerability assessment is 
fairly certain. 

Vulnerability assessment is 
moderately uncertain. 

Vulnerability assessment is 
highly uncertain. 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   53 

 

 

STEP 6: 

 

 
IMPLEMENT AND MAINSTREAM ADAPTATION 

 
 
 
 

 

In  Step 6, the adaptation measures that have been  evaluated and selected  are considered for implementation. While this is a final 
step in the process, the elements of this step form a critical part of a broader adaptive management process that has no end  point. 
Over time, as measures are implemented and adaptation is mainstreamed into policies and programs, monitoring, acquisition of new 
knowledge, and periodic re-assessments will be required.  

 

 

Implementing Adaptation Measures 

Once  priority  adaptation  measures  have  been  selected 
(refer  to  Step  5),  the  project  team  should  identify  who  is 
responsible  for  implementation  and  who  will  fund  those 
measures  that  have  fiscal  implications.  This  step  also 
identifies  opportunities  to  integrate  adaptive  responses 
into  existing  programs.  As  part  of  this  process,  the  team 
must  also  establish  the  timing  of  the  implementation  and 
develop  a  plan  for  how  the  actions  will  be  measured, 
monitored,  and  evaluated.  Sometimes,  it  is  only  through 
the team’s effort to implement adaptive measures that key 
limitations in adaptive capacity become evident. 

the 

In  some  cases, 
implementation  of  adaptation 
measures may lend itself to development of an adaptation 
plan, with goals, objectives, targets, and actions. In other 
cases,  adaptation  measures  can  be  implemented  and 
mainstreamed into existing plan and programs. 

 

Monitoring, [Marilyn Twiss, MNR] 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   54 

 

 

 

Monitoring 

Tracking  the  effectiveness  of  the  adaptation  action  and  the  progress  of  its  implementation  is  important  in  the  adaptation  process. 
Questions about outputs, outcomes, and impacts should be considered, including the following: 

  Has the adaptation effort generated outputs (e.g., new decision-support tools, policy changes, guidelines on “how to”, or 

reports and papers detailing process)? 

  What outcomes have been achieved (e.g., stakeholders formally participating in decision-making, and planning processes 

that integrate climate change considerations)?  

  What impacts have arisen (e.g., a flood early warning system that saved X lives)? 

  Considering indicators used to assess vulnerability, has there been ecological improvement in any of areas of study?  

  Has vulnerability been reduced or eliminated? 

Assess  whether  the  appropriate  information  has  been  collected  about  the  success  or  failure  of  the  adaptation  actions  being 
implemented. Tracking the progress that has been made towards adaptation may reveal, for example, that a given adaptation action 
is  ineffective  in  improving  the  adaptive  capacity  of  the  system.  Conversely,  an  action  may  be  very  successful  and,  with  additional 
funding, could be replicated in other locations by other agencies. The information collected as part of the project’s monitoring efforts 
can also be useful for future reviews, updates to public reports, budget requests, and policy decisions. 

For many reasons, it is important to integrate existing monitoring programs with climate change monitoring.  Existing programs can 
provide  information  to  help  to  monitor  climate  change  impacts  on  natural  resources.  These  programs  should  be  recognized  and 
supported. Conversely, there may be gaps in monitoring that that should be identified. Wherever possible, enhancing efficiencies to 
monitor  climate  change  and  a  range  of  other  objectives  (e.g.,  biodiversity  and  forest  health)  on  the  landscape  will  maximize  the 
program’s effectiveness. Seek to align monitoring efforts for indicators that have been identified as important climate change impacts 
indicators.  

Another  element  of  ongoing  monitoring  involves  re-evaluating  vulnerabilities  that  were  assessed  in  the  initial  assessment  and 
modifying or updating adaptation actions as necessary.  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   55 

 

New Information and Research  

Climate  change  adaptation  is  an  ongoing  process.  Assessing  new  information  and  research  as  it  emerges  can  help  the  team  re-
evaluate  both  the  results  of  initial  vulnerability  assessments  and  the  adaptation  options  that  were  identified  as  priorities.  Project 
teams can consider planning a review every few years to explore some of the following questions: 

 

 

  What societal, economic, or political factors have changed since the 

process began? Do any changes affect the successful implementation of 
adaptation actions (e.g., funding, public perception, or political support)? 

  Have new scientific findings improved or changed the understanding of 

vulnerabilities to climate change? Update the relevance and accuracy of 
information to inform future decisions.  

  Based on changes in scientific information, have vulnerabilities or high-risk 

areas changed? A re-evaluation of scientific information may lead your 
community to change the focus of priority actions. 

Depending  on  the  information  derived  from  monitoring  and  research,  some 
modifications to adaptation actions may be justified. 

Communicating Accomplishments 

As  noted  previously,  it  is  important  to  communicate  with  organizations,  staff, 
stakeholders, and decision-makers throughout the adaptive management process.  

is  a  success 

implementation  of  adaptation  actions 

The 
that  should  be 
communicated to those involved in the project and others that may potentially help 
effect change within their spheres of influence and responsibility. Communication at 
this  stage  is  also  an  opportunity  to  build  momentum  for  ongoing  implementation. 
Some  tools  that  teams  can  consider  include  annual  progress  reports,  press 
releases,  briefing  notes,  website  updates,  workshops,  ‘lunch-and-learns,’  and 
celebration events.  

Agawa Canyon, [Gilbert Racine, MNR] 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   56 

 

4.0  CASE  STUDY:  THE  LAKE   SIMCOE  VULNERABILITY   ASSESSMENT  AND 
ADAPTATION STRATEGY  

 

 

Background 

The  Government  of  Ontario  appointed  the  Expert  Panel  on 
Climate  Change  Adaptation  in  2007  with  a  mandate  to 
evaluate  current  government  programs  and  recommend  a 
path  forward.  The  panel  released  its  report  in  2009  with  59 
recommendations 
including  recommendation  #34,  which 
states that the “climate change adaptation strategy called for 
in the Lake Simcoe Protection Plan should be considered as 
a  pilot  project  with  potential  application  to  strategies  for 
increasing the climate resilience of other watersheds” (Expert 
Panel  on  Climate  Change  Adaptation,  2009).  The  Lake 
Simcoe  Protection  Plan  also  contains  a  dedicated  climate 
change  policy  that  commits  the  Ministry  of  the  Environment, 
in collaboration with Ministry of Natural Resources, Ministry of 
Agriculture,  Food,  and  Rural  Affairs,  First  Nations  and  Métis 
communities, 
the  Lake  Simcoe  Region  Conservation 
Authority, municipalities,  and interested academic institutions 
to develop a climate change adaptation strategy for the Lake 
Simcoe Watershed.  

Lake Simcoe, [MNR] 

With  this  direction,  MNR  and  MOE  co-led  an  ecosystem-focussed  climate  change  vulnerability  assessment  for  the  Lake  Simcoe 
Watershed.  Additional  areas  of  analysis  included  infrastructure,  agriculture  and  tourism.  Adapting  to  Climate  Change: 
Recommendations to Inform Development of a Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for the Lake Simcoe Watershed (Douglas et al., 
2011)  describes  the  process  used  to  gather  and  summarize  adaptation  recommendations  to  support  development  of  the  Lake 
Simcoe  watershed  climate  change  adaptation  strategy.  The  process  involved  engaging  experts,  assessing  current  and  future 
vulnerabilities of selected natural and built systems’ assets, and generating adaptation recommendations. This work is ongoing, and 
has provided the foundation for learning and future efforts on ecosystem-focussed vulnerability assessments. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   57 

 

Lake Simcoe Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments 

The  project  team  engaged  scientists  and  practitioners  to  complete  preliminary  vulnerability  assessments  for  11  themes  and 
established a forum of climate change experts to generate adaptation options for addressing the known and potential vulnerabilities 
of natural assets and infrastructure to climate change described by the scientists. The environmental themes included:  

 

 

 Hydrology;  
 Aquatic habitat; 
 Wildlife; 
 Insects; 
 Species-at-risk;  
 Invasive species;  
 Vegetation cover;  
 Natural heritage areas;  
 Agriculture;  
 Tourism and recreation; and  
 Infrastructure.  
 

 

Figure  5.  Projections  of  future  climate  for  the  Lake  Simcoe 
Protection Act study area (Source: Douglas et al., 2011). 
 

Scientists completed assessments by examining indicators to assess vulnerabilities based on future climate projections (see Figure 
5). Indicators were chosen that were most appropriate for the theme being examined, such as  impacts of warmer temperatures on 
riparian vegetation, coldwater fish habitat, wetland water levels, tourism activities (e.g., skiing, snowmobiling, and ice fishing), and the 
composition of tree species in the forest. Each team of scientists prepared a background discussion paper describing methods  and 
results.  In  addition,  they  provided  a  list  of  three  primary  consequences  of  climate  change  for  their  theme  or  sector;  these  were 
communicated to the forum of climate change experts at a workshop (refer to Step 5, above).  

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   58 

 

Developing Adaptation Options 

Many  different  types  of  decision-facilitation  tools  can  be  used  to 
identify  and  evaluate  adaptation  options,  including  scenario 
planning,  emerging  issues  analysis,  multi-criteria  analysis,  and 
idea-generating  strategies  using  expert  judgement  such  as 
workshops, focus groups,  and  the  policy  Delphi.  Each  technique 
has  strengths  and  weaknesses  depending  on  the  required 
outcome,  the  location,  and  the  stakeholders  involved  in  the 
process.  For  the  purposes  of  the  Lake  Simcoe  Climate  Change 
Adaptation Strategy, the policy Delphi tool was used to generate 
a list of adaptation options. The project team convened a meeting 
of  experts  in  November  2010  to  review  the  results  of  the 
vulnerability  assessments,  facilitate  an  initial  round  of  discussion 
about  adaptation  options,  and 
the  policy  Delphi 
procedure.  

introduce 

 

 

Invasive species awareness in Lake Simcoe, [MNR] 

The project team elected to use an electronic survey with two rounds of questions for the Delphi process. The first round provided 
survey  participants  with  climate  change  vulnerability  reports  prepared  by  the  scientists,  including  the  list  of  three  primary 
consequences  of  climate  change.  The  survey  presented  11  questions  organized  according  to  7  general  categories  of  action: 
legislation and policy, strategic planning, land-use and/or resource management planning, management and operations, monitoring, 
research, and knowledge dissemination. Recommendations generated by the workshop breakout groups and the first-round Delphi 
survey were used to develop a synthesized suite of adaptation options for each of the 11 themes. These ideas were then evaluated 
in  the  second-round  survey  for  their  perceived  priority  and  feasibility  (affordability  and  ease  of  implementation).  The  first  priority 
options were identified, aggregated, and edited for presentation at a second workshop. In total, 92 recommendations were identified 
as  first-order  priorities  and  48  recommendations  were  identified  as  first-/second-order  priorities.  Participants  evaluated  the  92 
recommendations  at  the  second  workshop  and  selected  27  strategies  for  consideration  in  the  development  of  the  Lake  Simcoe 
climate  change  adaptation  plan.  The  report  details  the  process  and  reveals  the  adaptation  recommendations  that  informed  the 
strategy; it can be found at:  

http://www.climateontario.ca/doc/workshop/2011LakeSimcoe/Lake%20Simcoe%20Adaptation%20Options%20Final%20Report%20J
une%20%202011.pdf (Douglas et al., 2011). 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   59 

 

 

 

Lessons Learned from the Lake Simcoe Vulnerability Assessment and Adaptation Strategy 

A number of observations and recommendations about project design and implementation were collected by the project team: 

  Use an ensemble of climate models and scenarios when possible: Access to a number of climate change projections and 
scenarios can significantly improve the robustness of analyses and strategic planning discussions. Finding ways to consider extreme 
weather events is also important.  

  Engage stakeholders and experts early and substantively: The success of any project with outcomes that will impact the daily 

lives of people living and working in an area will, in large measure, depend on the participation of and uptake by stakeholders.  

  Scope: Given the complexity of ecosystem composition, structure, and function, and the human position in it, it is important to complete 

as extensively as possible vulnerability assessments for the suite of forces and factors that shape the ecosystem and affect human health 
and well-being. 

  Carefully select idea-generation tools to match needs and expectations: Every situation and strategic planning process is 

unique. A variety of idea-generation tools and techniques are available to support strategic thinking and option development, and many of 
these can be used in combination. For example, the Lake Simcoe process involved the use of workshops (including a global café 
approach), face-to-face meetings, email surveys, and a policy Delphi process. 

  Provide incentives to participants: The policy Delphi is an idea-generating technique that often places substantial time and 

intellectual demands on participants. Incentives could improve survey response rates. In addition, experience with the use of incentives in 
other jurisdictions suggests that they will increase respondents’ willingness to participate in future studies and follow-up activities, including 
workshops.  

 

Improve the capacity of the online survey engine: The online surveys were cost effective and efficient. However, the first-round 
survey, which used a web-based browser application, did not allow respondents to save their responses. Consequently, respondents were 
forced to complete their surveys in a single session. Given the time and intellectual demands placed on respondents, a word processor or 
Adobe® version of the software is recommended for online surveys. 

  Engage communities on an ongoing basis: Given the site-specific and dynamic nature of climate change impacts, ongoing 

planning and management strategies developed at the local level are key. 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   60 

 

The Lake Simcoe Climate Change Adaptation Strategy 

The  commitment  contained  in  the  Lake  Simcoe  Protection  Plan  led  to  the  development  of  a  climate  change  adaptation  strategy  for  the  Lake 
Simcoe watershed. The Ministry of the Environment continues its work to complete the Lake Simcoe Climate Change Adaptation Strategy, and it 
is hoped that a draft will be available by the spring of 2012. To follow the progress on the strategy, refer to the Ministry of Environment’s website.  

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Shoreline naturalization in Lake Simcoe watershed, [MNR] 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   61 

 

 

 

5.0 REFERENCES  

Alberta Sustainable Resource Development. 2010. The Climate Change Adaptation Framework. Government of Alberta, Edmonton. Available 

from: http://www.srd.alberta.ca/MapsFormsPublications/Publications/documents/ClimateChangeAdaptationFrameworkManual-
April%202010.pdf; accessed May 2011. 

Berkes F. and Folke, C. (eds.). 1998. Linking Social and Ecological Systems: Management Practices and Social Mechanisms for Building 

Resilience. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 

Chen, I.C., Hill, J.K., Ohlemuller, R., Roy, D.B., and Thomas, C.D. 2011. “Rapid Range Shifts of Species Associated with High Levels of Climate 

Warming.” Science (333): 1024-1026. 

Colombo, S.J., McKenney, D.W., Lawrence, K.M., and Gray, P.A. 2007. Climate Change Projections for Ontario: Practical Information for 

Policymakers and Planners. Climate Change Research Report CCRR-05. Applied Research and Development Branch, Ontario Ministry of 
Natural Resources, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario. Available from: 
http://www.mnr.gov.on.ca/stdprodconsume/groups/lr/@mnr/@ofri/documents/document/mnr_e005587.pdf.  

Comer, N. 2009. “Ensemble Model Results and Downscaling.” Presentation made to the Ministry of Natural Resources on September 29, 2009, 

Peterborough, Ontario. 

Donohoe, H.M. and Needham, R.D. 2009. “Moving Best Practice Forward: Delphi Characteristics, Advantages, Potential Problems, and 

Solutions.” International Journal of Tourism Research 11(5): 415-437. 

Douglas, A., Lemieux, C., Nielsen, G., Gray, P., Anderson, V., and MacRitchie, S. 2011. Adapting to Climate Change: Recommendations to Inform 

Development of a Climate Change Adaptation Strategy for the Lake Simcoe Watershed. Unpublished report, OCCIAR. 

Engle, N.L. 2011. “Adaptive Capacity and Its Assessment.” Global Environmental Change  21(2): 647-656. 

Environment Canada. 2011. Climate Trends and Variations Bulletin for Canada. Meteorological Service of Canada. Available from: 

http://www.ec.gc.ca/adsc-cmda/default.asp?lang=En&n=4A21B114-1; accessed in May 2011.  

Expert Panel on Climate Change Adaptation. 2009. Adapting to Climate Change in Ontario. Available from: 

http://www.ene.gov.on.ca/stdprodconsume/groups/lr/@ene/@resources/documents/resource/std01_079212.pdf; accessed May 2011. 

Füssel, H.-M., and Klein, R.J.T. 2006. “Climate Change Vulnerability Assessments: An Evolution of Conceptual Thinking.” Climatic Change 

75:301-329. 

Glick, P., Stein, B.A., and Edelson, N.A. (eds.). 2011. Scanning the Conservation Horizon: A Guide to Climate Change Vulnerability Assessment. 

National Wildlife Federation, Washington, DC. Available from: http://www.nwf.org/News-and-Magazines/Media-
Center/Reports/Archive/2011/Scanning-the-Horizon.aspx; accessed May 2011. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   62 

 

 

 

Government of Ontario. 2007. Go Green: Ontario’s Climate Change Action Plan. Available from: 

http://www.gogreenontario.ca/docs/actionplanonclimatechange.pdf; accessed May 2011. 

Government of Ontario. 2011. Climate Ready: Ontario’s Adaptation Strategy and Action Plan. Available from: 

http://www.ene.gov.on.ca/stdprodconsume/groups/lr/@ene/@resources/documents/resource/stdprod_085423.pdf; accessed May 2011. 

Heemskerk, M., Wilson, K., and Pavao-Zuckerman, M. 2003. “Conceptual Models as Tools for Communication Across Disciplines.” Conservation 

Ecology 7(3): 8. 

Holling, C.S. 1973. “Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems.” Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 4:1-23.  

[IEA] International Energy Agency. 2011. “Prospect of Limiting the Global Increase in Temperature to 2ºC Is Getting Bleaker.” May 30. Available 

from: http://www.iea.org/index_info.asp?id=1959; accessed May 2011. 

[ICLEI] International Council for Local Environmental Initiatives. 2010. Changing Climate, Changing Communities: Guide for Municipal Climate 

Adaptation. Available from: http://www.iclei.org/index.php?id=11710; accessed May 2011. 

Inman, Mason. 2011. “Opening the Future.” Nature Climate Change 1:7-9.  

[IPCC] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2001. Contribution of Working Group II to the Third Assessment Report of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Eds. J. J. McCarthy, O.F. Canziani, N.A. Leary, D.J. Dokken, and K.S. White. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Available from: http://www.grida.no/publications/other/ipcc_tar/; accessed May 2011. 

 [IPCC] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007a. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva, Switzerland. Available from: 
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/syr/en/contents.html; accessed May 2011. 

[IPCC] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007b. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Eds. S. Solomon, D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M. Tignor, and H.L. 
Miller (eds.). Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom.  

[IPCC] Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2007c. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the 

Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Eds. M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, and C.E. Hanson. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. Available from: 
http://www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/ar4/wg2/en/contents.html; accessed May 2011. 

Johnston, M., Campagna, M., Gray, P., Kope, H., Loo, J., Ogden, A., O’Neill, G. A., Price, D., and Williamson, T., 2009. Vulnerability of Canada’s 

Tree Species to Climate Change and Management Options for Adaptation: An Overview for Policy Makers and Practitioners. Canadian 
Council of Forest Ministers, Ottawa, Ontario. 

Karl, T.R., Melillo, J.M., and Peterson, T.C. (eds.). 2009. Global Climate Change Impacts in the United States. Cambridge University Press, 

Cambridge, United Kingdom. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   63 

 

 

 

Kasperson, R.E, and Berberian, M. (eds.). 2011. Integrating Science and Policy: Vulnerability and Resilience in Global Environmental Change. 

Earthscan, London, United Kingdom. 

Leary, N., Adejuwon, J., Barros, V., Burton, I., Kulkarni, J., and Lasco, R. 2008. Climate Change and Adaptation. Earthscan, London, United 

Kingdom. 

Lee, K.N. 1999. “Appraising Adaptive Management.” Conservation Ecology, 3(2): 3. Available from: http://www.consecol.org/vol3/iss2/art3; 

accessed June 2011. 

Lemieux, C.J., Scott, D.J., Davis, R.G., and Gray, P.A. 2008. Changing Climate, Challenging Choices: Ontario Parks and Climate Change 

Adaptation. Department of Geography, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario. 55 p. 

Lemieux, C.J., Beechey, T.J., Scott, D.J., and Gray, P.A. 2010. Protected Areas and Climate Change in Canada: Challenges and Opportunities for 

Adaptation. Canadian Council on Ecological Areas 9CCEA) Occasional Paper No.19. CCEA Secretariat, Ottawa, Ontario. 170 p. 

Lemmen, D.S., and Warren, F.J. (eds.) 2004. Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation: A Canadian Perspective. Natural Resources Canada: 

Ottawa. Available from: http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/perspective/pdf/report_e.pdf; accessed May 2011. 

Lemmen, D.S.,  Warren, F.J., Lacroix, J., and Bush, E. (eds). 2008. From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007. Natural 

Resources Canada: Ottawa. 

McKenney, D.W., Pedlar, J.H., Lawrence, K., Gray, P.A., Colombo, S.J., and Crins, W.J. 2010. Current and Projected Future Climatic Conditions 

for Ecoregions and Selected Natural Heritage Areas in Ontario. Climate Change Research Report CCRR-016. Applied Research and 
Development Branch, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario.  

Millennium Ecosystem Assessment. 2005. Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Biodiversity Synthesis. World Resources Institute, Washington, 

DC. Available at: http://www.millenniumassessment.org/documents/document.776.aspx.pdf; accessed May 2011. 

Miller, F., Osbahr, H., Boyd, E., Thomalla, F., Bharwani, S., Ziervogel, G., Walker, B., Birkmann, J., vanderLeeuw, S., Rockström, J., Hinkel, J., 
Downing, T., Folke, C., and Nelson, D. 2010. “Resilience and Vulnerability: Complementary or Conflicting Concepts?” Ecology and Society 
15(3): 11. 

Moss, R.H., and Schneider, S.H. 2000. “Uncertainties in the IPCC TAR: Recommendations to Lead Authors for More Consistent Assessment and 

Reporting.” In R. Pachauri, T. Taniguchi, and K. Tanaka (eds.), Guidance Papers on the Cross Cutting Issues of the Third Assessment 
Report of the IPCC, 33-51. World Meteorological Organization, Geneva. 

Nakićenović, N. (and 27 others). 2000. Emissions Scenarios: A Special Report of Working Group III of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 

Change. Cambridge University Press, New York. 

Obbard, M.E., McDonald, T.L., Howe, E.J., Regehr, E.V., and Richardson, E.S. 2007. Polar Bear Population Status in Southern Hudson Bay, 

Canada. United States Geological Survey Administrative Report, United States Geological Survey, Reston, Virginia. 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   64 

 

 

 

Patt, A.G., Schroter, D., Klein, R., and de la Vega-Leinert, A.C. (eds). 2009. Assessing Vulnerability to Global Environmental Change: Making 

Research Useful for Adaptation Decision Making and Policy. Earthscan, London, United Kingdom. 

Robinson, D.C.E, Beukema, S., and Greig, L. 2008. Vegetation Models and Climate Change: Workshop Results. Prepared by ESSA Technologies 

for Western Wildlands Environmental Threat Assessment Center, USDA Forest Service, Prineville, Oregon. 

Smit, B., and Wandel, J. 2006. “Adaptation, Adaptive Capacity and Vulnerability.” Global Environmental Change 16(3): 282-292. 

Swanston, C.W., and Janowiak, M.K. (eds). In review. Forest Adaptation Resources: Climate Change Tools and Approaches for Land Managers. 

Northern Institute of Applied Climate Science, USDA Forest Service.  

Thompson, I., Mackey, B., McNulty, S., and Mosseler, A. 2009. Forest Resilience, Biodiversity, and Climate Change: A Synthesis of the 

Biodiversity/Resilience/Stability Relationship in Forest Ecosystems. Technical Series no. 43. Secretariat of the Convention on Biological 
Diversity, Montreal, Quebec. 

Turner II, B.L. 2010. “Vulnerability and Resilience: Coalescing or Paralleling Approaches for Sustainability Science?” Global Environmental 

Change 20(4): 570–576. 

[UNDP] United Nations Development Program. 2005. Adaptation Policy Frameworks for Climate Change: Developing Strategies, Policies and 

Measures. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 

Varrin, R., Bowman, J., and Gray, P.A. 2007. The Known and Potential Impacts of Climate Change on Biodiversity in Ontario’s Terrestrial 

Ecosystems: Case Studies and Recommendations for Adaptation. Climate Change Research Report CCRR-09. Applied Research and 
Development Branch, Ontario Ministry of Natural Resources, Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario. Available at: 
http://www.mnr.gov.on.ca/stdprodconsume/groups/lr/@mnr/@climatechange/documents/document/196749.pdf; accessed May 2011. 

Williamson, T.B., Price, D.T., Beverly, J.L., Bothwell, P.M., Parkins, J.R., Patriquin, M.N., Pearce, C.V., Stedman, R.C., and Volney, W.J.A. 2007. 

A Framework for Assessing Vulnerability of Forest-based Communities to Climate Change. Inf. Rep. NOR-X-414. Natural Resources Canada, 
Northern Forestry Centre, Edmonton, Alberta.  

Zielke, K., Bancroft, B., Brown, C., Jones, C., Smyrl, S., Kremsater, L., and Day, K. 2009. Adapting Forest Management in the Kamloops TSA to 

Address Climate Change: The Kamloops Future Forest Strategy. Symmetree Consulting Group: Vancouver, British Columbia. Available from: 
http://www.for.gov.bc.ca/hcp/ffs/KFFS_REPORT_ONLY_June25-09.pdf; accessed May 2011.  

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   65 

 

 

 

6.0 GLOSSARY 

Adaptation 

Initiatives  or  actions  to  reduce  the  negative  effects  of  climate  change  or  take  advantage  of  the  positive 
effects. 

A  process  by  which  individuals,  communities,  and  resource  managers  seek  to  moderate  and  cope  with 
the consequences of climate change (UNDP, 2005).  

Adaptation co-benefits 

Measures  that  simultaneously  reduce  vulnerability  to  climate  change  and  decrease  greenhouse  gas 
emissions. 

Adaptive capacity 

The ability or potential of a system to respond to climate variability and change. 

Adaptive management 

A  systematic  process for  continually  improving management  policies  and  practices  by  learning from  the 
outcomes of previously employed policies and practices. In active adaptive management, management is 
treated  as  a  deliberate  experiment  for  purposes  of  learning  (Millennium  Ecosystem  Assessment,  2005: 
599). 

Climate change 

Any change in climate over time whether due to natural variability or as a result of human activity. 

Exposure 

The nature and extent to which the system is exposed to significant climate variation. 

Impact 

The effects of existing and projected changes in climate in natural, built, and human systems. 

Mainstreaming  

The integration of climate change considerations into a range of policies, programs, and decision-making 
processes. 

Mitigation 

Resilience 

Actions to reduce the sources or enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases.  

The  ability  of  a  social  or  ecological  system  to  maintain  integrity  when  subject  to  disturbance  (UNDP, 
2005). For example, a resilient ecosystem can withstand shocks and rebuild itself when necessary. 

Resistance 

The capacity of the ecosystem to absorb disturbances and remain largely unchanged (Holling, 1973). 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   66 

 

 

 

Risk  

The severity of consequences of climate change impacts and the likelihood that impacts will occur. 

Sensitivity  

The degree to which a system is affected when exposed to a stress. 

Social-ecological 
systems 

Vulnerability  

Complex, integrated systems in which humans are part of nature (Berkes and Folke, 1998)  

The degree to which a system is susceptible to, and unable to cope with, adverse effects of climate 
change, including climate variability and extremes. Vulnerability is a function of the character, magnitude, 
and rate of climate change and variation to which a system is exposed, the sensitivity and adaptive 
capacity of that system (IPCC, 2007c). 
 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   67 

 

 

 

APPENDIX 1: ECOLOGICAL RESPONSE MODELS TO ASSESS VULNERABILITY  

Model Type 

Description 

For more information 

Conceptual models 

 Qualitative descriptions and diagrams of key attributes and 

 

processes related to species, habitats, or ecosystems  
 Can illustrate important linkages to stressors and how 

changes in stressors affect important attributes (e.g., soil 
texture) and functions (e.g., nutrient uptake, water flux). 

General 
characterization 
models 

 

 Represent broad groups (e.g., amphibians, riparian species) 
or generalized traits to identify how groups of species might 
respond to climate and/or habitat change by applying the 
classes of vulnerability to species distribution maps. 

 Another characterization approach involves meta-analyses 

that collate information to estimate common responses of 
species (especially effective at validating responses over 
large areas) (e.g., CCFM Tree Vulnerability Ranking Index 
and NatureServe Climate Change Vulnerability Index).  

 For a review of conceptual model development, see 
Heemskerk, Wilson, and Pavao-Zuckerman (2003). 

 Various types of conceptual modelling tools and 

software can be found at 
http://www.fileheap.com/software/conceptual_data_m
odel.html).  

 NatureServe Climate Change Vulnerability Index: 

(http://www.natureserve.org/prodServices/climatechan
ge/ClimateChange.jsp). 

 

Habitat and occupancy 
models 

 

 

 Expressed as ranges in specific biophysical attributes (e.g., 
climate, soils, vegetation or land cover, and elevation) that a 
species will occupy (e.g., suitable habitat).  

 Software used to develop niche and occupancy 

models can be downloaded from the Internet:  

 Genetic Algorithm for Rule-set Production (GARP)  

 Uses GIS to determine the spatial distribution of suitable 

(http://www.nhm.ku.edu/desktopgarp/);  

habitat for individual species. 

 Maximum Entropy Modeling (Maxent) 

 Niche-based models are also used to estimate species 

(http://www.cs.princeton.edu/~schapire/maxent/);  

distributions and habitat suitability: they generally involve 
more quantitative approaches with estimates of the 
probability of occurrence of a species. 

 Regression Trees and Random Forests 

(http://rattle.togaware.com/rattle-download.html); and 
 Bioclim (http://software.informer.com/getfree-bioclim-

download-software/). 
 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   68 

 

 

 

Vegetation / habitat 
response models 

 Include statistical species distribution models, GAP models, 

 Robinson et al. (2008) provide an extensive review 

landscape models, biogeochemical models, and dynamic 
global vegetation models. 

of vegetation climate models. 

Physiological models 

 Incorporate sensitive aspects of physiologies that influence 

 No known off-the-shelf software or tools that permit 

 

foraging, nesting/reproduction, thermoregulation, and 
migration.  

development of physiological climate response 
models. 

 Relate physiological traits and processes to climate change 

variables; can be used as part of general characterization 
models or as part of habitat models. 

 

 Complex; most commonly built for specific species in specific 

locations or habitats because of data requirements. 

Ecological models 

 Evaluate how climate change variables affect fundamental 

 Some models can be downloaded from the Internet, 

 

ecological processes.  

including 
RHESsys (http://fiesta.bren.ucsb.edu/~rhessys/),  
PnET (http://www.pnet.sr.unh.edu/),  
CENTURY model 
http://www.nrel.colostate.edu/projects/century5/). 

Expert opinion models 

 Constructed from the opinions of experts on a particular 

  Lemieux el al. (2011) used expert opinion to 

 

species, habitat, or ecosystem. 

 Used when existing data preclude or are insufficient to 

develop a quantitative model. A series of workshops and/or 
surveys are often used to gather data from experts that are 
then used in model development.  

 In some cases, results from expert input are combined with 

other data (e.g., from existing publications). 

(Source: adapted from Glick et al., 2011) 

assess the state of climate change adaptation in 
Canada’s protected areas sector 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   69 

 

 

 

APPENDIX 2:  TOOLS FOR IDENTIFYING  AND EVAL UATING  ADAPTATION OP TIONS  

Policy Delphi 

In  its  broadest  sense,  a  policy  Delphi  is  an  iterative,  group-oriented,  idea-generating  strategy  that  seeks  to  identify  the  strongest 
possible  opposing  views  on  the  potential  resolutions  of  a  policy  issue.  The  approach  permits  a  diverse  group  of  experts, 
stakeholders,  and  partners  to  interact  anonymously  on  a  policy  issue  and  provides  a  structured  method  for  assembling  ideas  and 
recommendations  (Donohoe  and  Needham,  2009).  By  design,  participants  are  provided  the  freedom  to  present  and  challenge 
alternative viewpoints and to think reflectively and independently between iterations.  

A policy Delphi overcomes many of the limitations associated with workshops and focus groups, including the propensities for: 

  One or a few vocal individuals to dominate the discussion; 
  People to remain silent, possibly due to shyness or fear of censure; 
  The ‘rut effect’ (i.e., participants getting hung up on one thought and staying in that rut for the duration of the discussion); 
  The power of persuasion and the ‘bandwagon’ effect; 
  The unwillingness to abandon ‘norms’; 
  Geographic isolation; and 
  Cost. 

Because  a  policy  Delphi  is  anonymous,  it  provides  respondents  with  the  opportunity  to  present  innovative  and  sometimes 
controversial ideas to the panel without fear of repercussions. This is particularly important in the area of climate change adaptation, 
as some adaptations may require fundamental changes in the way in which agencies have traditionally planned and managed lands, 
waters, and the built environment. 

There are many possible designs to a policy Delphi. Figure 6 illustrates an approach that uses two survey iterations. The first survey 
iteration  presents  the  experts  with  climate  change  vulnerabilities  and  consequences  for  several  sectors,  and  solicits  their 
recommendations  on  possible  adaptations.  The  second  survey  iteration  focusses  on  evaluating  the  recommendations  for  their 
perceived  desirability  (or  importance)  and feasibility.  Refer  to Worksheet 5.2 for  a multi-criterion feasibility  matrix  that  can  be  used 
(and adapted) to conduct the evaluations. Tools such as Survey Monkey are available to help conduct survey processes.  

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   70 

 

There is no doubt that assessment teams may identify a large suite of potential adaptation options. Measures may span a variety of 
themes  and  approaches  –  from  changes  to  policy,  management,  and  practices,  to  public  awareness  and  communications,  to 
monitoring and scientific research.  

 

 

 

Prioritize Risks 

  Collate vulnerability assessments and summarize results from risk assessment 

Plan Delphi Process 

  Determine sampling strategy and questions 
 
Identify and secure committed participants 

Delphi Round 1: Identification of Adaptation Options 

  Circulate vulnerability assessment results and key risks  
  Solicit adaptation recommendations via questionnaire 
  Analyze responses 

Delphi Round 2: Evaluation of Adaptation Options 

  Establish evaluation criteria 
  Solicit ratings based on Round 2 questionnaire 
  Analyze responses for consensus/disagreement 

 

Analysis and Final Report 

  Analysis of results (e.g., simple statistics, and tabulation, etc.) 
  Prepare final consensus statements of first and second priority adaptation options 
  Distribute final report to stakeholders  

 

Figure 6. Example of a policy Delphi approach to identify and evaluate climate change adaptation options. 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   71 

 

 

 

Using a Delphi approach: Sources of information  

  “Changing Climate, Challenging Choices: Ontario Parks and Climate Change Adaptation” (2008, by Lemieux et 

al.) 

  “Protected Areas and Climate Change in Canada: Challenges and Opportunities to Adaptation” (2010, by 

Lemieux et al.) 

  “Adapting  to  Climate  Change:  Recommendations  to  Inform  Development  of  a  Climate  Change  Adaptation 

Strategy for the Lake Simcoe Watershed” (2011, by Douglas et al.) 

Menu Approach 

Climate change adaptation actions and strategies are widely discussed in academic literature, applied case studies, and an array of 
other  information  sources.  To  assist  in  identifying  adaptation  options  applicable  to  particular  impacts  or  a  particular  study  area, 
project  teams  can  develop  a  menu  of  possible  adaptation  options  from  the  literature  and/or  from  targeted  review  by  experts 
(Swanston and Janowiak, in review)..  

With this menu, teams can seek input from natural resource managers and stakeholders to determine whether the adaptation options 
list is complete and which actions may be most realistic and feasible for their needs.  

Wherever possible, efforts should be made to refine adaptation approaches by aligning actions with existing management planning 
and decision-making (e.g., forest management planning) and working with those responsible for implementing the plan to determine 
next steps (Swanston and Janowiak, in review). 

Such  an  approach  can  use  a  menu  approach  and  integrate  methods  such  as  online  survey  (e.g.,  Survey  Monkey)  and  ranking 
methods (e.g., Flash-Q), workshop facilitation, and a variety of other decision-making and input-seeking methods.  

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   72 

 

 

 

Creating an Adaptation Menu: Sources of Adaptation Approaches 
 

  MNR has supported diverse research programs to better understand and adapt to climate change. The MNR 

Climate Change Report Series includes recommended adaptation strategies. 

  Strategies for Managing the Effects of Climate Change on Wildlife and Ecosystems (2008 by Heinz Center, 

Washington D.C). 

  “Adaptation to Climate Change in Forest Management.” (2003, by D.L. Spittlehouse and R.B. Stewart, BC 

Journal of Ecosystems and Management 4[1]). 

  “Incorporating Climate Change Adaptation Considerations into Forest Management and Planning in the 

Boreal Forest.” (2007, by A.E. Ogden and J.L. Innes, International Forestry Review 9[3]: 713-733).  

  Preliminary review of adaptation options for climate-sensitive ecosystems and resources (2008, ed. S.H. 

Julius and J.M. West, US Climate Change Science Program). 

  “Biodiversity Management in the Face of Climate Change: A Review of 22 Years of Recommendations .” 

(2009, by N. Heller and E. Zavaleta, Biological Conservation 142[1]: 14-32). 

  The Climate Adaptation Knowledge Exchange website highlights case studies of adaptation measures and 

projects across North America. 
 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   73 

 

Other Tools for Scoping and Evaluating Adaptation Options 

TOOLS 

APPLICATIONS 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
r
e
n
u
v
 
t

l

n
e
r
r
u
C

 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
r
e
n
u
v
 

l

e
r
u

t

u
F

 
t

n
e
m
s
s
e
s
s
a

 
k
s
R

i

 

n
o

i
t

a

t

p
a
d
a

 

i

g
n
p
o
c
S

 
f

o

 

n
o

i
t

l

a
u
a
v
E

 
s
n
o

i
t

p
o

 
s
n
o

i
t

p
o

 

n
o

i
t

a

t

p
a
d
a

 

n
o

i
t

a

t

n
e
m
e
p
m

l

i
 

d
n
a

 

i

g
n
n
n
a
p

l

i

 
c
g
e

t

a
r
t

S

Expert judgement: 
Assessment by experts in the field of probabilities and risks 

Focus groups: 
Groups of stakeholders that discuss their opinions on specific topics 

Brainstorming: 
Free-flowing lists/diagrams of all ideas and options 

Cost-benefit analysis: 
Assessment of economic efficiency, assigning a monetary value to the measure of effect, etc. 

Cost-effectiveness: 
Economic analysis that compares the relative costs and outcomes (effects) of two or more courses of 
action. 

Multi-criteria analysis 
Examination of more than one and some non-monetary criteria involving subjective judgement 

Decision/probability trees: 
Charts of relationships between decision modes; helpful in generating expected value 

Influence diagrams/mapping tools: 
Graphic identification of options; particularly useful when there are many options 

Monte Carlo analysis: 
Computer-based analysis that explicitly assesses uncertainty 

(Source: adapted from UNDP, 2005)  

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

X 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

X 

X 

X 

X 

 

X 

 

 

 

 

X 

X 

X 

X 

 

 

 

 

X 

X 

X 

X 

 

 

 

 

A PRACTITIONER’S GUIDE TO CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION IN ONTARIO’S ECOSYSTEMS (VERSION 1.0) 

   74 

 

