 

 

 

2017 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of 
Climate Change Impacts and 
Adaptation 

Research Northwest & Morrison Hershfield 

November 14, 2017 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THIS PAGE HAD BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK 

November 14, 2017 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
 
Executive Summary 
This report was commissioned by Environment Yukon’s Climate Change Secretariat to provide 
the public and other stakeholders with an understanding of how climate change is affecting 
Yukon, what actions have been taken to date to help us adapt, and the key challenges that we’ll 
need to address to adapt in the future. This work will also explore the economic challenges and 
opportunities related to adaptation. 

This is not a comprehensive analysis of all the issues around climate change and adaptation 
efforts. It is a synthesis of existing knowledge and provides a focused snapshot of selected key 
adaptation challenges in the Yukon. 

The strongest measure of climate change in Yukon is relative change in annual temperature. The 
annual average temperature has increased 2°C over the past 50 years, while winter 
temperatures have increased 4°C. 

Annual precipitation (rain and snowfall), another important indicator of climate change, has 
increased by 6% in the Yukon over the past 50 years, with the greatest increase seen during the 
summer months. 

Temperature is projected to increase by more than 2°C over the next 50 years. Winters are 
projected to warm faster than any other season. Precipitation is projected to increase by 10% to 
20% over the next 50 years in Yukon. Snowfall is projected to arrive later in the fall and become 
more variable over the winter, with periods of little snow and intense snow-fall events likely 
becoming more common. 

Adaptation to climate change starts when governments, communities, and individuals adjust 
their expectations about the future and make decisions to better prepare for changing 
conditions. Yukon has already started to adapt to the effects of climate change and decision 
makers have an interest in addressing present and future climate change impacts through 
adaptation. 

Growing concern for Yukon’s changing climate has led to increased research and adaptation 
initiatives that contribute to the development of new knowledge and local capacity and 
expertise. Ensuring that the climate change funding and programming opportunities 
substantively enhance the adaptive capacity of communities is critical to Yukon’s long-term 
adaptation efforts.   

 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
I 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Table of Contents 
 

November 14, 2017 

1. .. Introduction ....................................................................................................................1 

1.1 ... Context 

1.2 ... Approach 

1 

2 

2. .. Yukon’s Changing Climate ................................................................................................4 

2.1 ... Historical Changes in Temperature and Precipitation 

2.2 ... Expected Future Changes in Temperature and Precipitation 

2.2.1  Community-Level Climate Change Projections 

2.3 ... Community-Level Observations of Climate Change 

2.3.1  Yukon First Nation Elders see Climate Change Impacts to Water, Wildlife and 

Traditional Foods 

2.3.2 

Ice Breakup on Yukon River in Dawson City 

5 

6 

7 

7 

8 

9 

2.3.3  Changes in Vegetation and New Bird Species on Qikiqtaruk-Hershel Island 

10 

3. .. Yukon’s Capacity to Adapt .............................................................................................. 12 

3.1 ... Yukon Adaptation Efforts to Date 

3.2 ... Key Challenges to Advancing Yukon’s Adaptive Capacity 

12 

13 

4. .. Extreme Weather Events and Wildfire ............................................................................ 16 

4.1 ... Extreme Weather Events 

4.1.1  Adaptation to Flood Hazards 

4.2 ... Wildfire 

4.3 ... Adaptation to Wildfire Hazards 

4.3.1  Adaption Opportunity: FireSmart Plus 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

5. .. Infrastructure ................................................................................................................ 23 

5.1 ... Adaptation to Infrastructure Impacts 

24 

5.1.1  Adaptation Opportunity: Improved Accounting for Long-Term Infrastructure Costs  25 

6. .. Changing Climate, Changing Land ................................................................................... 28 

6.1 ... Adaptation to the Changing Land 

6.1.1  Adaptation Opportunity: Agriculture 

29 

30 

7. .. Human Health and Wellbeing ......................................................................................... 33 

7.1 ... Health and Wellbeing Adaptation 

7.1.1  Adaptation Opportunity: Community-Based Climate Monitoring 

35 

35 

8. .. Bibliography .................................................................................................................. 37 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
II 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
9. .. Key Contacts .................................................................................................................. 41 

November 14, 2017 

 

APPENDIX A  Yukon’s Climate 
APPENDIX B  List of Yukon Climate Change Adaptation Projects: 2008 through 2017 
 

Cover Photo: Kaskawulsh Glacier (Purdon, Matthias)  
 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
III 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
List of Figures 
 

November 14, 2017 

Figure 1: Temperature Departures from the 1960-91 Average — Winter 2015/2016 .................... 6 
Figure 2: Timing of the Ice Breakup on the Yukon River in Dawson City ...................................... 10 
Figure 3: Green Resilience: Adaptation and Mitigation Synergies ................................................ 14 
Figure 4: Yukon annual temperature variation, 1950-2016 .......................................................... 42 
Figure 5: Yukon annual precipitation variability, 1950-2016 ........................................................ 43 
Figure 6: Yukon projected annual temperature anomalies (A2, A1B, B1) .................................... 44 
Figure 7: Yukon projected annual precipitation anomalies (A2, A1B, B1). ................................... 45 
 

 

 

 

List of Photos 
 
Photo 1: Slims River ......................................................................................................................... 3 
Photo 2: Calliope Hummingbird, Quiqtaruk-Hershel Island .......................................................... 11 
Photo 3: Yukon Landslide .............................................................................................................. 15 
Photo 4: Flooding at Army Beach .................................................................................................. 17 
Photo 5: Yukon Wildfire ................................................................................................................ 20 
Photo 6: Fighting Yukon Wildfire ................................................................................................... 22 
Photo 7: Thawing Permafrost and Roads ...................................................................................... 25 
Photo 8: Minto Mine ..................................................................................................................... 27 
Photo 9: Caribou ............................................................................................................................ 28 
Photo 10: Drying Fish .................................................................................................................... 34 
 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
IV 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

1.  INTRODUCTION 

This report was commissioned by Environment Yukon’s Climate Change Secretariat to provide 
the public and other stakeholders with an understanding of how climate change is affecting 
Yukon, what actions have been taken to date to help us adapt, and the key challenges that we’ll 
need to address to adapt in the future. This work will also explore the economic challenges and 
opportunities related to adaptation. 

This is not a comprehensive documentation of all the issues around climate change and 
adaptation efforts. It is a synthesis of existing knowledge and provides a focused snapshot on 
selected key adaptation challenges in the Yukon.   

1.1  CONTEXT 

Climate change is already affecting Yukon and consideration of climate is becoming increasingly 
important in decision making and planning for the future. The Yukon Climate Change Impacts 
and Adaptation ‘State of Play’ report was developed to provide Yukoners with the latest 
information about climate change impacts and adaptation in Yukon. Included in the analysis are 
the economic impacts of climate change. The report is designed to support public participation 
in decision making about climate change issues that affect Yukon communities by providing a 
snapshot of climate change impacts and adaptation efforts to date. 

Canada, along with most other countries, has begun taking more aggressive action on climate 
change. The recently adopted Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and Climate Change 
(2016) commits to action in the areas of climate change mitigation, adaptation, carbon pricing, 
and clean economic growth.  

The Yukon government has committed to renewing its climate change strategy in a manner that 
better integrates its approaches to energy, climate change risk and action, and clean 
growth/economic development. Throughout this process, Yukon government aims to engage 
with the public to solicit feedback on the renewal of this strategy.  

The effects of climate change pull on environmental, social, and economic threads, not all of 
which are directly related to the changing climate, but are still important to consider when 
planning for effective adaptation actions. These include environmental changes caused by 
drivers other than climate change, as well as demography, culture and economic development. 
Indeed, “climate change has compounded some of the existing vulnerabilities caused by these 
other factors” (Larsen et al., 2014).  

Adaptation to climate change starts when governments, communities, and individuals adjust 
their expectations about the future and make decisions to better prepare for changing 
conditions. Yukon has already started to adapt to the effects of climate change and decision 
makers have taken steps to address present and future climate change impacts through 
adaptation policies and initiatives. Despite this, efforts to integrate climate change 
considerations into decisions and implement effective adaptive actions face significant 
challenges. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
1 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Our ability to adapt to climate change will have an 
important influence on what Yukon’s future will 
look like. If we are proactive in our approach to 
adaptation many issues can be avoided and some 
impacts lessened. However, some impacts will be 
much more difficult to adapt to. 

Building momentum for climate change adaptation 
will take time and concerted effort. Developing 
expertise and allocating adequate financial 
resources to adaptation initiatives and planning is 
critical. This report was developed in part to help 
support collaborative opportunities for climate 
change adaptation where connections are not 
always clear and simple. 

1.2  APPROACH 

Our approach to this report has been to: 

November 14, 2017 

What is Climate Change Adaptation? 

Climate change adaptation refers to 
actions that reduce the negative 
impact of climate change and/or take 
advantage of new opportunities. It 
involves making adjustments in our 
decisions, activities and thinking 
because of observed or expected 
changes in climate. 

(Lemmen, Warren, Lacroix, and Bush, 
2008). 

  Provide a synthesis of the most up to date information available on climate change impacts 

and adaptation in Yukon (Section 2); 

  Select and present concrete examples of some of the Yukon-specific work being done to 

better understand the effects of local climate change (Section 2.3); 

  Provide an overview of our assessment of the Yukon’s capacity to adapt to climate change 

(Section 3) along with a list of known adaptation initiatives undertaken in the territory 
(APPENDIX B); and, 

  Examine in more detail four issues that are particularly important as the Yukon continues to 

adapt to the realities of climate change: 

o 

Increased risk of extreme weather and wildfire hazards (Section 4); 

o  Damage to infrastructure (Section 5); 

o  Changing ecological landscapes (Section 6); and, 

o  Concerns regarding human health (Section 7). 

The four major issues grew from our review of the relevant literature and discussions with key 
contacts. For each of the four issues listed above, we summarize how climate change and 
current adaptation efforts intersect with the issue now and how we expect those intersections 
to change.  

We have attempted to identify further opportunities for adaptation, economic costs and 
possible economic benefits. These opportunities are not intended to be exhaustive or definitive, 
but to provide a starting point for a renewed conversation about how Yukon can address 
current and future climate change impacts. 

  

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
2 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Our focus on further opportunities for adaptation has been guided by four questions: 

November 14, 2017 

  Are the risks of not taking further adaptation action significant? 

  Are there possible economic benefits from the adaptation action itself? 

  Will Yukon regret doing this if the climate threat does not materialize?  

 

Is this action a win for Yukon communities even if the climate threat turns out to not be a 
severe as some scenarios projected? 

We have also attempted to explicitly highlight where the suggested adaptation opportunities 
might intersect with other issues and opportunities in Yukon (e.g. Fire Smart and biomass heat). 
Adaptation opportunities and efforts are rarely stand-alone issues. 

 

Photo 1: Slims River 

 

(Environment Yukon) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
3 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
2.  YUKON’S CHANGING CLIMATE 

November 14, 2017 

Climate change is a complex problem that impacts 
natural, human, and cultural systems in many 
ways. In Yukon, changes to the climate have 
already been observed and impact our water, 
ecosystems, landscapes, and ways of life. How 
climate change is understood and talked about in 
Yukon is grounded in scientific evidence, the 
Traditional Knowledge of Yukon First Nations, and 
the observations of Yukoners.  

Changes are expected to continue and increase in 
the decades ahead. The amount of change and 
associated impacts will ultimately depend on the 
success of global efforts to curb emissions of 
greenhouse gasses (i.e. mitigate climate change) 
and our ability to adapt to climate change  

Gradual and Sudden 

Although temperature and 
precipitation seem to be changing 
slowly, the interaction between 
“gradual” changes and other factors 
can produce complex and sudden 
effects. For example, warmer annual 
temperatures associated with 
climate change have accelerated the 
retreat of the Kaskawulsh glacier, 
which led to a sudden diversion of 
water from the Slims River to the 
Alsek River in 2016. This resulted in 
a substantial drop in water levels in 
the Slims River and in Kluane Lake, 
which impacts the communities of 
Burwash Landing and Destruction 
Bay.  

Temperature and precipitation are well understood 
and widely used indicators of climate change that 
drive a broad range of climate impacts. The Yukon 
generally has only about 50 years of temperature 
and precipitation data, not a significant record 
given that a climate normal is usually defined over a 30-year period. This lack of long-term data 
makes additional proxy data drawn from historical, local, and indigenous sources of knowledge 
particularly valuable in improving our understanding how climate change is affecting the Yukon. 

 

Variability Within Long-Term Trends 

Long-term climate trends are important, but these 
broader changes are driven in part by short-term 
weather variability. Extreme swings in temperature and 
precipitation can have serious impacts on everything 
from infrastructure to wildlife breeding cycles, but 
increases in the severity, frequency or duration of 
extreme events are not easily captured in long-term 
trends. For example, a one degree increase in average 
annual temperature can mean 25 days where 
temperatures are 15 degrees above the seasonal 
normal if climate remains at normal levels the rest of 
the year. This example shows how averaging change in 
temperature throughout the year can hide the extent of 
extreme temperature variability. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

This section summarizes analyses 
of temperature and precipitation 
data to show how Yukon’s 
climate has changed and how it 
is expected to change in the 
future. Projections for 
temperature and precipitation 
change in Old Crow and 
Whitehorse are also highlighted 
as local examples of the type of 
change Yukoners can expect to 
see in their communities.  

As climate change impacts 
Yukon’s regions in different 
ways, this section also includes 
discussion of how Yukoners are 
observing the impacts of climate 
change in their own communities 

 
4 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
and in culturally and ecologically important places. These and other related changes present a 
wide range of challenges and opportunities for future adaptation efforts in Yukon.  

November 14, 2017 

2.1  HISTORICAL CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE AND PRECIPITATION 

The strongest measure of climate change in Yukon is relative change in annual temperature. The 
annual average temperature has increased 2°C over the past 50 years, while winter 
temperatures have increased 4°C. These temperatures are understood to be increasing at twice 
the rate of southern Canada and the global average. This rise in temperature means that winters 
are getting shorter and spring and fall are getting relatively longer. There are significantly fewer 
very cold days in the winter but no significant change in the number of very hot days (above 
30oC) in the summer. (Furgal and Prowse, 2008; Larsen et al., 2015).  

Warmer average temperatures are associated with a wide variety of impacts on Yukon 
communities and landscapes. For example, more rapid permafrost thaw is resulting in an 
increase in impacts on community infrastructure built on permafrost areas. Warmer 
temperatures have also resulted in widespread melting of glaciers and the rate of melt 
continues to increase. Yukon has lost 22% of its glacial cover over the last 50 years (Derksen et 
al. 2012).  

Annual precipitation (rain and snowfall), another 
important indicator of climate change, has increased 
by 6% in the Yukon over the past 50 years, with the 
greatest increase seen during the summer months 
(Streicker, 2016). Changes in precipitation cause 
changes in surface and ground water, permafrost, 
vegetation and wildlife. Yukoners have experienced 
higher summer precipitation and more extreme rain 
events, associated flood events, permafrost thaw 
(more snow cover traps heat in the ground), and 
river bank erosion. The trend points towards a 
further increase in annual precipitation and possibly 
more extreme variability in precipitation as well. 

Yukoners have observed an increase in short-term 
extremes in temperature and precipitation and data 
suggests that variability is increasing in Yukon. 
Projected future changes in temperature and 
precipitation suggest that short-term extremes will 
happen more often (Streicker, 2016).  

El Nino 

During “El Nino” years, periodic 
warming of the Pacific Ocean drives 
warmer and more extreme weather 
patterns across North America. In 
2015-16 El Nino contributed to 
Yukon winter temperatures that 
were almost 70C above seasonal 
averages (Environment Canada, 
2017). Typically, El Nino years have 
been observed 5 out of every 100 
years, but new research suggests 
that global climate warming is likely 
to increase the number of El Nino 
events to 10 in every 100 years 
under current emission scenarios 
(Guojian, et al., 2017).   

Figure 1 shows how winter temperatures in 
2015/2016 departed from the 1961-1990 average across Canada. The biggest departure from 
average occurred in the central Yukon. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
5 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Figure 1: Temperature Departures from the 1960-91 Average — Winter 2015/2016  

November 14, 2017 

(Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2017) 

 

2.2  EXPECTED FUTURE CHANGES IN TEMPERATURE AND PRECIPITATION  

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has developed three scenarios for future 
temperature changes for Polar Regions. All scenarios show both an increase in temperature and 
its variability. Temperature is projected to increase by more than 2°C over the next 50 years in 
Yukon (Streicker, 2016). Winters are projected to warm faster than any other season (IPCC, 
2014).   

Precipitation is projected to increase by 10% to 20% over the next 50 years in Yukon. All 
scenarios project a significant increase in precipitation. In practical terms, this means that 
precipitation is expected to become more variable and increase in summer months. Snow fall is 
projected to come later in the fall, become more variable with periods of little snow, and it is 
likely that intense snow-fall events will be more common (Streicker, 2016). 

These expected continuing changes in temperature and precipitation matter to Yukoners as they 
will need to cope with, and adapt to changes in local environments, impacts on community 
infrastructure built on permafrost areas, more extreme rain events and associated floods.  

For more detail on how Yukon’s climate has changed and how it is expected to change in the 
future see APPENDIX A at the end of this report.    

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
6 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
2.2.1  Community-Level Climate Change Projections 

November 14, 2017 

The Scenarios Network for Alaska and Arctic Planning (SNAP) has developed a climate model 
that projects temperatures and precipitation patterns for approximately 80 locations in the 
Yukon. These projections give a sense of how, at a broad level, climate is expected to change at 
those locations. SNAP releases these projections with the qualifier that there is inherent 
uncertainty in projecting future climate change, but that the value of developing and using the 
projections in community adaptation planning “allows for greater flexibility in the face of high 
uncertainty” (SNAP 2017). One weakness in the SNAP model is that it does not take temperature 
inversions (i.e. significant temperature differences between lower altitude and higher altitude 
areas) into account, an important issue in many Yukon communities.  

We have selected Whitehorse and Old Crow as examples to illustrate what the SNAP model 
provides. See APPENDIX A. Some selected highlights of the SNAP projections for Old Crow and 
Whitehorse are: 

  Winter temperatures are projected to increase significantly for both Old Crow and 

Whitehorse; 

  Both Old Crow and Whitehorse are projected to have much warmer spring (May and June) 

temperatures with little extra rainfall in those months; 

  Overall precipitation is projected to increase steadily in Old Crow; and 

  An overall increase in precipitation for Whitehorse but with more variability than Old Crow. 

In general, the same changes are projected for both Whitehorse and Old Crow with notably 
warmer temperatures and more precipitation expected in the coming decades. At a practical 
level, these trends likely lead to different kinds of anticipated changes in both communities such 
as:  

  A longer growing season that will allow more local agriculture and therefore more local food 

supply; 

 

Increased fire risk early in the fire season which will have the effect of extending the fire 
season and its associated risks and costs; 

  A reduced period during which ice and frozen ground can be used for travel or food storage 

which may reduce traditional activities; and 

  A shift in precipitation from snow to rain, which impacts water storage capacity and surface 

water availability. 

2.3  COMMUNITY-LEVEL OBSERVATIONS OF CLIMATE CHANGE 

Yukoners have observed and experienced the impacts of climate change in their communities. 
Indigenous elders speak to changes on the land, communities, and traditional practices 
originating from changes in climate.  

Sections 2.3.1 through 2.3.3 highlight three examples from of local climate change impacts that 
have been observed at the community-level. These examples help to illustrate how our changing 
climate is affecting people in different areas of Yukon, and helps us better understand potential 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
7 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
impacts that we may see in the future. They are also strong reminders of the need for improving 
local climate monitoring and data collection, and partnerships that will sustain these efforts, to 
better understand and adapt to climate change impacts that affect Yukon communities.  

November 14, 2017 

2.3.1  Yukon First Nation Elders see Climate Change Impacts to Water, Wildlife and 

Traditional Foods 

Yukon First Nations elders and 
other community members have 
concerns about the changes that 
are taking place on their lands 
that affect their way of life. 
Elders have documented many 
changes on the land and in their 
communities and are concerned 
about the future. 

Elders highlighted the following 
changes in forums held in 2003-
2004 in Yukon First Nation 
Communities (Huntington, Fox, 
and Dickson, 2005):   

 

In northern Yukon, freezing 
rains in the early winter have 
created a layer of ice that 
limit the ability of some 
animals to access food 
sources.  

Indigenous Knowledge 

Indigenous knowledge and observations are important 
to understanding climate change in Yukon. This 
knowledge indicates that important changes have 
already occurred. “In the Yukon community members 
are reporting changes including: unpredictable weather, 
glaciers and permafrost are melting, wildlife migration 
patterns, new species, insect populations, increasing 
forest fires and different water levels.” (Champagne and 
Aishihik First Nations and Alsek Renewable Resources 
Council, 2009).  

At another Yukon workshop elders described similar 
experiences with the weather becoming unpredictable, 
expressing growing concern about impacts of climate 
change on wildlife, land, and water (Dickson, in 
Henderson and Fox 2005 p. 77). 

 

  The bush and the forest are changing and shrubs are getting larger, and more abundant in 

areas where they were not typically seen before. 

  Birds that usually migrate south in August and September are now being seen in October 

and November.  

 

 

In some areas, thawing permafrost has caused the ground to drop or has made the area 
smell foul. 

In more southerly communities, rings around the moon are no longer seen, although they 
are still visible in the northernmost community.  Similar changes to the visual character of 
the atmosphere have been observed by Inuit Elders who observed changes in the location of 
the sunset on the horizon (Kunuk and Mauro, 2015). These observations indicate higher 
levels of moisture in the air linked to increases in temperatures.  

  There are more frequent sightings of cougars, and mule deer, and new types of insects. 

  People used to be able to predict when it would get colder by looking at tree leaves. It has 

become more difficult to do that now. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
8 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
 

Lakes and streams are drying up or becoming choked with weeds, making the water 
undrinkable. 

November 14, 2017 

  Many animals are changing where they go and their behavior. Bears used to go into their 

dens in October and November, but are now out until December.  

  There is a growing dependence on market foods and people eat fewer traditional foods.  

These are just a few examples of the type of climate change impacts that are causing alarm for 
many Yukon First Nation elders. Importantly, elders emphasize the need for each community to 
have the ability to prepare for change and to be a part of designing the strategies that are being 
developed to respond to climate change impacts.  

Initiatives like the ongoing adaptation planning efforts of the Champagne Aishihik First Nation 
(CAFN) and the Selkirk First Nation (SFN) are examples of this work in action. These initiatives 
have sought to engage directly with community members to understand environmental changes 
that First Nations citizens are seeing on their traditional territories, and develop new ideas and 
approaches to preserving traditional practices in the face of climate change. 

2.3.2 

Ice Breakup on Yukon River in Dawson City  

Long-term community level impact information like the breakup data discussed here is valuable 
for measuring change, understanding the rate of change over time, and can help inform 
planning for the future. The trend from the past 120 years of breakup data is strong evidence 
that that fast ice cover on the Yukon River – the ice that extends into water from shore – will 
continue to diminish in Dawson. Although still an uncommon occurrence, in the winter of 2016-
2017 an official ice road was not possible because of poor ice conditions. Long-term data on the 
ice break up is an indicator that can help inform adaptation measures like extending the ferry 
season, and planning for shorter ice road seasons. 

The exact timing of the ice breakup on the Yukon River in Dawson has been recorded every year 
since 1886. The practice that originated from a lively betting tradition now provides a long-term 
indication of how changes in climate are impacting the breakup. Figure 2 shows the timing of 
the ice breakup over the past 120 years. The trend line shows the spring breakup occurring on 
average 6 days earlier per century. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
9 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Figure 2: Timing of the Ice Breakup on the Yukon River in Dawson City 

November 14, 2017 

 

(Environment Yukon, 2017) 

Earlier breakup means that the ice road across the Yukon River that connects the town of 
Dawson with West Dawson will experience shorter seasons, limiting access to food, medical 
care, and work and recreation opportunities for West Dawson residents. All West Dawson 
residents plan for the shoulder season when there is no access to town, however, when the 
season extends longer than anticipated residents may be faced with shortages in food or other 
essential goods that occasionally require expensive helicopter re-supplies. Furthermore, not 
captured in the ice break-up data is that warmer and more variable temperatures increase the 
risk of mid-winter and spring flooding. In 2009, ice jamming and unusual patterns of river ice 
break-up triggered significant damage to infrastructure in Dawson City. 

2.3.3  Changes in Vegetation and New Bird Species on Qikiqtaruk-Hershel Island  

Documented changes in vegetation and the observation of new bird species on Qikiqtaruk-
Herschel Island serve as an example of how climate change is affecting Yukon’s most northern 
region. 

A seventeen-year study of the vegetation communities on Qikiqtaruk-Herschel Island 
documented rapid changes to the island’s vegetation ecology (Myers-Smith et al. 2017). Shrubs 
and grasses are growing higher and expanding into areas that were typically bare or had 
minimal vegetation. The changes were linked to warming air temperatures along with longer 
growing seasons and increasing permafrost thaw.  

Recent bird surveys conducted on Qikiqtaruk found several migratory bird species that are 
normally only found in areas a thousand kilometers further south. The most striking example of 
this was the discovery of a Calliope Hummingbird in the summer of 2017 (see Photo 2).  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
10 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
These observations indicate how changes in climate are changing local ecology and landscapes 
across Yukon. This has far reaching consequences for wildlife and vegetation that are still not 
fully understood. While we know that some birds and shrub are changing in response to shifting 
temperatures, plant or animal species that cannot adapt or move to more favourable areas fast 
enough may experience stress and other negative impacts. 

November 14, 2017 

 

Photo 2: Calliope Hummingbird, Quiqtaruk-Hershel Island 

  

(Eckert, Cameron, June 2017) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
11 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
3.  YUKON’S CAPACITY TO ADAPT 

November 14, 2017 

Yukon’s climate change adaptation landscape involves a diverse group of governments and non-
governmental organizations with a wide range of jurisdictional responsibilities, resources, and 
areas of interest and expertise. While the variety of actors involved makes it difficult to 
assemble a comprehensive picture of Yukon’s adaptation capacity, analyzing some of the 
adaptation projects or initiatives that have been undertaken by these groups provides us with a 
snapshot. 

3.1  YUKON ADAPTATION EFFORTS TO DATE 

Over $13 million has been invested since 2008 in the 80 adaptation projects identified in this 
analysis, most of which (85%) was provided through federal government agencies and 
programs. More than two-thirds of these projects were partnerships between two or more 
organizations, with most implemented by First Nations or territorial government agencies – 
often in partnership with other non-profit, indigenous, or academic organizations – and funded 
by the federal government.  

Two notable federal adaptation programs that have served as drivers of territorial efforts to 
date to address climate change impacts are: 

 

Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada’s Climate Change Preparedness in the North 
program (formerly Climate Change Adaptation Program) supports identification and 
assessment of climate-related risks, adaptation research and planning, and efforts to 
address major climate change issues such as related to infrastructure, extreme weather 
events, and permafrost degradation. This analysis has identified 35 projects financed 
through the two funding streams of the program (for First Nations communities and 
territorial government departments, respectively).  
 

  Health Canada’s Climate Change Health Adaptation Program has emphasized a community-

focused approach; projects address climate change-related needs identified by the 
community, strengthen a community’s adaptive capacity, and involve community members 
in the project’s results. This analysis identified 23 Yukon projects funded through this 
program, many of which focused on food security and Traditional Knowledge transfer 
between elders and youth. 

The focus of most of these projects has been determined by the capacity and specific interests 
of proponents, and the criteria set out by funding agencies. These criteria, designed to be 
enabling rather than proscriptive, have provided significant flexibility for proponents to address 
climate change impacts of interest to their organizations or communities. While this flexible, 
project-based approach has helped to realize adaptation actions that might not otherwise occur, 
it is also more piece-meal than strategic, and does not easily lend itself to a more coherent 
effort to develop capacity or expertise in areas where they are most needed, or where they can 
have the biggest impact.  

A summary of adaptation projects identified for this analysis can be found in APPENDIX B. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
12 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
3.2  KEY CHALLENGES TO ADVANCING YUKON’S ADAPTIVE CAPACITY 

November 14, 2017 

Building partnerships, developing Yukon-specific climate information, fostering innovation, and 
initiating dialogue with communities about climate change impacts have been the focus of much 
of the adaptation work that has been undertaken to date in the territory. Building on this work, 
and re-focusing efforts towards the targeted development of capacity and resources will be an 
important component of building resilience to climate change across sectors and communities. 
There are, however, certain challenges that will need to be addressed along the way.  

Most of these challenges relate to the multi-faceted nature of climate change (i.e., its 
complexity and uncertainty) and difficulties related to governance (i.e., difficulty of 
implementing adaptation due to limited annual budgets and competing priorities). The sense of 
urgency to address challenges that limit Yukon’s capacity to adapt is growing as impacts of 
climate change, and related issues of community development and sustainability, increase. 
Other specific issues that limit Yukon’s ability to adapt to climate change include: 

  Climate change is complex and cannot be fully understood or dealt with by one organization 

or government – especially in Yukon, which has eleven self-governing First Nations in 
addition to federal, territorial and municipal agencies with overlapping jurisdictions and 
interests.  

  Government departments and policy-makers sometimes struggle to prioritize long-term 

planning objectives related to climate change adaptation when faced with immediate needs 
and financial constraints. Furthermore, it is often difficult for many decision-makers to see 
tangible connections between the issues they are mandated to address and the interaction 
of these issues with climate change. 

  A challenge in the Yukon, as in the rest of Canada, is that there has been little effort to 

actively support climate change adaptation through changes to existing legislation or 
regulations. In part, this appears to stem from a general reluctance to open legislation for 
changes and from a lack of clarity or consensus on what changes should be made.   

  Difficulties in integrating adaptation into long-term planning are compounded by limited 

local-level information or projections about climate change impacts, which serves to 
increase uncertainty about what actions should be taken to address climate change impacts 
at a local scale.  

  Financial management and administration systems are sometimes designed in ways that do 

not adequately consider the long-term financial costs of climate change in present-day 
spending and procurement decisions (e.g., new buildings are not required to take into 
consideration possible impacts of climate change). 

  Slow progress on mitigating climate change (i.e., reducing GHG emissions) in Yukon risks 

slowing adaption as well. Successful climate change mitigation measures, particularly in the 
areas of infrastructure and buildings, will help adaptation and vis-versa (see Figure 3).  

 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
13 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Figure 3: Green Resilience: Adaptation and Mitigation Synergies 

November 14, 2017 

(Centre for Clean Air Policy, 2016) 

 

 

 

As impacts of climate change become more apparent, the adaptive capacity of many 
communities may be challenged or exceeded but the severity of these impacts, reducing their 
ability to adapt. “Extreme impacts can exceed human and financial resources to address them, 
and can cause physical, financial and psychological stress. Stress on local governments and 
service providers, and other responders to disasters, can reduce adaptive capacity to address 
climate change impacts in both the short and long terms” (Manuel et al., 2012 in Lemmen, D.S., 
et. al. 2016 p. 118). Building partnerships and relationships with communities so that they can 
address key vulnerabilities over the long-term will help address this challenge. 

No Regrets 

The broader benefits of acting to adapt to climate risks is the low/no regrets model where 
decisions or actions related to climate change make sense in development terms regardless 
if a specific climate threat materializes in the future. This is achieved by building resilience to 
changing economic, social and environmental conditions (Adapted from Siegel, 2011). This 
approach is useful when considering how to plan and prioritize adaptation measures. One 
can ask: will we regret doing this if the climate threat does not materialize? Is this action 
good for Yukon communities even if the climate threat turns out to not be as severe as 
some scenarios project? 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
14 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Although progress has been made in this area, climate change adaptation still is not 
systematically considered in most government policy decisions. This makes Yukon more 
vulnerable to climate change impacts, as present-day solutions are developed without adequate 
understanding of how the problems being addressed may be affected by climate change over 
the long term. 

November 14, 2017 

 

Photo 3: Yukon Landslide 

 
(Environment Yukon, 2006) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
15 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
4.  EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS AND WILDFIRE 

4.1  EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS 

November 14, 2017 

The variability of our climate is expected to increase. This will mean more extreme weather 
events and greater fluctuations in precipitation, which are associated with increases in 
landslides and flooding. Flooding can negatively affect communities in a range of ways, including 
population displacement, impacts on critical infrastructure, interruptions to business activities, 
decreased production due to worker displacement, impacts on physical health, and impacts on 
mental health, including depression, anxiety, and post-traumatic stress disorder (Henstra, D. and 
Thistlethwaite, J., 2017). 

Some of the direct and 
indirect costs that result 
from extreme rainfall 
events are exemplified by 
the flash floods that 
simultaneously washed 
out the Alaska Highway at 
Rancheria and at the 
south end of Kluane Lake 
in 2012. 

The highway was closed 
for a total of four days at 
Rancheria and two days at 
Kluane Lake. During this 
period, the costs that 
resulted from these 
closures included: 

  Both the emergency 

Alaska Highway Closed 

“The Alaska Highway reopened Monday evening near 
Rancheria following the completion of a road detour around 
the substantial washout at Canyon Creek. Northbound 
commercial trucks stranded at the highway lodge since the 
washout occurred last Thursday night were the first to be 
taken over the single-lane detour… Once Rancheria was 
cleared, some 200 commercial trucks waiting in Watson Lake 
to come north were released… Larger industrial vehicles 
followed. Then private vehicles and RVs were released in 
groups behind a pilot car. Southbound traffic backed up in 
Teslin was released at about the same time as vehicles waiting 
in Watson Lake to come north.”  

(Whitehorse Star, June 12, 2012). 

road repairs and the permanent repairs; 

  The business costs to trucking companies as hundreds of trucks sat idle for days and trucking 

schedules were disrupted; 

  The time costs to travellers, both locals and tourists, whose plans were disrupted and 

delayed; 

  The costs to businesses who ran out of goods (particularly at grocery stores, where shelves 

sat empty), and to others whose workers were unavailable due to the travel disruption; 

  The costs of delays in mail and parcel delivery services; and 

  The knock-on losses to tourism businesses as people changed their plans in response.   

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
16 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
4.1.1  Adaptation to Flood Hazards 

November 14, 2017 

In Canada, flooding has surpassed theft and burglary as the largest single source of property 
insurance claims (Henstra, D. and Thistlethwaite, J., 2017). Mitigating flood hazard risk requires 
that we improve knowledge and awareness of what values (e.g. personal or commercial 
property, public infrastructure, industrial infrastructure, sites for traditional activities, etc.) are 
exposed to these risks, and what arrangements are currently in place to reduce vulnerability to 
flooding.  In 2016, Yukon government collected digital elevation data in 13 communities to 
identify what areas might be exposed to flooding at different water levels. This data is currently 
available online and is being used to create flood risk maps for use by residents, decision-makers 
and land-use planners. 

 

Photo 4: Flooding at Army Beach 

 

(Environment Yukon, 2007) 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
17 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Other adaptations to climate change-driven increases in flood hazards in Yukon, both flash 
flooding and other higher water levels, are currently being advanced through ongoing efforts to 
reduce flood risks and damage, including: 

November 14, 2017 

  Better land planning and zoning to account for flood risks; 

  Flood control infrastructure in already developed areas subject to floods; 

  Re-assessment of eligibility of property owners for compensation in areas subject to 

repeated flooding; 

 

Improved road infrastructure standards, including elevation and culvert size requirements; 
and 

  Updated storm sewer standards. 

4.2  WILDFIRE  

Wildfire in Yukon forests is an existing hazard to Yukon communities and infrastructure that can 
have environmental and economic consequences. Most Yukoners live in the boreal forest, 
where fire is an integral part of the ecology: “fires are frequent and their ecological influence at 
all levels—species, stand and landscape—drives boreal forest vegetation dynamics” (NRCan, 
2017). In addition, many areas near communities, residences, and other infrastructure have 
accumulated deadfall and forest debris. The Yukon has seen many large wildfires (e.g., in 1958) 
and will see them again. 

Whitehorse Saved by Rain 

“Rain saved Whitehorse last week. If it hadn't come, forestry officials say there would have 
been little hope for the town with a 30-mile front of fire advancing. In some places 20 miles 
away, the fire came up within five miles of the White Pass tank farm and was seen plainly 
from city streets Friday evening… Nobody outside was more worried than local inhabitants 
who were told by Mayor Gordon Cameron to prepare for emergency evacuation. It was 
decided… that in event of the fire getting too close, local residents would be sent to 
Carcross either in their own cars or by special White Pass trains.” 

(Whitehorse Star, July 24, 1958). 

 

There are many factors — forest age, past fire suppression, lack of fuel management, insect 
infestations, drought, and trees blown down by storms — influencing the likelihood of wildfires. 
“Quantifying the multiple effects of climate change will be challenging, particularly because 
there are great uncertainties attached to possible interactions among them, as well as with 
other land-use pressures” (Price et.al., 2013). However, it appears that climate change is likely 
increasing both the likelihood and potential severity of wildfire hazards in Yukon:  

  Analysis of historical wildfire data examining annual area burned does not reveal a 

statistically significant increase in fire risks in Yukon, but a trend is apparent when looking 
more broadly at regional data from Alaska and the Northwest Territories that indicates an 
increased wildfire risk is expected (Streicker, 2016); 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
18 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
  Natural Resources Canada states that climate change during the 21st century is expected to 
result in more frequent large fires in many boreal forests: “Large wildfires, which can cause 
serious economic losses, are expected to become more frequent, but increases in mean 
annual area burned will be relatively gradual.” (Price et. al., 2013); 

November 14, 2017 

  Climate change impacts that could add damaged or dead wood to the forest fuel load (for 

example, from insect outbreaks, ice storms or high winds) may increase the risk of fire; and 

  Recent major wildfires in Fort McMurray (2016) and Interior British Columbia (2017) are 

important reminders of our limited ability to supress intense wildfires and avoid major 
losses of homes, businesses, and community infrastructure. 

The mechanism by which climate change can be expected to result in increased wildfire risk 
includes greater risk of dry winters and dry summers (through increased precipitation variability 
despite average precipitation increasing) and through increased heat and desiccation of existing 
fuel sources. There may also be trends in convective storms leading to more lightning strikes. 

4.3  ADAPTATION TO WILDFIRE HAZARDS 

In practical terms, the primary means of adapting to the increased likelihood and potential 
severity of wildfires in Yukon largely overlap with existing efforts to reduce risks, including: 

  More robust emergency preparedness and public infrastructure (including communication 

systems along with road access to vulnerable areas) will limit a broad range of risks and 
improve overall public safety; 

  Evacuation and emergency response plans, both at the household and community level. The 

Yukon Emergency Measures Organization is responsible for coordinating community-level 
plans, but it is up to individuals to both be aware of these plans and to create their own 
household plans;  

 

Land use planning that accounts for increased wildfire risks when planning new 
developments. One suggestion in the Whitehorse Community Adaptation Plan is to 
strategically place agricultural land developments as fire-breaks to reduce wildfire risk;  

  Encourage the increased use of fire-resistant building materials, including metal cladding, 

metal roofs and metal soffits, along with closing in areas under decks and porches, to 
provide better protection from wind-driven embers. Yukon Community Services already 
provides this advice to Yukoners, however, a more concerted public education campaign 
and incentive program, or possibly changes to building code requirements for rural-
residential lots, could further reduce risks; 

  Encourage fuel reduction (deadfall removal, tree thinning, replacement of conifer trees such 

as spruce with more fire-resistant birch or aspen) on private property. Yukon Community 
Services already provides this advice to Yukoners; however, a more concerted public 
education campaign and incentive program could reduce risks; and 

  Systematic identification and prioritization of fuel rich areas for targeted fuel reduction on 

public land near communities. 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
19 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Photo 5: Yukon Wildfire 

November 14, 2017 

  
  (Yukon Government Protective Services) 

4.3.1  Adaption Opportunity: FireSmart Plus 

Most Yukoners are familiar with the FireSmart program. FireSmart has an annual budget of 
$850,000, and has spent approximately $15 million since 1999 on efforts to thin trees and 
reduce fuel loads around most Yukon communities. The program’s primary aim is to reduce fire 
risks, but it is also a local economic development tool that provides seasonal employment.  

There are several issues, however, currently limiting the capacity of the FireSmart program to 
effectively reduce wildfire risk to communities: 

  The program’s relatively modest funding is spread throughout the Yukon and is not 

systematically focused on priority areas where wildfire risk is most significant; 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
20 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
  Wooded areas are thinned but very little area is cleared. (Note that clearing at least small 
areas of spruce further reduces fuel load. The cleared areas then begin the natural process 
of succession with far lower risk of fire); and 

November 14, 2017 

  FireSmart projects can and do provoke public objections that block them from undertaking 

fuel reduction activities in certain areas. 

The risks of wildfire are expected to increase with climate change and the likely impacts of an 
extreme fire for Yukon communities (and especially for Whitehorse) become larger and costlier 
every year as fuel loads increase and the community grows. A more aggressive and targeted fuel 
reduction effort could significantly reduce this risk. This may be accomplished by exploring a mix 
of tested and innovative approaches, including: 

 

Improved community awareness and communications to enhance understanding of wildfire 
risks and the importance of fuel reduction and management in reducing those risks; 

  Selectively cutting and clearing small patches and, where appropriate, replacing significant 
amounts of spruce with naturally re-growing aspen, willow and poplar that is less prone to 
wildfire; and 

  Actively maintaining a mix of increased aspen, willow or poplar trees to stop succession back 

to spruce. 

Building on the above actions, fuel reduction activities also present a further economic 
development opportunity by supplying firewood and wood chips for bio-fuel heating. The 
Dawson City wastewater treatment plant currently has been using local wood chips for heat for 
several years and the Whitehorse Correctional Centre uses a wood pellet fired heating system. 
There is considerable opportunity to expand the use of wood heat in Yukon, which presents a 
unique synergy between efforts to reduce reliance on fossil-fuels for heating, while increasing 
resilience to the impacts of climate change. 

The very recent Teslin Tlingit Council (TTC) project to convert ten buildings in Teslin from either 
propane or electric heat to a district biomass heating system is an example of the opportunities 
to combine adaptation to climate change with local economic development. Some highlights of 
the Teslin project include: 

  Community support for the project was built up over many years, beginning in 1998 in the 

TTC forest management plan and being revisited in community plans in 2009 and 2015; 

  The project identified a sustainable and economical supply of wood chips processed from 
locally-sourced waste wood – either from fire smarting activities, development-related, or 
from the Teslin Tlingit Council-owned sawmill (Hogan, 2017); 

  The ongoing operations of the project are anticipated to provide one full-time position plus 

an unknown employment benefit from local wood supply contracts.   

There is a significant risk attached to not taking more action on fuel reduction as an adaptation 
measure. The forest continues to age and wildfire fuel builds up year by year. There are obvious 
economic benefits to going forward with a FireSmart Plus approach linked to biomass heating as 
is clearly illustrated by the TTC’s efforts in Teslin. Even if greater risks of wildfire do not emerge 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
21 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
from climate change to the degree anticipated, a FireSmart Plus approach will still reduce the 
existing risks while providing benefits.    

November 14, 2017 

 

Photo 6: Fighting Yukon Wildfire 

(Environment Yukon, 2006) 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
22 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
5.  INFRASTRUCTURE 

November 14, 2017 

Infrastructure in the 
Yukon is already being 
impacted by climate 
change and the warmer 
temperatures, higher 
precipitation levels, and 
greater weather variability 
that is projected will 
further increase 
environmental stressors to 
buildings, roads, power 
and communications 
systems, water and sewer 
systems, and mine sites. 
Specific climate change 
challenges for Yukon 
infrastructure include: 

Art and Margaret Fry Recreation Centre 

In August 2017, engineers deemed large portions of the Art 
and Margaret Fry Recreation Centre structurally unsound due 
to permafrost thaw, forcing the City of Dawson to close most 
of the building for over a month until the decision was made to 
re-open in September 2017. In 2009, Yukon government 
allocated $4 million in funding to improve the centre, but a 
2014 study estimated that $12.5 million in improvement costs 
would be required (Yukon News, November 21, 2014). In 
addition to repair costs, there are other financial and social 
costs — including loss of recreational and social opportunities 
and the staff time needed to manage the issue itself — that are 
difficult to quantify. 

  Most existing infrastructure was designed and built based on historical climate data that 

may not be appropriate for future conditions. Even small increases in snow load, storm 
severity and frequency, and thawing permafrost may directly affect structural integrity; 

  Buildings sited on permafrost are highly vulnerable as rising temperatures increase the rate 

of thaw. The cost of repairs required to keep affected buildings open and functioning is 
significant, but there are additional financial and social implications including periods of 
closure that negatively affect users (e.g. Dawson City’s recreation centre in 2017); 

  Thawing permafrost, landslides, 
erosion and other climate-driven 
damage to infrastructure is having a 
major impact on roads and highways 
in Yukon. Highways and Public Works 
reports higher operating and 
maintenance costs for many roads 
and bridges related to these climate 
impacts. Risks to highway 
infrastructure are of concern 
because there are limited 
transportation corridors through 
which consumer goods and critical 
supplies can enter the territory; 

Dempster Highway 

Climate-related operations and maintenance 
costs for the Dempster highway have increased 
significantly in the past two decades. On 
average, an additional $200,000 dollars per year 
has been needed to maintain the Dempster 
highway since 2005 (Burns, 2015). This trend is 
expected to continue and financial challenges to 
fund major road repairs are anticipated. 

  Thawing permafrost and increased precipitation has led to problems with mine 

infrastructure both for operating mines and at abandoned sites. Changes in the hydrological 
cycle – especially extreme precipitation events and melt patterns – are creating higher-than-
planned-for water flows that can exceed the capacity of water management structures; and 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
23 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
  Thawing permafrost and other climate hazards present a growing risk for electricity 

November 14, 2017 

generation and distribution infrastructure, including generation facilities and powerlines. 

Ross River School 

Thawing permafrost beneath the Ross River School has led to structural damage requiring 
significant repairs. It was built in 2001 with a thermosiphon system – a method for passive 
heat exchange – designed to insulate and maintain the permafrost below the building. The 
system has not been successful. The building has required repairs in 2004, 2006, 2013, 2015 
and is still in need of further repairs. In 2015, the school was closed for 5 months, a major 
disruption in a small community where the school is the center of many activities. 
Approximately $3 million was spent on the repairs in 2013 and 2015 and cost estimates for 
further repairs are approximately $1.7 million. (CBC North News reports, May 10, 2017, May 
29, 2017 and August 4, 2017). In addition to the well-documented repair costs, there are 
other financial and social costs — including the disruption of the school year, increased child 
care costs, loss of recreational and social opportunities and the staff time needed to 
manage the issue itself — that are difficult to quantify. 

 

5.1  ADAPTATION TO INFRASTRUCTURE IMPACTS 

Increasing the resilience of Yukon’s infrastructure to climate change will require a shift in the 
way we think about design requirements of our built environment and the way that we evaluate 
the financial costs of construction, maintenance, and repair. Long-term infrastructure planning 
that takes future climate change into account will be an important aspect of this work. Other 
factors that will influence the resilience of Yukon’s infrastructure to climate change include: 

  Developing critical infrastructure partnerships with federal government agencies, First 

Nations, municipalities and the private sector to access funding and implement 
infrastructure adaptation projects (see National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure, 2009; 
National Action Plan for Critical Infrastructure, 2014);  

  Developing and applying new infrastructure standards and best practices. For example, the 
Northern Infrastructure Standardization Initiative developed many national standards that 
are directly relevant to land-based infrastructure in northern communities such as technical 
guidance on factoring in future climate changes when building on permafrost. New 
infrastructure design and maintenance standards that recognize climate resilience as a key 
objective are currently under development and are expected to be completed by 2020; 

 

Improving mechanisms for monitoring and data collection regarding buildings, roads and 
other infrastructure impacts by climate change, and making this information more 
accessible and transparent to a wide variety of user groups, may help to stimulate new 
insights into climate-resilient design; 

  Providing opportunity for more innovative building design that leverages lessons learned 

and best practices from other jurisdictions. More importantly, this approach may also create 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
24 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

space to grow and export local expertise and experience with sub-arctic and arctic 
infrastructure construction and repair, particularly for permafrost affected areas; 

  Engaging communities on a range of infrastructure challenges to discuss the sustainability of 

community infrastructure, gather key (climate related and other) information, and 
incorporate the results into infrastructure and other relevant planning processes; and 

 

Integrating climate change considerations into mining infrastructure development, 
maintenance and reclamation – a process which can last for over 100 years – to ensure that 
mines are built with future climate in mind. 

5.1.1  Adaptation Opportunity: Improved Accounting for Long-Term Infrastructure Costs 

Improving the accounting for long-term infrastructure costs related to climate change will 
provide benefits, but not doing so does not create significant risks. There are possible economic 
benefits in the long-term but also some economic costs. However, a better accounting approach 
to infrastructure will not likely result in regrettable outcomes even if the threats to 
infrastructure posed by climate change turn out to be less than anticipated. 

 

Photo 7: Thawing Permafrost and Roads 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
(Environment Yukon)  

 
25 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
The Yukon government commonly uses life cycle costing (LCC) to help decide among options for 
some infrastructure projects. LCC measures the total cost of infrastructure throughout its life 
including planning, design, construction, operations and maintenance, and any other related 
costs. LCC is an excellent tool that lays out the financial case for a decision such as whether to 
completely renovate an old building for a new use or construct a new building, or to compare 
the total costs of trade offs between capital and operating costs (e.g., investing more up front in 
energy efficiency to save on operating costs throughout the life of the building). 

November 14, 2017 

There is the opportunity for the LCC approach currently used by YG to be expanded to explicitly 
encompass climate-related infrastructure risks. Examples might include an LCC analysis of 
culvert size selection when building or rebuilding highways. Installing a larger culvert costs more 
than a smaller one, but the larger culvert may also prevent road washouts during future flash 
flood events. Developing a metric to estimate the (increased) likelihood of such floods and 
including the average of repair and disruption costs saved in the LCC may present an 
opportunity to improve this decision-making process. Another example may be to develop a 
metric to estimate the indirect costs incurred (e.g., loss of recreational and social opportunities) 
when buildings are closed for repairs and include it in the LCC analysis from the onset.       

The application of full life-cycle cost accounting to the mining industry presents a more complex 
challenge. Mining companies build privately-owned infrastructure on public land and generally 
have an interest in minimizing their up-front costs. Unless the mining company is large and has 
ready access to capital, it may not be able to finance significantly higher capital costs associated 
with a full LCC analysis even if those result in net financial benefits in the long-term.  

Regulators are already requiring mines to account for climate change in mine design and closure 
plans, particularly with respect to water management. Governments and the public have an 
interest in ensuring the long-term stability of mine sites, but the industry continues to have a 
strong incentive to minimize capital costs and trust that future cash flow and profits will cover 
any future climate-driven cost-increases. These conflicting incentives make the application of 
full life-cycle cost accounting to the mining industry challenging. 

Minto Mine 

The Minto copper gold mine in the central Yukon is an example of a successful operating 
mine that has struggled to overcome mine design and water management shortcomings 
since it began production in 2007. Some of these issues are a result of the site’s 
discontinuous permafrost while others stem from higher than expected water levels on site 
that exceeded the design requirements it was built for. In 2009, the mine had two 
emergency discharges of untreated water into the Yukon River as its water containment 
systems were overflowing. 

Capstone Mining, owner of the Minto mine, has stated that “…future extreme weather in 
Yukon could again result in excess run-off at the mine site, which could have an adverse 
effect on the results of operations at the Minto Mine and on our business, financial 
condition, results of operation and prospects...” (Capstone Mining Corporation, 2015)   

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
26 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Photo 8: Minto Mine 

November 14, 2017 

 

(Environment Yukon) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
27 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
6.  CHANGING CLIMATE, CHANGING LAND  

November 14, 2017 

There is clear evidence that vegetation zones are shifting, forests are more vulnerable to insect 
infestations and animal species' habitat, ranges, and diversity are changing. Changes to seasonal 
weather patterns and climate variability also have direct impacts on the way that some species 
of wildlife feed and breed. 

Climate is the most important factor that influences the development of terrestrial ecosystems. 
Within areas of similar climate, ecosystems vary because of differences in topography and soil. 
Shifting climates within these bioclimate zones may mean that some of the flora and fauna that 
have adapted to the historical climate of that area may face increasing ecological pressure under 
different present and future climatic conditions. These shifts drive changes in the type of 
vegetation that is present or pervasive in certain areas, and also to the seasonal events (e.g. 
flowering) in the lifecycle of native plants. Furthermore, climate change may also make areas 
more hospitable to invasive species, as it enables some plants, insects and animals to survive 
and thrive in parts of the territory that were previously less hospitable. 

Photo 9: Caribou 

(Environment Yukon, 2009) 

 

Wildlife species ranges are projected to shift northward on both land and sea, bringing new 
species into the north while limiting the range of other species already present on those 
landscapes. Seasonal changes are also affecting reproductive cycles and species productivity for 
some animals. In southern Yukon, for example, seasonal temperature increases have been 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
28 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
shown to advance the breeding cycle of rock and white-tailed ptarmigan and reduce the average 
number of eggs produced (Wilson and Marten, 2010). Other documented ecological impacts 
include more difficult winter and spring feeding for some animals due to deeper snowpack and 
changes to freeze-thaw cycles that lead to thicker layers of ice on and in the snow. Spring and 
summer have also seen greater levels of insect harassment of caribou (Furgal and Prowse, 2008; 
Streicker, 2016), which interrupts summer feeding, reducing overall animal health and leading to 
reduced reproduction.   

November 14, 2017 

Aquatic species are also affected by changes in water temperature and other climate change 
impacts to Yukon’s hydrological regimes. Climate change-related impacts on ocean and fresh-
water habitats for wild salmon exacerbate existing environmental and human-caused stressors, 
jeopardising migration and reducing reproductive success. According to the federal department 
of Fisheries and Oceans, the annual Yukon River Chinook salmon migration has historically 
reached up to 150,000 fish; by 2016 this number declined to less than 75,000, and salmon 
productivity has been consistently low since 2008. In response, several Yukon First Nations have 
imposed restrictions on salmon fishing for their citizens, cancelling or limiting the amount of fish 
available for seasonal fish camps. 

The cumulative impacts of these ecological, biological and hydrological impacts are less well 
understood. How these changes will impact the health of keystone species like caribou and 
salmon, which serve as indicators of overall ecosystem health, is of significant concern for 
Yukoners – especially Yukon First Nations whose traditional culture, diet and livelihoods are 
intimately connected with Yukon’s landscapes and wildlife. 

6.1  ADAPTATION TO THE CHANGING LAND 

Yukon First Nations have a long history of adaptation to changing landscapes and wildlife. 

30,000 Years 

“People have lived in what is now called the Yukon for perhaps 30,000 years. During that 
long period both the climate and the landscape have changed. The weather was sometimes 
much colder than it is now, sometimes warmer. For at least half of the last 30,000 years, 
instead of being covered by forests, most of the land was mossy or grassy tundra…The lakes 
too have changed in number, location, and shape. Rivers once flowed in places where there 
are none today, and salmon once spawned where they do no longer. Many of the animals 
that the early peoples hunted were unlike those they hunt today…” (McClelland. 1987. P.17) 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
29 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Several Yukon First Nations have undertaken community-based research and adaptation 
planning to evaluate and respond to the effects of climate change on their land, water, and 
wildlife. For example, Selkirk First Nation partnered with the Arctic Institute of Community 
Based Research to develop a community based climate change adaptation plan (VanBibber and 
Pratt 2016). This plan emphasized, among other aspects, the resiliency of the community and 
ability to adapt as well as the importance of initiatives to connect youth with the land and work 
to improve the mental wellness of young people in the community. 

November 14, 2017 

Southern Tutchone Resilience 

“There are many examples of Southern Tutchone people being extremely resilient and 
adaptable to change in the past, including the dynamic land, the Gold Rush, the 
construction of the Alaska Highway, residential school, the dam construction at Aishihik 
Lake, the pipeline coming through, etc. Change has always been happening...  The 
conclusion of this study is that Southern Tutchone people are used to change and making it 
work for them.” (Champagne and Aishihik First Nations and Alsek Renewable Resources 
Council, 2009) 

 

Shifting species distributions may also provide future opportunities for hunting/trapping (e.g. 
deer) and warmer temperatures may contribute to higher survival rates for certain species. 
However, the cumulative negative effects may outweigh these benefits. Currently, very little is 
known about the full extent of ecological impacts on complex natural systems that will result 
from climate change and how those impacts will interact with the landscapes and the animals 
that are valued for food and other human uses. There is a lot of concern, but also a high level of 
uncertainty.  

Anticipating how regional ecological systems will be affected by climate change is very 
important in determining the potential effects on traditional lifestyles and ecosystem services. 
Ensuring that planning processes (land-use planning, development planning, park planning, 
forestry, etc.) explicitly incorporate mechanisms for anticipating and accommodating future 
climate change will influence the durability and effectiveness of land and resource planning 
initiatives. 

6.1.1  Adaptation Opportunity: Agriculture 
Yukon’s agricultural sector is limited not only by soil, but by temperature and precipitation.   As 
noted in Section 2, climate change has already resulted in 20C higher annual average 
temperatures and a 6% increase in average annual precipitation. Further change is expected to 
bring even higher average temperatures and generally higher levels of precipitation.  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
30 

November 14, 2017 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Higher average temperatures bring longer 
growing seasons by increasing the average 
number of frost-free days. In the Canadian 
prairies, Agriculture Canada is anticipating 
significant increases in the length of the 
growing season over wide areas based on a 
predicted 10C to 20C increase in average 
temperatures over the 2009 to 2032 
period. For example, while 33.6% of the 
area had a growing season longer than 130 
days in the 1971-2000 period, that is 
expected to increase to 56.6% of the area 
by 2032.  

Willingness to Buy Local Food 

“The consumers in the Yukon show a strong 
desire to buy locally. This can be seen in the 
support for community markets, and in 
strong farm gate sales. This has also 
translated into high premiums for a limited 
amount of Yukon production. This local 
premium may be as high as two to four- fold 
over imported production.” (Serecon, 2007 P. 
A15) 

Although a similar level of analysis has not been done for the Yukon, a similar lengthening of the 
growing season can likely be expected. And the increased summer precipitation from climate 
change will also increase agricultural potential and decrease irrigation needs and costs. Some 
general trends that emerge from the 2016 Census of agriculture, which largely combines the 
Yukon with the NWT, include: 

  The number of farms was largely unchanged from 2011 to 2016; 

  The area of cropland remained stable from 2011 to 2016 but there was a shift away from 

hay to the production of field crops, particularly field pea production; 

  The total area dedicated to fruit and berry production more than doubled between 2011 

and 2016 while greenhouse production has fallen; 

  Overall the agriculture sector in Yukon and NWT reported gross receipts of $10.0 million for 

2015, significantly higher than the $4.1 million in 2005; and 

  Poultry and egg farms accounted for 44% of reported gross receipts in 2015. 

Increasing Yukon agriculture is a low-risk climate change adaptation opportunity. It is an 
opportunity that may yield significant economic benefits and if properly managed does not have 
significant downsides if the climate threat turns out to not be as severe as some scenarios 
projected.  

Factors other than climate change that may help to further increase Yukon agricultural 
production include: 

  General trends toward higher demand for more local food. In the Yukon, the popularity of 

farmer’s markets has been rising: Dawson City, Haines Junction, Mayo and Whitehorse have 
all established local farmers markets (Yukon News, April 21, 2017).       

  The increased attention and interest in food security and the role of local food production in 
enhancing food security in the territory, particularly among rural First Nations communities. 
Since 2005, food security-related adaptation projects have been pursued by the Teslin 
Tlingit Council, White River First Nation, Little Salmon Carmacks First Nation, Liard First 
Nation, Vuntut G’witchin, and the Kluane First Nation. Little Salmon Carmacks First Nation 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
31 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

began a community greenhouse and garden program in 2000 and other communities and 
First Nations have made similar efforts, including the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Teaching and 
Working Farm, which began in 2015.   

  The price premium that many are willing to pay for local food. “There are studies that show 
that consumers are willing to pay a premium for local products (Brown 2003; Schneider and 
Francis 2005; Novotorova and Mazzocco 2008; Darby, Batte, Ernst and Roe 2008). But this 
willingness to pay a premium is apparently contingent on local products being readily 
available and easy to identify” (Equiterre, 2011).  

  The very small amount of local food in proportion to the total market for food in the Yukon. 
The total gross receipts of farms (both Yukon and NWT) was $10.0 million in 2015 as noted 
above. The Yukon Bureau of Statistics reports that food and beverage stores in the Yukon 
had $203.4 million in sales in 2015. The farm receipts include sales (e.g., hay for horses) that 
do not directly compare to grocery sales and there are significant grocery sales that cannot 
be displaced by local production (e.g., soft drinks) but the numbers do indicate that local 
food has a lot of room to grow its market share in the Yukon.  

Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Teaching and Working Farm 

In 2015 the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in First Nation stated the Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in Teaching and 
Working Farm in the Klondike Valley near Dawson City. In the summer of 2017, the farm had 
22 students of varying ages, most of them post-secondary. “Students spend three hours a 
day in classes, which are taught in a large, open-air frame tent. The other four and a half 
hours of the day are spent in practicum, doing things like tending the sprawling garden 
beds, planting seedlings, operating and maintaining farm machinery and taking care of the 
pigs. Most students live on-site in small frame tents.” (Yukon News, July 4, 2017) 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
32 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
7.  HUMAN HEALTH AND WELLBEING 

November 14, 2017 

Human health and wellbeing can be impacted by climate change in a variety of ways, from 
exposure to new disease and vectors to physical and psychological health effects of anxiety and 
stress from extreme weather events or wildfire damaging homes or livelihoods.  

Ticks in the North 

Over the long-term, climate 
change is projected to make the 
Yukon more hospitable to 
invasive species that are likely to 
bring with them both vector-
borne and zoonotic diseases. 
Vectors are organisms (usually 
insects) that transmit pathogens 
or parasites from one person (or 
animal or plant) to another. 
Zoonotic diseases are diseases 
that normally infect animals but 
can make the jump to human 
populations. Both can cause 
human illness and can negatively 
impact plants or animals that contribute to the food security and livelihoods of Yukoners. 
Climate change may also increase existing health-risks connected to climate-driven hazards or 
relationships between humans and natural ecosystems. 

In the summer of 2017, a black-legged tick was 
discovered in Yellowknife, one of the most northern 
locations in Canada that this insect has been 
documented. The black-legged tick, also known as the 
“deer tick” can be a carrier of Lyme disease. According 
to Canadian Lyme Disease Foundation president Jim 
Wilson, deer ticks are becoming increasingly resilient to 
colder climates, and it is expected that more of these 
insects will arrive in the north over the coming years. 

(CBC North News. June 13, 2017). 

According to the 2012 Yukon Health Status Report (Government of Yukon, 2012), many 
Whitehorse households and most rural households obtain at least some food from hunting (33% 
and 58%) or fishing (44% and 62%). These traditional food sources, and our ability to access 
these animals over land and water, are affected by shifting weather patterns and seasonal 
changes occurring here in Yukon. This may generate changes in diet that lead to physical health 
impacts, but also has implications for the mental health and psychological wellbeing of Yukon’s 
First Nations people whose ability to participate in traditional cultural activities that are 
intimately connected with traditional foods may become more limited.  

Mental Health 

“Many northern communities consider 
traditional practices as a pathway to 
mental health and wellness for First 
Nation youth” Adapting to Climate 
Change and Keeping Our Traditions: 
Selkirk First Nation Adaptation Plan. 
(VanBibber and Pratt 2016) 

 

The Vuntut Gwitchin First Nation is one of several 
Yukon First Nations who have taken steps to 
better understand the impact of climate change 
on human health and wellbeing. Between 2007 
and 2011, the First Nation undertook a multi-
phased project to solicit community feedback on 
local climate change impacts in the Vuntut 
Gwitchin traditional territory, understand 
historical adaptations to address food-related 
concerns, and develop new actions to improve 
community food security (Arctic Institute for 
Community-Based Research, 2017). 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
33 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Photo 10: Drying Fish 

November 14, 2017 

 

(Environment Yukon) 

Extreme weather events and wildfire also have direct and indirect implications for human health 
and wellbeing. Flooding events affect the safety of individuals, the health of those whose 
drinking water quality is impacted or whose access to medical supplies or treatment is affected 
by flooding events, and the mental wellness of people whose property and living conditions are 
negatively impacted. Similarly, wildfires that lead to community evacuations or property 
damage can have significant impacts on the people in those areas. Furthermore, anticipated 
increases in wildfire activity presents the potential for increased respiratory health impacts 
related to wildfire smoke. In 2017, Yukon government’s Department of Health and Social 
Services initiated a project to improve monitoring of wildfire impacts on human health and 
improve emergency planning for extreme weather events and wildfires. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
34 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
The threats posed by climate change to human health and wellbeing are a function of many 
factors, including exposure to climate hazards, sensitivity of exposed populations to 
environmental changes (especially the elderly and persons with pre-existing health conditions), 
and the capacity of the individuals or populations to proactively plan for change and/or to 
respond to disaster (Seguin, 2008; Seguin and Berry, 2008; Costello et al., 2009).  

November 14, 2017 

7.1  HEALTH AND WELLBEING ADAPTATION 

Understanding the implications of climate change for public health and wellbeing depends 
largely on our understanding of the breadth and depth of the relationship between climate and 
health, and extent to which forward-looking public health programming incorporates climate 
change considerations.  

Specific opportunities to improve Yukon’s capacity to understand and respond to direct and 
indirect climate change impacts on the health and wellbeing of its residents include:  

  Enhancing data collection and investing in research on the role of country foods in Yukoners’ 

diets, and the impact of climate change on availability and access to traditional foods; 

 

Identifying populations most at risk to climate change-related health risks and developing 
strategies and actions to increase awareness of these risks among these groups; 

  Enhancing mental health services in communities and supporting programs and initiatives 

that enable First Nations to reconnect with traditional land-use activities; and 

 

Investing in capacity to address health-related vulnerabilities that are increased by climate 
change, such as food and housing security, poverty and marginalization. 

Examples (see 9.APPENDIX B) of work on communities beginning to adapt to the health and 
wellbeing issues of climate change include: 

 

 

 

“Pilot Study on the Health Effects on the Selkirk First Nation due to Climate Change” in 2009; 

“Climate Change and Health – Linking our Past and Future through our Traditions and 
Culture: An Ethno-Botanical Resource Study to determine the Effects of Climate Change on 
Traditional Ecosystems” in 2010; and 

"Keeping our traditions for the mental wellbeing of Selkirk First Nations Youth: What do we 
do at the fish camp when there is no fish?" in 2016. 

7.1.1  Adaptation Opportunity: Community-Based Climate Monitoring 

Community-based climate change monitoring initiatives may provide new opportunities to 
gather valuable data on impacts of climate change, while simultaneously enabling community 
members to re-connect with traditional and land-based knowledge. 

Not taking the action of further community-based monitoring does pose some risks as lack of 
local and community-specific data limits the effectiveness of adaptation efforts. It is important 
that initiatives to establish community-based monitoring programs consider how monitoring 
might help address local needs and vulnerabilities such as concern about the condition and 
populations of local game species. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
35 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
While the impacts of climate change on wildlife, and especially traditional sources of food, is of 
great concern for Yukoners, there is limited scientific research on what these impacts will mean 
in practical terms both for wildlife and for the population who rely on them for food. A 
community-based climate monitoring program that provides resources and training for 
community residents to monitor and collect data on key ecological indicators of climate change 
could help to address this information gap while also providing modest economic benefit to 
Yukon communities. 

November 14, 2017 

Integrating the data collected through this program with existing research and information 
available through other public agencies (e.g. statistics on traditional food consumption, wildlife 
population health data, forest health information, etc.) may help to provide improved insights 
into the long-term implications of climate change for human health. The data can also be used 
to inform and guide natural resource planning and development to ensure that regional 
ecosystems and their capacity to support important traditional plant and animal species are 
sustainably managed.   

Beyond the information-gathering component of these initiatives, community-based climate 
monitoring provides a valuable opportunity to integrate traditional knowledge and scientific 
research on climate change and create new opportunities to re-connect with the land for 
individuals who may be feeling alienated from traditional land-use activities. Historical insight 
into local climate indicators related to, for example, the timing of seasonally significant events 
such as the first snowfall, sightings of migratory birds, and the budding of flowers in spring 
provide a deeper understanding of long-term climate trends in specific geographic regions. This 
type of traditional and local knowledge could feed into such initiatives by soliciting the 
participation of First Nations elders and contribute to cultural revitalization by providing a 
framework to promote and preserve land-based skills and knowledge for younger community 
members. (Lemmen et. al. 2016). 

Community-based climate monitoring programs are low-risk regardless of how severe the 
effects of climate change turn out to be. There is an opportunity for communities to benefit in 
different ways from the programs and their costs tend to be relatively low. 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
36 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
8.  BIBLIOGRAPHY 

November 14, 2017 

Arctic Institute for Community-Based Research, 2017. “Vuntut Gwitchin Climate Change and 
Health Research in Northern Yukon (2007-2011)”. Retrieved from: https://www.aicbr.ca/vuntut-
gwitchin-old-crow 

Beckert, Bronwyn, Roy, Louis Phillipe, Kennedy Kristen., and Calmels, Fabrice. “Climate Change 
Hazard Mapping Project Completed in Yukon.” Yukon College: Climate Change Hazard Mapping 
Project Completed in Yukon, Yukon government, 12 Sept. 2016. Retrieved from: 
www.yukoncollege.yk.ca/research/post/climate_change_hazard_mapping_project_completed_i
n_yukon. 

Bonnaventure P.P., and Lewkowicz A.G., 2013. Impacts of mean annual air temperature change 
on a regional permafrost probability model for southern Yukon and northern British Columbia, 
Canada. The Cryosphere 7: 935-946. DOI:10.5194\tc-7-935-2013 

Burns, C., 2015. Climate Change Costs, Yukon Section, Dempster Highway. Presentation to 
Yukon Government- Highways and Public Works. 

Calmels, F., L.-P. Roy, C. Laurent, M. Pelleter, L. Kinnear, B. Benkert, B. Horton and J. Pumple. 
2015. Vulnerability of the North Alaska Highway to Permafrost Thaw: A Field Guide and Data 
Synthesis. Whitehorse, Yukon: Northern Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre. 

Capstone Mining Corporation. 2015 and 2016. Consolidated Financial Statements. pp.44-45. 
Retrieved from: http://capstonemining.com/home/default.aspx 

CBC North News. Various dates. Retrieved from: http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/north 

Centre for Clean Air Policy, 2016. What Does Climate Resilience Look Like? Retrieved from: 
http://ccap.org/what-does-climate-resilience-look-like/  

Derksen, C., et.al. 2012. Variability and change in the Canadian cryosphere. Climate Change, 115, 
59–88, doi:10.1007/s10584-012-0470-0. 

Environment Canada. 2016. Weather Climate and Hazards. Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean 
Growth and Climate Change. 

Environment Yukon, 2017. Date of ice break-up on the Yukon River at Dawson City, 1896-2016. 
Retrieved from: http://www.env.gov.yk.ca/publications-maps/report-water-river-break-up.php 

Equiterre, 2011. Eating at Home: Canadian households and the motivations and obstacles 
related to buying locally grown food – a pan-Canadian study. p.7 Retrieved from: 
http://www.equiterre.org/sites/fichiers/analyse_manger_chez_soi_-final_en.pdf 

Furgal, C., and T.D. Prowse, 2008. Northern Canada. From: Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 286p.  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
37 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Government of Yukon, Department of Health and Social Services: Yukon 2012 Health Status 
Report: Focus on Children and Youth. Retrieved from: 
http://www.hss.gov.yk.ca/pdf/health_status_report_2012.pdf  

November 14, 2017 

Hennessey, R., Love, N., Kinnear, L. and Duerden, F., 2011. Atlin Climate Change Adaptaton Plan. 
Northern Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College, Whitehorse, YT, 55 p. 

Hennessey, R., Stuart, S. and Duerden, F., 2012. Mayo Region Climate Change Adaptaton Plan. 
Northern Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College, Whitehorse, YT, 103 p. 

Hennessey, R. and Streicker, J., 2010. Future Histories of Whitehorse: Scenarios of Change. 
Northern Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College, Whitehorse, YT, 39 p. 

Hennessey, R., Stuart, S. and Duerden, F., 2012. Mayo Region Climate Change Adaptaton Plan. 
Northern Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College, Whitehorse, YT, 103 p. 

Hennessey, R. and Streicker, J., 2011. Whitehorse Climate Change Adaptaton Plan. Northern 
Climate ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College, Whitehorse, YT, p. 84 

Henstra, D. and Thistlethwaite, J., 2017. Climate Change, Floods, and Municipal Risk Sharing in 
Canada.” IMFG Papers on Municipal Finance and Governance No. 30. Toronto: Institute on 
Municipal Finance and Governance. Retrieved from: http://munkschool.utoronto.ca/imfg/ 
uploads/373/1917_imfg_no_30_online_final.pdf.  

Hogan, Blair. March 2017. Teslin Biomass District Heating V.3 (presentation). Retrieved from: 
https://www.uaf.edu/files/ces/nrcd/awec/2017/Blair-Hogan.pdf 

Huntington HP, Fox S, Berkes F, Krupnik I (2005) The changing Arctic: indigenous perspectives. 
In: ACIA (ed) Arctic climate impact assessment. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp 61–
98 

IPCC, 2014: Annex II: Glossary [Mach, K.J., S. Planton and C. von Stechow (eds.)]. In: Climate 
Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Core Writing Team, R.K. 
Pachauri and L.A. Meyer (eds.)]. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 117-130. 

Jones, Sebastian and Hennessey, Ryan, 2011. Dawson Climate Change Adaptation Plan. Climate 
Change Impacts and Adaptation Division, Natural Resources Canada, Whitehorse, YT 

Kunuk, Zacharias and Mauro, Ian, 2015. Inuit Knowledge and Climate Change [Documentary 
Film]. Canada. 

Larsen, J.N., et. al. 2014. Polar regions. In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and 
Vulnerability, Part B: Regional Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment 
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Barros, V.R., et. al. (eds.)]. 
Cambridge University Press. pp. 1567-1612. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
38 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Larsen, C., E. Burgess, A. Arendt, S. O’Neel, A. Johnson, and C. Kienholz, 2015. Surface melt 
dominates Alaska glacier mass balance. Geophysical Research Letters, vol. 42, pp. 5902–5908 

November 14, 2017 

Lemmen, D. S., Warren, F. J., Lacroix, J. and Bush, E. (Eds.), 2008. From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007. Ottawa, Ont.: Government of Canada. Retrieved from  
http://adaptation.nrcan.gc.ca/assess/2007/index_e.php. 

Lemmen, D.S., Warren, F.J., James, T.S.  and Mercer Clarke, C.S.L. editors (2016): Canada’s 
Marine Coasts in a Changing Climate; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, 274p. 

Lipovsky, P.S. and Yoshikawa, K., 2009. Initial results from the first year of the Permafrost 
Outreach Program, Yukon, Canada. In: Yukon Exploration and Geology 2008, L.H. Weston, L.R. 
Blackburn and L.L. Lewis (eds.), Yukon Geological Survey, pp. 161-172. 

McClelland, Catherine, 1987. Part of the Land, Part of the Water: A History of the Yukon Indians. 
Douglas & McIntyre. 

Myers-Smith, Isla H., Meagan M. Grabowski, Haydn J.D. Thomas, Sandra Angers-Blondin, 
Gergana N. Daskalova, Anne D. Bjorkman, Andrew M. Cunliffe, Jakob J. Assmann, Joe Boyle, 
Edward McLeod, Sam McLeod, Ricky Joe, Paden Lennie, Deon Arey, Richard Gordon, Cameron 
Eckert, 2017. Seventeen years of ecological monitoring reveals multiple lines of evidence for 
tundra vegetation change. Draft manuscript. 

Natural Resources Canada, 2016. Working Group on Adaptation and Climate Resilience. Ottawa, 
ON: Canadian Government Publishing. 

Natural Resources Canada, 2017. Retrieved from: http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/boreal/13071 

Palko, K. and Lemmen, D.S. (Eds.)., 2017. Climate risks and adaptation practices for the Canadian 
transportation sector 2016.  Ottawa, ON: Government of Canada. 

Price, D.T. et al, 2013. Anticipating the consequences of climate change for Canada’s boreal 
forest ecosystems. Environ. Rev., 21 (2013), pp. 322-365 

Public Safety Canada, 2014. National Action Plan for Critical Infrastructure, Ottawa, ON: 
Canadian Government Publishing. 

Public Safety Canada, 2009. National Strategy for Critical Infrastructure, Ottawa, ON: Canadian 
Government Publishing. 

Richardson, G.R.A. and Otero, J. (2012). Land use planning tools for local adaptation to climate 
change. Ottawa, Ont.: Government of Canada, 38 p. 

Scenarios Network for Alaska and Arctic Planning, 2017. Community Charts for Whitehorse and 
Old Crow. Retrieved from: 
https://www.snap.uaf.edu/sites/all/modules/snap_community_charts/charts.php 

Seguin, J., 2008. Conclusion. In: Seguin J. et al. (Eds.) Human Health in a Changing Climate: A 
Canadian Assessment of Vulnerabilities and Adaptive Capacity. Health Canada. Health Canada. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
39 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
Serecon Management Consultants. 2007. Yukon Agriculture Multi-Year Development Plan. 
Retrieved from: 
http://www.emr.gov.yk.ca/agriculture/pdf/yukon_multi_year_development_plan.pdf 

November 14, 2017 

Siegel, P., 2011. “No Regrets” Approach to Decision Making in a Changing Climate: Toward 
Adaptive Social Protection and Spatially Enabled Governance. World Resources Institute. 
Retrieved from: http://www.wri.org/our-work/project/world-resources-report/no-regrets-
approach-decision-making-changing-climate-toward 

Streicker, J., 2016. Yukon Climate Change Indicators and Key Findings 2015. Northern Climate 
ExChange, Yukon Research Centre, Yukon College, p. 84 

VanBibber, M., Kassi, N., Pratt, M., March 2016. Adapting to Climate Change and Keeping Our 
Traditions. Selkirk First Nation. 

Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S., editors (2014): Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector  

Werner, A.T., H.K. Jaswal and T.Q. Murdock, 2009: Climate Change in Dawson City, YT: Summary 
of Past Trends and Future Projections. Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, University of 
Victoria, Victoria BC, 40 pp. 

Wang, Guojian; Cai, Wenju; Gan, Bolan; Wu, Lixin; Santoso, Agus; Lin, Xiaopei; Chen, Zhaohui & 
McPhaden, Michael J., 2017. Continued increase of extreme El Niño frequency long after 1.5 °C 
warming stabilization. Nature Climate Change 7, 568–572  

Whitehorse Star. Various dates. Retrieved from: http://www.whitehorsestar.com/ 

Yukon News. Various dates. Retrieved from: http://www.yukon-news.com/ 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
40 

Yukon ‘State of Play’:  
Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 
9.  KEY CONTACTS 

November 14, 2017 

Brian Horton, Research Project Coordinator, Northern Climate ExChange, Northern Climate 
ExChange 

Alison Perrin, Climate Change Education and Project Coordinator, Northern Climate ExChange 

Panya Lipovsky, Surficial Geologist, Yukon Geological Survey  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
41 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
 
 
APPENDIX A 

Yukon’s Climate 

November 14, 2017 

Currently, projections about future change in Yukon’s climate are made by combining historical 
data for each indicator with different emissions scenarios developed by the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). These scenarios suggest possible future conditions based on 
different “Representative Concentration Pathways” or predicted amount of GHGs in our 
atmosphere based on more successful or less successful “paths” to stabilize or reduce 
emissions.  

Figure 4 shows the relative change in average Yukon temperature from one year to the next 
from 1950 through 2016. 

 

Figure 4: Yukon annual temperature variation, 1950-2016 

 

 

(Streicker, 2016) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
42 

 

 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
 
 
Figure 5 shows the percent difference from the 30-year average (1961-1990) precipitation. 

November 14, 2017 

 

Figure 5: Yukon annual precipitation variability, 1950-2016 

 

 

(Streicker, 2016) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
43 

 

 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
 
 

November 14, 2017 

Figure 6 shows the relative change in average annual Yukon temperature projected over the 
next century. 

 

Figure 6: Yukon projected annual temperature anomalies (A2, A1B, B1) 

 

 

Year 

 

(Streicker, 2016) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
44 

 

 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
 
 
Figure 7 shows the relative change in total annual precipitation in Yukon projected over the next 
century. 

November 14, 2017 

 

Figure 7: Yukon projected annual precipitation anomalies (A2, A1B, B1). 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
45 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
 
 
SNAP Community Temperature Projections for Old Crow and Whitehorse are shown below. 

November 14, 2017 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 

 
46 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation
 
 
SNAP Community Precipitation Projections for Old Crow and Whitehorse are shown below 

November 14, 2017 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 
47 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

APPENDIX B 
 

List of Yukon Climate Change Adaptation Projects: 2008 through 2017 

This appendix presents a summary of available information regarding climate change adaptation projects that have been undertaken in Yukon 
between 2008 and 2017. Given the wide range of organizations involved in adaptation activities, this summary should be viewed as a snapshot 
of adaptation actions rather than a comprehensive picture. Readers who have questions or who may be able to provide additional information 
regarding the projects listed below or other projects not listed in this appendix are encouraged to contact Yukon government’s Climate Change 
Secretariat at ClimateChange@gov.yk.ca. 

List of Yukon government acronyms 

  CS-EMO – Department of Community Services, Emergency Management Office 
  CS-WFM – Department of Community Services, Wildfire Management  
  ENV-AHU – Department of Environment, Animal Health Unit 
  ENV-CCS – Department of Environment, Climate Change Secretariat 
  ENV-FW – Department of Environment, Fish and Wildlife 
  ENV-WR – Department of Environment, Water Resources 
  EMR-AG – Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, Agriculture 
  EMR-ESC – Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, Energy Solutions Centre 
  EMR-FMB – Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, Forest Management branch 
  EMR-YGS – Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, Yukon Geological Survey 
  HPW-PMD – Department of Highways and Public Works, Property Management Division 
  HPW-TEB – Department of Highways and Public Works, Transportation Engineering Branch 
  HSS-CPRM – Department of Health and Social Services, Corporate Planning and Risk Management 
  TC-CS – Department of Tourism and Culture, Cultural Services 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
48 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Start 
Date 

2012 

End 
Date 

2013 

Description 

Project work included a pan-territorial permafrost 
workshop held in Yellowknife in 2013 that facilitated 
permafrost information and knowledge-sharing across the 
three territories to enable an improved response to the 
impacts of permafrost thaw. Work also included the 
development of communications products to increase 
awareness of Yukon government adaptation actions. 

2012 

2015 

Project identified priority areas of concern and examined 
climate change impacts on the hydrology of the Yukon River 
headwaters and implications for downstream energy 
generation. 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Research Org-
Natural Science 
and Engineering 
Research 
Council of 
Canada (NSERC) 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS),  
Government of the 
Northwest Territories, 
Government of 
Nunavut 

Yukon Energy 
Corporation, 
Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre - 
Northern Climate 
ExChange),  
Yukon government 
(EMR-YGS; ENV-WR),  
University of Alberta,  
University of 
Saskatchewan 

Pan-Territorial 
Adaptation Outreach 

Characterizing 
hydrological processes 
in the headwater 
region of the Yukon 
River: impacts on 
discharge and 
implications for 
hydroelectric security 

Sensitivity of Dempster 
Highway Hydrological 
Response 

Yukon government 
(HPW-TEB; ENV-WR)  

Transport 
Canada 

2013 

2016 

Project explored climate change impacts on water regimes 
along the Dempster Highway. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
49 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Start 
Date 

2013 

Description 

End 
Date 

2016  Developed a web-based information portal to improve 
access to information about climate change adaptation 
research and action across the circumpolar north. 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Arctic Adaptation 
Exchange 

Natural 
Resources 
Canada 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS), 
Government of 
Canada (NRCAN),  
US State Department, 
University of Alaska-
Fairbanks,  
Aleut International 
Association,  
Gwich'in Council 
International 

Yukon Flood Plain Risk 
Mapping 

Yukon government 
(CS-EMO) 

Effects of Thawing 
Permafrost on 
Agricultural Capacity 

Yukon government 
(EMR-AG) 

Development of 
Bioclimate Envelopes 

Yukon government 
(ENV-FW) 

Communicating Climate 
Change Adaptation 

Yukon government 
(TC-CS) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2012 

2015 

This flood hazard mapping project collected elevation data 
for 13 Yukon communities to better understand where 
flood hazards might be affected by climate change.  

2012 

2016 

Identified challenges and barriers to agriculture, adaptive 
measures and best management practices. Modelled areas 
prone to change in Dawson, Central Yukon, Haines Junction, 
and Whitehorse/Southern Lakes agricultural regions 

2012 

2016  Development of ecosystem classification and modeling to 

inform research and resource and land use planning. 

2012 

2015 

This project presents a climate change adaptation film and 
speaker series to share knowledge related to INAC-funded 
Yukon government climate change adaptation initiatives. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
50 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Yukon government 
(EMR-FMB),  

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Examining forest 
vulnerabilities to 
climate change and 
developing resilience 
enhancement 
strategies through long-
term community 
partnerships in Yukon 

The Mountain Pine 
Beetle in Novel 
Habitats: Predicting 
Impacts to Northern 
Forests in a Yukon’s 
Warming Environment  

Vulnerability of the 
North Alaska Highway 
to Permafrost Thaw 

Sensitivity of Yukon 
Hydrological Response 
to Climate Warming 

Start 
Date 

2012 

End 
Date 

2016 

Description 

This project with the Teslin Tlingit Council and broader 
community integrated science, policy and community 
participation to assist decision-makers and community 
members in using long-term climate change considerations 
for forest management. 

Yukon government 
(EMR-FMB),  
University of British 
Columbia 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2012 

2016 

This project aims to understand the potential for mountain 
pine beetle outbreaks in Yukon and to establish 
management steps to decrease the impacts and spread of 
the beetle.  

Yukon government 
(HPW-TEB),  
Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre-
Northern Climate 
ExChange) 

Yukon government 
(ENV-WR) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2012 

2016 

Project focused on determining the vulnerability of the 
North Alaska Highway to climate change through an 
examination of permafrost occurrence and type to evaluate 
potential future effects that could impact Destruction Bay, 
Burwash Landing, and Beaver Creek. 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2012 

2014 

Project examined impact of climate change on water cycle 
processes to inform the development of adaptation 
strategies for Yukon communities.  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
51 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Start 
Date 

2013 

End 
Date 

2014 

Description 

This project aimed to improve understanding of general 
health implications of climate change for Yukon. 

Public Health 
Agency of 
Canada 

Yukon Climate 
Change Consortium:  
Council of Yukon First 
Nations,  
Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre -
Northern Climate 
ExChange),  
Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS),  
Arctic Athabaskan 
Council 

Climate Change and 
Public Health 

Examining Geophysical 
Data along 
Transportation 
Infrastructure in 
Permafrost Regions 

Landscape Hazards in 
Yukon Communities: 
Geoscience Mapping 
for Climate Change 
Adaptation Planning 

Yukon government 
(HPW-TEB) 

Transport 
Canada 

2012 

2013 

Processing and interpretation of geophysical data along 
transportation infrastructure in permafrost regions.  

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2010 

2016 

This project investigated contemporary landscape hazards 
related to permafrost degradation in Yukon communities. It 
also considers potential future landscape evolution in 
response to changes in climate.  
 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre -  
Northern Climate 
ExChange), 
Yukon government 
(EMR-YGS), 
University of 
Montreal,  
University of Ottawa, 
Yukon First Nations 
(scoping and 
community liaison) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
52 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Community 
Information & Needs 
Assessment (2008-
2010) 

Water Adaptation 
Project: Adaptive 
Management for Water 
Users Responding to 
Climate Change 

Infrastructure 
Vulnerability to 
Permafrost 
Degradation 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS); Council of 
Yukon First Nations 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Yukon government 
(ENV-WR) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2009 

2011 

Start 
Date 

2008 

End 
Date 

2011 

Description 

Project identified priority areas of community concern 
related to climate change in 13 Yukon communities and 
increased awareness of important areas for future climate 
change programming.  

Identified priority climate change areas of concern and 
monitor the impacts of climate change (on water 
resources), adapt to changes, provide access to information 
(water data). 

Yukon government 
(EMR-YGS; HPW-TEB) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2009 

2011 

Identify priority areas of concern and monitor the impacts 
of climate change on infrastructure and vulnerability of 
Yukon government buildings to permafrost thaw. 

Compilation of Energy 
Sector Case Studies 

Yukon government 
(EMR-ESC);  
 

Natural 
Resources 
Canada 

2014 

2015 

Temperature Trends 
and Impact on Energy 
Demand  

Yukon government 
(EMR-ESC);  

Natural 
Resources 
Canada 

2014 

2015 

This project looks at case studies where actions to mitigate 
and adapt to climate change in the energy sector have 
merged to determine how such actions can be repeated 
elsewhere. The co-benefits of such an approach include a 
reduction in the overall cost of responding to climate 
change that ensures the energy sector is both climate-
friendly and climate-ready.  

This project will evaluate the impacts of climate change on 
how Yukon manages energy by evaluating future electrical 
demand and supply and subsequent implications for energy 
resource planning. This work will identify potential risks and 
opportunities for the Yukon energy sector and inform 
energy resource planning going forward. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
53 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Transport 
Canada 

Yukon College 
(Yukon 
Research 
Centre-
Northern 
Climate 
ExChange) 

Canadian 
Northern 
Economic 
Development 
Agency 

Start 
Date 

2013 

End 
Date 

2015 

Description 

This project will develop guidelines and best practices for 
building management in Ross River in response to 
permafrost thaw that are transferrable to other northern 
jurisdictions. 

2014 

2015  Using permafrost data from the Yukon government’s 

Department of Energy, Mines and Resources, Highways and 
Public Works, and The Northern Climate Exchange to assess 
permafrost degradation in Dawson City to inform 
development, monitoring, maintenance and management 
decisions.  

2013 

2014 

Research project to investigate the production of silage 
from arctic char waste products.  

2012 

2018 

This project provided support to the Northern Greenhouse 
Initiative, advance Yukon agriculture and provide advice to 
Yukon farmers, processors and agri-businesses in all aspects 
of farm management, production, processing, marketing, 
conservation techniques, new farm technology and farm 
financing.  

 
54 

Permafrost and Risk 
Assessment of Key 
Buildings and 
Infrastructure in Ross 
River 

Assessment of recent 
past and current 
permafrost conditions 
under Front Street, 
Dawson City, Yukon 

Arctic Char Fish Silage 
Project 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre - 
Northern Climate 
ExChange);  

Natural 
Resources 
Canada 

Yukon government 
(EMR-YGS; HPW-TEB) 
 
Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre-
Northern Climate 
ExChange) 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre - 
Cold Climate 
Innovation), 

Canada-Yukon Growing 
Forward Agreement for 
various Agriculture 
projects 

Yukon government 
(EMR-AG) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Climate Change 
Information and 
Mainstreaming 
Program (CCIMP) 

Yukon 
government-
Environment 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS), 
Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre-
Northern Climate 
ExChange) 

Start 
Date 

2010 

End 
Date 

2016 

Description 

Provide support and expertise required for the integration 
of climate change considerations into projects, planning and 
decision-making processes for Yukon government 
departments. 
 

Establishment of 
baseline data collection 
sites and assessment of 
permafrost response to 
climate warming for 
transportation 
infrastructure in the 
Yukon and NWT 

Yukon Mines Wastes 
and Climate Change 

Yukon Climate Trends 
and Projections 

Yukon government 
(HPW-TEB) 

Transport 
Canada 

2013 

2016 

Established baseline data collection sites and assessed 
permafrost response to climate warming for transportation 
infrastructure in the Yukon and NWT. 

Government of 
Canada (NRCAN),  
Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre -
Northern Climate 
ExChange) 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre -
Northern Climate 
Exchange) 

Natural 
Resources 
Canada 

Yukon 
Environmental 
and Socio-
Economic 
Assessment 
Board (YESAB) 

2011 

2013 

Identified priority areas of concern and impacts related to 
climate change for Yukon mine waste sites.  

2011 

2012 

Analyze historical climate information and identify impact 
on YESAB’s six assessment districts. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
55 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Alaska-Canada Climate 
Biome Shift  

University of Alaska-
Fairbanks 

Ducks 
Unlimited 
Canada 

Start 
Date 

2010 

End 
Date 

2012 

Description 

Identify priority areas of concern that are undergoing 
climate-driven ecological pressures. 

Vuntut Gwitchin First 
Nation; Arctic 
Institute for 
Community-Based 
Research 

Health Canada 

2008 

2009  Multi-phased project to solicit community feedback on local 

climate change impacts in the Vuntut Gwitchin traditional 
territory, research historical adaptations to food insecurity, 
and develop new actions to improve community food 
security. 

Vuntut Gwitchin 
Climate Change and 
Health Research in 
Northern Yukon: 
---PHASE I: "Gwich'in 
Youth and Scientists 
Climate Change and 
Health Research 
Symposium in Northern 
Yukon: What do our 
changing homelands 
mean for our health?"  
---PHASE II: "What do 
our Changing 
Homelands mean for 
our Health? Phase II: 
Knowledge into Action”  
---PHASE III: 
"Community Action on 
Climate Change and 
Food Security 
Adaptation in Old 
Crow”  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
56 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Documentation, 
Mapping and 
Identifying Traditional 
Medicines 

Champagne Aishihik 
First Nation 

Health Canada 

Start 
Date 

2014 

Description 

End 
Date 

2015 

Project details unavailable. 

Good Medicine: 
Understanding and 
adapting to the effects 
of climate change on 
the use of traditional 
medicine 

Integrating Indigenous 
Knowledge and Public 
Health into a 
Community 
Contaminant and 
Climate Change 
Monitoring Program 

Climate Adaptation 
Strategies: An 
Intergenerational Effort 
to Combine Indigenous 
Knowledge and 
Western Science 

Little Salmon 
Carmacks First Nation 

Health Canada 

2014 

2015 

Project details unavailable. 

Yukon River Inter-
Tribal Watershed 
Council 

Yukon River Inter-
Tribal Watershed 
Council 

Health Canada 

2012 

2013  Held focus groups with FN citizens and government officials 

from Tr'ondek Hwech'in, Selkirk, White River, Kluane, 
Carcross-Tagish to discuss areas of concern re: water 
contamination, and to identify sites for water sampling.  

Health Canada 

2013 

2014 

Collected same water samples from five locations in five 
Yukon communities; held an intergenerational (youth and 
elder) workshop in each community to talk about climate 
change concerns and adaptation interests. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
57 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Yukon River Inter-
Tribal Watershed 
Council 

Health Canada 

First Nation Climate 
Change Policy: A 
Regional Indigenous 
Approach to CC 
Adaptation, Health, and 
water governance 

Nourishing our Future: 
Building on Kluane First 
Nations Community 
Food Security Strategy 
& Youth Engagement in 
Traditions Related to 
Fisheries and Fish 
Health in Kluane Lake 

Nourishing our Future: 
An adaptive food 
security strategy to 
ensure the cultural and 
physical wellbeing of 
the Kluane First Nation 
against the impacts of 
climate change in the 
Yukon 

Moose traditional 
Knowledge 

Start 
Date 

2014 

Description 

End 
Date 

2015  Water Action Planning: based on previous research, develop 

a water action plan to outline how First Nations and their 
traditional knowledge can take action to address concerns 
regarding the impacts of climate change and contaminants 
on water and community health. 

Kluane First Nation 

Health Canada 

2015 

2016 

Promoting the importance of consuming traditional foods 
and improving understanding of contaminant levels in 
Kluane Lake fish. Part of this research project included 
conducting interviews with Kluane First Nation (KFN) 
citizens and traditional knowledge experts in the 
community about observations regarding changes in the 
quality, quantity and health of fish from Kluane Lake as well 
as concerns about contaminants in traditional foods. 

Kluane First Nation;  
Arctic Institute for 
Community-Based 
Research 

Kluane 
Renewable 
Resource 
Council 

2013 

2014 

Project details unavailable. 

Liard First Nation 

Health Canada 

2013 

2014 

Traditional Food Security and Climate Change: Liard First 
Nation Traditional Knowledge for Monitoring and Managing 
the Moose Harvest 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
58 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in, 
Wilp Wilxo'oskwhl 
Nisga'a Institute 

Health Canada 

Start 
Date 

2013 

Description 

End 
Date 

2014  Development of a documentary film of adaptation planning, 
shelter-building, and food harvesting: a Tr'ondek Hwech'in, 
Gwich'in, and Nisga'a collaboration 

Little Salmon 
Carmacks First Nation  

Health Canada 

2012 

2013 

Project details unavailable. 

A video adaptation plan 
for healthy foods, 
shelters, and education 
in Tr'ondek Hwech'in, 
Gwich'in, and Nisga'a 
communities 

Food Security of our 
Future Leaders: Young 
Adults Build Health 
Capacity through 
Northern Community 
Gardens 

Mayo Talks Climate 
Change and Health 

To Feed Our 
Community Project 

Nacho Nyak Dun First 
Nation 

White River First 
Nation 

Health Canada 

2012 

2013 

Project details unavailable. 

Health Canada 

2010 

2011 

The project focused on potential climate change impacts on 
people with respect to food availability and storage. 

Little Salmon Carmacks 
First Nation Traditional 
Land Use Health Study  

Little Salmon 
Carmacks First Nation  

Health Canada 

2010 

2011 

Project details unavailable. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
59 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Start 
Date 

2010 

End 
Date 

2011 

Description 

The primary focus of this project was to increase the 
understanding of climate change and its impacts along the 
Yukon River within Tr'ondek Hwech'in Traditional Territory, 
and the associated health implications for the community. 

Yukon River Inter-
Tribal Watershed 
Council 

Health Canada 

2012 

2013 

Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in 

Health Canada 

2012 

2013 

The project integrated Indigenous Knowledge on climate 
change, human health risks, and suspected contaminated 
sites with site-specific community-based monitoring plans. 
The Yukon River Inter-Tribal Watershed Council (YRITWC) 
collaborated with five Yukon First Nations including Selkirk, 
Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in, Kluane, White River and Carcross / 
Tagish. 

This project examined the plant foods that have 
traditionally contributed to a healthy and diverse diet 
throughout the year for northern indigenous people. 

Teslin Tlingit Council  

Health Canada 

2010 

2011 

Project details unavailable 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in 
First Nation  

Health Canada 

A Multi-Disciplinary 
Investigation of Climate 
Change Impacts on 
Yukon River Traditional 
Foods and the 
Implications for Health 
and Tr’ondëk Hwëch’in 
River Culture and 
Lifestyle 

Integrating Indigenous 
Knowledge and Public 
Health into a 
Community 
Contaminant and 
Climate Change 
Monitoring Program 

The vital harvest: year-
round plant foods of 
Tr'ondek Hwech'in and 
Nisga'a Tradition 

Food Security and 
Climate Change: Teslin 
Tlingit Research Food 
Security and Climate 
Change Health Impacts 
in Our Community 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
60 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Culturally Important 
Plants of the Ross River 
Dena, and Associated 
Impacts Related to 
Climate 

Ross River Dena 
Council 

Health Canada 

Start 
Date 

2010 

Description 

End 
Date 

2011 

Project details unavailable 

Caribou, Culture and 
Climate Change 

Ross River Dena 
Council 

Health Canada 

2009 

2010 

Project details unavailable 

Keeping our traditions 
for the mental 
wellbeing of Selkirk 
First Nations Youth: 
What do we do at the 
fish camp when there is 
no fish? 

Climate Change and 
Health – Linking our 
Past and Future 
through our Traditions 
and Culture: An Ethno-
Botanical Resource 
Study to determine the 
Effects of Climate 
Change on Traditional 
Ecosystems  

Pilot Study on the 
Health Effects on the 
Selkirk First Nation due 
to Climate Change 

Selkirk First Nation 

Health Canada 

2015 

2016 

Project details unavailable 

Selkirk First Nation 

Health Canada 

2009 

2010 

Project details unavailable 

Selkirk First Nation 

Health Canada 

2008 

2009 

Project details unavailable 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
61 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Enhancing Knowledge 
Transfer to Decision 
Makers with Respect to 
Climate Change Impacts 
on the Cryosphere 

Scenario Planning for 
New Wildlife Species 

Natural 
Resources 
Canada 

Social Science 
and Humanities 
Research 
Council (SSHRC) 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre-
Northern Climate 
ExChange), 
Risk Science 
International 

University of 
Saskatchwan, Alsek 
Renewable Resource 
Council, Yukon Wood 
Bison Technical Team, 
Yukon Elk Technical 
Team 

Start 
Date 

2012 

End 
Date 

2013 

Description 

This project aims to enhance the resiliency of the mining 
and transportation sectors to climate change through the 
creation of knowledge products that communicate snow 
and permafrost information to industry decision-makers. 

2010 

2013 

Applied a scenario planning approach to develop wildlife 
management goals and evaluate participants’ perceptions 
of scenario planning as a development tool. 

CCFM Guidebook for 
Practitioners: 
Adaptation in Canada's 
Forest Sector 

Edwards, Pierce, and 
Ogden for Canadian 
Council of Forest 
Ministers 

Canadian 
Council of 
Forest 
Ministers 

2012 

2015 

The current guidebook, one in a series by Canadian Council 
of Forest Minister’s (CCFM) Climate Change Task Force, 
provides a “how to” tool for applying the CCFM adaptation 
framework. It brings together many of the other tools 
explored in the series to provide a comprehensive 
approach, with phases for organizational readiness, pre-
vulnerability analysis, vulnerability assessment, and 
adaptation of sustainable forest management.  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
62 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Climate Change in our 
Backyard 2: Building 
towards an Action Plan 

Climate Change Risk 
and Vulnerability 
Assessment and 
adaptation strategies 

Cost of Adaptation for 
Community Housing 
and Infrastructure 

Champagne and 
Aishinik First Nation, 
Alsek Renewable 
Resource Council, 
Yukon government 
(EMR-FMB), Council 
of Yukon First 
Nations, Yukon 
College (Yukon 
Research Centre -
Northern Climate 
ExChange) 

Champagne and 
Aishihik First Nation 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre -
Northern Climate 
Exchange) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Canadian 
Northern 
Economic 
Development 
Agency 

Start 
Date 

2008 

End 
Date 

2009 

Description 

Further discuss the results of climate change in the 
Champagne and Aishihik First Nations Traditional Territory 
with community members, and to identify ways of adapting 
to change in this region.  

2015 

2016 

Project details unavailable. 

2015 

2016 

Identifying adaptation costs for at-risk building stock in Old 
Crow, Yukon, and Arviat, NWT: This project explores the 
potential costs of climate change impacts on buildings and 
housing, as well as the costs associated with adaptive 
modifications for buildings exposed to different levels of 
risk.  

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
63 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Human Dimensions of a 
Thawing Landscape 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre -
Northern Climate 
Exchange) 

Social Science 
and Humanities 
Research 
Council (SSHRC) 

Start 
Date 

2015 

End 
Date 

2018 

Description 

Improving understanding of how permafrost thaw may 
affect traditional and cultural activities can help 
communities develop appropriate responses: the Northern 
Climate ExChange and the University of Saskatchewan 
worked with community partners in Old Crow, Yukon, and 
Jean Marie, NWT, to identify how traditional land use 
activities may be affected by permafrost thaw.  

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2008 

2009 

Awareness of the results of the National Climate Change 
Assessment was raised through public presentations and 
surveying in Yukon communities. in order to build adaptive 
capacity and identify communities for future climate change 
risk analyses. 

Impacts and Adaptation 
in Yukon Communities 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre -
Northern Climate 
Exchange), 
Council of Yukon First 
Nations,  
Vuntut Gwitch'in First 
Nation,  
Arctic Athabaskan 
Council,  
Environment Canada 
(Northern Ecosystem 
Initiative) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
64 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Water Temperature 
Data  Collection 
Program 

Ta’an Kwäch’än 
Council 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Start 
Date 

2009 

End 
Date 

2011 

Description 

Collected water temperature date and developed a 
technical report on monitoring freshwater thermal regimes 
and a guidebook for use of data loggers to measure water 
temperatures in SW Yukon. 

 

Supporting the 
development of 
Regional Climate 
Change Scenarios 

Assessing the 
Vulnerability to Climate 
Change and Adaptive 
Capacity of Yukon 
Forest Tree Species and 
Ecosystems" 

Northern Climate 
ExChange Community 
Adaptation Project 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS); 
Council of Yukon First 
Nations; 
Yukon College - 
Northern Research 
Institute; 

Yukon government 
(ENV; EMR-FMB) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2008 

2011 

Project details unavailable. 

2008 

2011 

Project details unavailable. 

Northern 
Strategy Trust 

 

2010 

Climate change adaptation planning and implementation of 
adaptation actions in three Yukon communities. 

Yukon College (Yukon 
Research Centre-
Northern Climate 
Exchange) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
65 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Old Crow Climate 
Change Risk 
Assessment and Final 
Agreement Analysis 

Arctic Athabaskan 
Council; Vuntut 
Gwitchin First Nations 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Start 
Date 

2008 

End 
Date 

2009 

Description 

Local and scientific methods were used to observe and 
evaluate climate change impacts in Old Crow, and a final 
report was produced to give recommendations for further 
action (i.e. the development of a risk management and 
adaptation plan). Information concerning the assessments 
and other aspects of the project was collected and 
disseminated via General Assemblies and gatherings and 
presentations were conducted on climate change impacts 
and programs and initiatives to various forums (local, 
regional and national meetings and workshops). 

Ecological Initiatives of 
the Yukon Invasive 
Species Council 

Climate Change 
Community Liaison 

Yukon Invasive 
Species Council 

Council of Yukon First 
Nations; Yukon 
government (ENV-
CCS) 

Environment 
and Climate 
Change Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2012 

2013 

Project details unavailable. 

2016 

2017 

Establishment of a Climate Change Community Liaison 
position at CYFN to inform and enable Yukon First Nations 
to build adaptation capacity and develop community-led 
responses to local climate change challenges. 
 

Wildfire Risk 
Assessment 
Methodology 

Yukon government 
(CS-WFM) 

Yukon 
government -
Environment 

2016 

2017  Development of a potential approach to assessing climate 

change impacts on wildfire risk in Yukon. 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

 
66 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Arctic Institute for 
Community Based 
Research 

POLAR Canada 

Start 
Date 

2017 

End 
Date 

2019 

Description 

 Identifying and training local community champions in 
Yukon communities to build adaptive capacity, improving 
local responses to current and future climate change 
impacts. 

Mobilizing Knowledge 
for developing 
Indigenous Community 
Champions for Climate 
Change Adaptation in 
Yukon 

Greater Whitehorse 
permafrost 
characterization, 
monitoring, and climate 
change analysis 

Monitoring and 
planning for health 
impacts of Extreme 
Weather Events and 
Wildfires 

Permafrost study on 
Yukon government 
buildings 

Yukon government 
(EMR-YGS) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2017 

2021 

Characterizing and mapping permafrost in the Greater 
Whitehorse Area (GWA).  

Yukon government 
(HSS-CPRM) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2017 

2018 

Exploring opportunities to improve emergency 
preparedness to reduce the health, social and economic 
impacts of extreme weather events and wildfires in the 
territory.  

Yukon government 
(HPW-PMD) 

Yukon Climate Change 
Needs Assessment 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS) 

Climate Risk 
Assessment for Yukon 
government 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS) 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

2017 

2021 

This project examines potential risks facing Yukon 
government buildings constructed on permafrost, and 
develops building-specific action plans to mitigate these 
risks and adapt to future permafrost thaw. 

2018 

2021  Developing a process to gather data on climate change 

2017 

2020 

needs and priorities in Yukon communities, and using this 
data to make recommendations for future adaptation work 
in Yukon.  

Creating a climate risk framework to identify and reduce 
climate change related risk for Yukon government 
operations, programs and assets.  

 
67 

Yukon ‘State of Play’: Analysis of Climate Change Impacts and Adaptation 
 

November 14, 2017 

Title 

Implementing Org(s) 

Funding Org(s) 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Indigenous and 
Northern 
Affairs Canada 

Mapping and assessing 
climate-related 
landcover change 

Yukon government 
(ENV-FW) 

Yukon Adaptation 
Forum 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS) 

Predicting the effects of 
climate change on 
winter ticks and their 
hosts in Yukon 

Kluane watershed 
salmon climate change 
adaptation project 

Yukon government 
(ENV-AHU) 

Yukon government 
(ENV-WR) 

Linking a changing 
climate with a changing 
traditional diet 

Yukon government 
(EMR-AG) 

Permafrost 
vulnerability mapping - 
Dempster Highway Km 
65-200 

Yukon government 
(HPW-TEB) 

CCPN program 
administration 

Yukon government 
(ENV-CCS) 

 

 

 
RESEARCH NORTHWEST & MORRISON HERSHFIELD 

Start 
Date 

2017 

Description 

End 
Date 

2020  Mapping climate change-related landcover change to 

2020 

2021 

2017 

2021 

identify where and how land is changing, predict future 
changes, and assess vulnerability and resiliency of wildlife 
habitat.  

An event for people across sectors and communities to 
share information about climate change adaptation-related 
initiatives in Yukon.  

This project will provide an understanding of the impacts of 
climate change on wildlife parasites and support proactive 
management decisions.  

2017 

2021  Mapping and monitoring groundwater quality in Kluane 

2017 

2021 

2018 

2021 

2017 

2021 

Lake and River to generate baseline information about the 
preferences of the keystone chum salmon species for 
spawning areas.  

This project aims to improve understanding of the 
importance of self/family, community, and territory food 
sufficiency and sovereignty in the face of changing climate 
and to inform Yukon strategies and policies with respect to 
climate change adaptation for local food systems.  

Providing a tool for Yukon Highways and Public Works 
(HPW) to proactively consider threats to the Dempster 
Highway from the melt of massive ice-bodies.  

Supporting Yukon government’s capacity to advance 
Climate Change Preparedness in the North funded climate 
change adaptation initiatives within and outside 
government. 

 
68 

