Flood Recovery for your   
Home or Business

Be prepared 
What you need to know

Flood recovery for your home or business

Table of Contents

New Brunswick Emergency Measures Organization 
(NB EMO) ..................................................................... 1 

Flood Recovery – Everything you need to know ..... 1 
 

Your Property ........................................................................................ 1 
About Your House - A Homeowner’s Checklist ......................... 1
How to Chlorinate your Well Water ............................................... 5 

 

Disaster Financial Assistance ...................................   9
Recovery Program .............................................................................10 
 
Disaster Financial Assistance .........................................................10

Service New Brunswick

1-888-298-8555
www.snb.ca/emo

1

Be prepared

2

Flood recovery for your home or business

New Brunswick Emergency Measures Organization (NB EMO)

NB EMO’s Role and Process for Disaster Financial Assistance

Protecting People, Property and the Environment
The New Brunswick Emergency Measures Organization (NB EMO) co-ordinates 
preparedness for emergencies. At the federal, provincial and municipal levels, 
planning is the key to emergency preparedness. A well established and tested 
emergency plan helps to ensure a prompt and co-ordinated response by 
responsible agencies in a time of crisis. NB EMO also co-ordinates provincial 
response operations during emergencies and administers the disaster 
financial assistance program.

Flood Recovery – Everything you need to know
Your property

As the owner of the affected property it is your responsibility to ensure that it 
is a safe and healthy environment for you and those who occupy it. You must 
therefore take appropriate steps to ensure that clean up and recovery begins 
as soon as possible and not to wait for Government Assistance.

About your House – A Homeowner’s Checklist

After a flood, it is important to restore your home to good order as soon as 
possible to protect your health and prevent further damage to property and 
belongings. Whether you do the work yourself or hire a contractor, this handy 
checklist will help you organize the clean up. Immediate action is important. 
Your house and furnishings are less likely to grow mould if contents are dried 
within 48 hours.

Before you begin

•	

•	

Put your own safety first. Avoid electrical shock. If you are 
experiencing flooding and need to be disconnected or reconnected, 
call NB Power at 1-800-663-6272.

Record details of damage, with photos or video if possible. Contact 
your insurance agent immediately.

1

Be prepared

•	

•	

•	

Register your flood damages with 
298-8555 or online at www.snb.ca/emo

Service New Brunswick at 1-888-

Set up a step-by-step action plan to remove all water, mud and other 
debris; dispose of contaminated household goods and rinse away 
contamination inside the home. Detailed information is available 
online from the NB Department of Health www.gnb.ca/health
Be prepared to make difficult decisions about what to keep and what 
to throw out. Make sure the building is structurally safe. Look for 
buckled walls or floors. Watch for holes in the floor, broken glass and 
other potentially dangerous debris. If in doubt, contact a professional.

Protect Yourself When Cleaning Your Home

For personal protection during clean-up, wear rubber gloves and other 
protective clothing. Avoid direct skin contact with contaminated material. 
Practice good personal hygiene (i.e. wash hands before eating or smoking) 
and change outer clothing before entering a “clean” residence.

Heating

Do not heat your home to more than four degrees Celsius (about 40 degrees 
Fahrenheit) until all water is removed.

If you use pumps or heaters powered by gasoline, kerosene or propane, buy 
and install a carbon monoxide sensor. Combustion devices can produce 
large amounts of lethal carbon monoxide when they are not tuned-up or are 
improperly ventilated.

Mould and Mildew

To avoid the health hazards of mildew and mould, water soaked walls and 
insulation should be removed, and the space and studding allowed to dry 
thoroughly. Walls constructed of gyproc, plaster or wood will dry out in time 
but insulation in these walls in no longer effective. As insulation becomes 
water soaked the weight causes it to settle and compact at the bottom, 
leaving a large portion of the wall no longer insulated. 

Caution: Obtain approval from assessors, insurance agents and other relevant 
agencies before discarding or destroying any furniture or equipment.

2

Flood recovery for your home or business

Food Affected by Flooding

To avoid the health hazards of food contamination, all perishable goods, 
vacuum-packed foods and any other foods affected by flooding should be 
thrown out. Undamaged commercially-canned food properly identified by 
labels, containers which show no leaks, swelling or rusting at joints or edges 
should be thoroughly washed and dried. Vacuum-packed foods pose a special 
hazard due to dried waste material inside crevices and covers. They should  
be discarded.

Home preserves, meats, fish or dairy products should be discarded as unsafe 
if they have been affected by flood water. Frozen foods left in a freezer will 
stay frozen for a few days without electricity if the door is kept shut. These 
products can be refrozen if ice crystals are still present and the food has not 
been exposed to flood waters. All perishable food left in a refrigerator more 
than 24 hours without electricity should be discarded.

Cooking and eating utensils should be cleaned of all deposits, washed with 
household detergent or soap and rinsed for at least two full minutes in a mixture 
containing 15 millilitres (one table spoon) of liquid bleach in 4.5 litres (one 
gallon) of water. Utensils used for infant feeding should be boiled before use.

Refrigerators, Freezers, Stoves and Other Appliances

Appliances (that have not been partially and entirely immersed in flood 
water) and food contact surfaces should be cleaned as follows:

•	
•	

•	

Ensure electrical power is turned off.
Clean the unit thoroughly with a detergent solution, rinse with clean 
water that has been previously boiled, and then wash with a solution 
containing one-half cup of bleach in nine litres (two gallons) of water.
Allow to dry with door kept open.

Note: Any appliance that has been partially or wholly immersed in water is no longer 
insulated. It cannot be dried without removal. A qualified service technician should be 
contacted before the appliance is put into service or thrown out.

Hazardous Products

Household hazardous products, such as pesticides, can also cause problems. 
Contaminated items and surfaces should also be cleaned. Although small 
amounts of household hazardous products or agricultural products can 

3

Be prepared

be placed in plastic bags and discarded with domestic garbage, significant 
quantities should be handled differently, under the advice of the Department 
of Environment.

Basements and Rooms

It is important to use a good soap or detergent, “elbow grease”, and lots of hot 
water when cleaning.

Walls, solid floors, and ceilings should be thoroughly scrubbed with a good 
detergent or soap and water. Avoid household bleach. Organic content 
and pH in flood waters as well as contact time required for bleach to kill 
microorganisms may render bleach ineffective. For significant flood or water 
damage, you may consult with an air quality specialist or professional cleaner.

Water and wastes can be removed by pumping, pails, shovels, etc. Wastes 
should be buried at least 15 metres (50 feet) away from the source of any 
water supply. Lime may be used to cover wastes before covering with soil. This 
advice applies to all waste disposals in the following section. Oil or petroleum 
products are usually removed with Varsol or similar products.

After cleaning, open doors and windows to air thoroughly and help the 
drying process.

Oil Clean-up

An oil spill which occurs in a house could create a contamination problem 
that can be difficult to correct. Peat moss can be used to remove floating 
oil. If only finished basement walls have been affected, the odour can be 
eliminated by removing and discarding the wall covering, studding, insulation 
and any other permeable material. Caution should be taken in using electrical 
equipment during cleaning since the fumes could ignite and cause an explosion. 
Dispersants should be avoided in cases where oil tanks have been ruptured.

Household Furnishings

Solid wood or metal furniture can be cleaned with a household detergent 
solution, wiping clean and then wiping dry. Furniture should be left to dry 
outside before furniture polish may be applied where needed. Upholstered 
furniture and mattresses affected by flooding should not be used.

4

Flood recovery for your home or business

Reminder: Anything that stays wet long enough will grow mould; mould can 
make people sick. Dry everything quickly to avoid future health problems.

Water Contamination

Private water supplies affected by flooding should not be used until they have 
been disinfected and tested. Until tests indicate a safe water supply, water for 
drinking and personal use should be brought to a rolling boil for at least  
1 minute and then stored in clean covered containers. Communicate with 
your local Health Protection Branch office for information on how to proceed 
to have your water tested. 
For more information and useful links, visit the River Watch website:  
www.gnb.ca/riverwatch

How to chlorinate your well water

If you rely on a well for your water, you may have to chlorinate it from time to 
time. Chlorination refers to the process of flushing your well and water system 
with a chlorine solution.

This process is usually applied in order to accomplish one of the following:

•	
•	

•	
•	
•	

Disinfecting to “neutralize” coliform bacteria
Disinfecting after making repairs to your well or following extended 
period of non-use
Temporary elimination of hydrogen sulphide (or “rotten egg”) odours
Temporary removal of iron and manganese build-up
Removal of bacteria that create slime

Read all of the instructions before proceeding!

1. 

2. 

3. 

Before you begin the chlorination process, store enough water to 
meet your household needs for a minimum of 24 hours.

Next, remove any filter, water conditioners, or any type of water 
treatment system, or find a way to by-pass them during chlorination.

Use the chart below to determine the amount of chlorine solution 
that is recommended for your water system. For dug wells use 
approximately 1 litre of chlorine solution for every 100 litres of water.

5

Be prepared

Note: The chlorine solution is simply common unscented household bleach, 
containing 3-5% sodium hypochlorite.

Volume of Chlorine Solution Chart

Vol. of Chlorine Solution (litres) per diameter of Well

Well Depth (ft)

4 inch

5 inch

6 inch

less than 50

50-100

101-150

151-200

201-250

251-300

301-350

351-400

1

2

3.5

4.5

5.5

7

8

9

2

4

7

9

11

13.5

16

18

3.5

7

10

13.5

17

20.5

24

27

4. 

Pour the chlorine solution into your well. If your well head is buried, 
excavation is probably required. An alternative is to apply the 
chlorine solution through an air line, if there is one leading from the 
well to your home.

There are two methods for using the air line: you can either insert the 
air line into the container of chlorine solution and pump your well 
until all the solution  is consumed, or simply pour the solution into 
the air line (If you use either of these methods, flush the air line out 
with clean water after chlorinating your well).

5. 

Attach a garden hose to an outside faucet and place the other end 
into the well. Turn on the outside faucet and allow the water to 
circulate for approximately 1 hour.

Note: If your well head is buried and you choose not to excavate, or the garden hose 
cannot be connected to the air line, disregard this step.

6

Flood recovery for your home or business

6. 

Open each faucet in your water distribution system, (including 
inside and outside faucets, cold and hot water faucets, dishwashers, 
toilets, baths and showers), one at a time, until the smell of chlorine is 
apparent, then quickly shut them off. This will thoroughly chlorinate 
your water distribution system. 

Note: During this procedure, chlorinated water that is permitted to enter your sewage 
system should be kept to a minimum, as an excess amount of chlorine may affect the 
biological activity of a septic tank system.

7. 

8. 

Do not operate your water system for a minimum of 8 hours 
(overnight, for example) or longer if possible. A 24 hour period is 
recommended, but may not always be practical.

Place the end of your garden hose in an outside location where the 
chlorinated water will not run into a natural waterway (such as a 
stream, brook, lake, etc.) or damage any desired vegetation (like your 
vegetable garden). Allow the water to flow until a strong chlorine 
odour is no longer apparent (generally 2 to 3 hours). If you have a low 
yield well, be careful not to pump the well dry.

Note: During this procedure, the water may have the colour of tea, but the colour will 
improve after a short period of time. Aeration screens in faucets and the cold water 
inlet of washing machines may become plugged with sediment. For water systems 
equipped with jet pumps, there is also a possibility that the jet may become clogged 
with sediment. It is important to keep this in mind, especially if the jet is located in the 
well column, which may require excavation of the well head.

9. 

Turn on each faucet in the house (one at a time), and run the water 
until the odour of chlorine is no longer present. It is recommended 
that you do not drink the water during this flushing period.

10. 

Once the flushing process is complete you may resume normal use of 
your water, keeping in mind that it may be two to three days before 
the chlorine odour and taste is completely gone. 

Note: If you chlorinated your well to address a coliform bacteria problem, you should 
have your well water tested at an accredited lab before using it again. To do this, you 
will need to collect a water sample about one week after you have chlorinated your 
system and have it analyzed immediately after collecting it (within 24 hours).

11. 

If the chlorination process results in a noticeable improvement in 
your water quality, but the problem redevelops after two to three 
weeks, repeat steps 1 to 9, using two to three times the amount of 

7

Be prepared

chlorine solution recommended for your water system. In addition, 
you should increase the period of time in which you do not operate 
your water system (step 7) to a minimum of 24 hours.

A final note

Depending on the characteristics of your well water quality, it may be 
necessary to chlorinate your well system more than once a year. Chlorination 
may or may not improve your water quality, and in some cases, provides only 
a temporary or short-term solution.

There are many household water treatment systems available that are 
approved by the National Sanitation Foundation (NSF). Look for a listing of 
retailers who carry these systems, in the yellow pages of the telephone book.

Questions? Need more Information?

If you have any questions or require additional information, please contact 
any office of the New Brunswick Department of Environment. You can also 
contact the Department of Environment by calling our general number (506) 
453-2690 or by visiting our website at the following address:  
www.gnb.ca/0009/index-e.asp 
 
You can contact any office of the New Brunswick Department of Health or visit 
their website at this address: www.gnb.ca/0051/index-e.asp

8

Flood recovery for your home or business

Disaster Financial Assistance / Recovery Program

What is Disaster Financial Assistance (DFA)?

Disaster Financial Assistance is a program managed by New Brunswick 
Emergency Measures Organization within the Department of Public Safety. 
There are two important steps to this program. 

First Step: After any disaster, NB EMO assesses the damages that have 
occurred.

Second Step: Based on the information received and the Disaster Financial 
Assistance Policy, NB EMO makes a recommendation to government. 
Government then decides if a financial assistance program is needed. No 
assistance can be given until government approves a Disaster Financial 
Assistance Program.

If you need assistance call Service New Brunswick at the following toll-
free number 1-888-298-8555.

It is important to note that we all have a duty to safeguard ourselves, and 
property from damage. Therefore, the Disaster Financial Assistance program 
does not pay for any damage or loss that is, or could be, covered by an 
insurance policy. Assistance, when provided, is only available after all other 
forms of disaster aid have been received and only covers uninsurable loss.

You should contact your insurance company immediately to find out if the 
damage you suffered is covered by your policy.

Record details of damage, with photos or video if possible. After 
contacting your insurance agent, immediately register with NB EMO by 
calling 1-888-298-8555. 

If Government approves a disaster financial assistance program, is there 
a deductible amount I have to pay?

Yes, a deductible will be applied and is announced when the program is 
announced. The deductible is automatically waived for clients of Social 
Development. It may also be waived in cases of low income.

9

Be prepared

Recovery Program

The recovery program will allow residents to receive information and register 
their flood-related damage with a single telephone call, and will put health 
and safety inspection teams in contact with residents in the flood-affected 
areas to allow them to return to their homes more quickly.

Registering with SNB at 1-888-298-8555 is the first step in the recovery 
process, which includes three elements:

•	

•	

•	

Complementary assistance
ensure safety. 
Health and safety inspections
repairs are required for residents to safely return to their homes.
Disaster financial assistance
covering eligible costs of repairs. 

, which may be available to assist in 

, including water and electrical testing to 

, to assess damage and determine what 

Disaster Financial Assistance

When a Disaster Financial Assistance program is approved by government, 
local radio and newspapers will carry information on the program and 
deadlines for application. You will receive a guide book with all necessary 
application forms in the mail.

10

