Protect Your Home   
from Flooding 

LOW-COST PROJECTS YOU CAN DO YOURSELF 

FLOODING IS THE MOST COMMON AND COSTLY DISASTER 
 
IN THE UNITED STATES AND CAN HAPPEN ANYWHERE. 
 

However, there are many ways to reduce your home’s risk of fooding, 
 
and not all of them are diffcult or expensive. This guide briefy describes 
 
some of the smaller, lower cost actions you can take yourself or with minor 
 
assistance from others. It also suggests places you can go to fnd more 
 
information about food mitigation techniques, including some of these. 

You have many food mitigation options as a homeowner. As you begin 
 
to think about which might be the best for you and your home, consider 
 
following these three key steps: 

 

1. Know Your Risk. Anywhere it can rain, it can food–so we all live in a 
 
 
food zone, and we all live with the risk of food damage to our property. Learn 
 
more details about your home’s level of food risk, including the type of food 
 
zone it is in and, if available, the potential food elevation (referred to as the 
 
“base food elevation” on a food map). A good place to start is FEMA’s online 
 
Flood Map Service Center at 
. You can also visit the 
 
offcials in your community who maintain the FEMA food maps and elevation 
 
certifcates; they may work in the local planning and zoning offce or in the 
 
building department. Talk to them, your neighbors, and others about any past 
food events and how high the water has risen in the past at or near your home. 

www.msc.fema.gov/portal/

 

2. Insure Your Property. As a homeowner, it’s important to insure your home 
 
 
and personal belongings. Even if your home is in a low- or moderate-risk food 
 
zone, purchasing a food insurance policy is highly recommended. It provides 
 
you with fnancial protection from a food event. Flood damage isn’t covered by 
 
standard homeowners insurance policies, and just a few inches of foodwater 
 
can end up costing thousands of dollars in repairs. More than 25 percent 
 
of food insurance claims come from properties that are not in an identifed 
 
high-risk zone, but most homeowners in these areas are eligible for coverage 
 
at a preferred rate. Preferred Risk Policy premiums are the lowest premiums 
available, offering building and contents coverage for one low price. 

 

3. Reduce Your Risk. Decide how to prepare your family and protect your 
 
 
home from fooding. Consider which of the methods included in this guide are 
  
most appropriate and practical, based on your home’s food risk, and create 
 
a plan to mitigate the risk to your property. Even after a mitigation project, 
  
some risk will remain, so learn about more actions to prepare and protect 
your family, home, and belongings at 

www.ready.gov/make-a-plan. 

Please be aware that food mitigation measures need to be 
 
tailored to the property in question. Depending on the project, 
 
you may need to consult local architects, engineers, contractors, 
 
landscapers, or other experts in design and construction. Also, 
 
changes to properties and buildings often require permits or other 
 
regulatory approvals. Your local planning and zoning offce or 
 
building department is a good place to start for advice on how to 
 
best proceed. Lastly, please remember to be kind to your neighbors! 
 
Consulting adjacent property owners is very important when 
 
any actions on your property, such as extending downspouts or 
 
regrading areas between homes, could affect their property. 

•  Install a rain barrel. A rain barrel is an alternative method for 

   

dealing with rainwater. Rain barrels are typically connected to gutter 
downspouts and collect the runoff from roofs. You can use this stored 
water for non-potable uses such as watering the lawn and gardens or 
washing your car. 

•  Elevate utilities and service equipment. Raise and anchor air 
 

   

conditioning condensers, heat pumps, water meters and other service 
 
equipment onto pedestals or platforms that are at least 1 foot above 
the potential food elevation. For identifed high-risk zones this means 
going to or above the regulatory food elevation for the property as 
adopted by the local community. This inexpensive action can help 
prevent signifcant damage and disruption following a food event. 

•  Anchor outdoor fuel tanks. Attach outdoor fuel tanks to a large 

   

concrete slab that weighs enough to resist the force of foodwaters, 
or install inexpensive ground anchors that are connected across 
the top of the tank with metal straps. Unanchored fuel tanks can be 
easily moved and ruptured by foodwaters and pose serious threats to 
people, property, and the environment. If located in an identifed high-
risk zone, fuel tanks should also be elevated to or above the regulatory 
food elevation as adopted by the local community. If not feasible then 
all flling and ventilation tubes should be elevated so that foodwaters 
cannot enter the tank. 

OUTSIDE THE HOME 

For the exterior areas of your property, consider taking the 
 
following actions: 

•  Maintain proper water runoff and drainage. Routinely clean and 
   
 

 

 
 

maintain gutters, downspouts, and splashpads so that rainwater from your 
 
roof fows easily away from your home. Also, make sure that any nearby 
drainage ditches or storm drains are clear of debris and functioning 
properly. 

•  Improve lot grading. Determine how water fows or accumulates 
 

   

around your home to identify potential trouble spots (often easy to see 
 
during an average rainstorm). Stormwater should always drain away from 
 
the building; if necessary, change your landscaping to improve runoff. 
 
This may include building up any sunken areas around the foundation, 
 
digging small depressions to properly channel water, and otherwise 
 
improving the yard so that it slopes away from your home. 

•  Reduce impervious surfaces around your home. Water runs off 
 

   

concrete and asphalt almost immediately and can exceed the capacity 
 
of storm sewers quickly during heavy rains. Retaining and creating 
 
natural green space around your home can help reduce sewer overfows 
 
by reducing stormwater runoff. Consider options such as rain gardens, 
 
vegetated swales, or pervious pavements, which allow more water to be 
 
absorbed by the ground. 
 

INSIDE THE HOME 

For interior areas below the potential food elevation, consider 
 
making the following alterations: 

•  Protect your valuable possessions. Move important documents and 
   
 

other valuable or sentimental items to a safer location, well above the 
 
potential food elevation and/or inside watertight containers. 

•  Seal your foundation and basement walls. Close any foundation 
   
 

cracks with mortar and masonry caulk or hydraulic cement, which 
 
expands and flls gaps completely. Seal walls in your basements with 
 
waterproofng compounds to avoid seepage. Make sure any foor drains 
 
are clear of obstructions. 

•  Install food vents. Flood vents are small permanent openings that 
 

   

allow foodwater to fow freely through an enclosure such as a crawlspace 
 
or garage. Properly positioned and installed food vents protect homes 
 
during foods by preventing water pressure buildup that can destroy walls 
 
and foundations. Flood openings may be required for lower enclosures of 
 
homes being built in high-risk food zones, but they can also be installed in 
 
existing homes. Once installed, make sure your food vents are kept free 
 
of debris and will allow the free-fow of foodwater. 

•  Install a sump pump. Sump pumps, which pump groundwater away 
 

   

from your home, can be an excellent defense against basement seepage 
 
and fooding. They draw in the groundwater from around the house 
 
and direct it away from the structure through drainage pipes. Be sure 
 
to choose a device with battery-operated backup, in case of electrical 
 
power failure. 
  

 

•  Prevent sewer backups. Install drain plugs for all basement foor 
   
 

drains to prevent sewer backups. Another recommended option, 
 
regardless of the potential food elevation, is to install sewer backfow 
 
valves for all pipes entering the building. These devices, which allow 
 
water to fow only one direction, prevent foodwater and wastewater from 
 
backing up into your home through toilets, sinks, and other drains. They 
 
are available in a variety of designs that range from simple to complex, 
 
but they should be installed by a qualifed, licensed plumber. 
 

•  Use food-resistant building materials. 
   
 

FLOOD PREPAREDNESS 

 
You may be able to take additional actions immediately before an 
 
expected food event that will prevent or reduce food damage to 
your home: 

 
•  Activate food protection devices (turn on sump pumps, close backfow 

   

valves, etc.). 

•  Shut off electricity at the breaker panel. 

   

 
•  Safeguard important paperwork and move furniture, rugs, electronics, 

   

 
and other valuable belongings to upper foors, or at least off the foor of 
the ground level. 

 
•  Elevate major appliances onto concrete blocks. 

   

 
•  Clean gutters, downspouts, and splash pads, along with any nearby 

   

 
drainage ditches or storm drains; clear snow and ice away from 
foundations. 

 
•  Deploy temporary food barriers, such as portable food gates or shields, 

   

sandbags, infatable foodwalls, and food skirts. 

 

 

 

 
 
— Replace wooden foorboards and carpets with ceramic tile, vinyl, 

 
rubber, or other food-resistant materials. Use moveable rugs instead 
 
of ftted carpets. 

— Replace internal walls and ceilings with food-resistant material such 
 
 

 
as lime plaster, cement board, concrete, or pressure-treated and 
 
decay-resistant wood. 

— Replace wooden doors and window frames with metal or other food-
 

 
resistant options. 
  

 

•  Raise electrical system components. Increase the height of electric 
   
 
service panels (fuse and circuit breaker boxes) and all outlets, switches, 
 
and wiring to at least 1 foot above the potential food elevation. These 
 
modifcations should be made by a licensed electrician. 

•  Protect utilities and service equipment. Move the main parts 

   

 

of your heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems to 
a higher foor or the attic. Consider raising other major appliances, 
such as washers, dryers, and hot water heaters, above the ground 
foor. If relocation or elevation is not possible, you can protect service 
equipment in place using low foodwalls and shields. Alternative 
options such as replacing traditional hot water heaters with tankless 
units should also be considered. 

•  Anchor indoor fuel tanks. Anchor fuel tanks by attaching them to 
 

   

 

a large concrete slab that weighs enough to resist the force 
of foodwaters. 

 

•  Install a food alert system. A variety of food sensors and other early 
 

   

warning devices can alert you to the risk of imminent fooding so that 
 
you can take preventative or protective actions before extensive damage 
 
occurs (see “Flood Preparedness”). 
 

WANT TO LEARN MORE? 

Contact your local community offcials. Start with the local 
  
planning and zoning offce or building department, and ask 
  
to speak with the designated foodplain administrator. 

Consult local contractors or design professionals with food 
 
mitigation expertise. 
 

Visit the following websites: 

FEMA, Protect Your Property 
www.fema.gov/protect-your-property 

FEMA Region III, Mitigation Division 
www.fema.gov/region-iii-mitigation 

FloodSmart 
www.foodsmart.gov 
  

Read more detailed publications available from FEMA: 

Homeowner’s Guide to Retroftting 
www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/480 

Reducing Flood Risk to Residential Buildings That Cannot Be Elevated. 
www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/109669 
 

Protecting Your Home and Property from Flood Damage. 
 
www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/21471 
 

Protecting Building Utility Systems from Flood Damage. 
 
www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/3729 
 

Protect Your Property from Flooding. 
www.fema.gov/media-library/assets/documents/13261 
 

