 

 

Spring	  Flooding:	  Risks	  and	  Protection	  

 

 

WHAT	  YOU	  SHOULD	  KNOW	  

 
 
While spring brings the promise of warm weather and longer days, it also brings a variety of conditions 
that can include heavy rains, severe weather, and rapid snowmelt that can increase your flood risk. 
Don’t be caught off guard.  Get the facts.  Know the risks.  Take action to protect yourself, your family, 
your business, and your finances—before a weather event occurs and it’s too late. 
SPRING FLOOD RISKS 
Spring Thaw.  Warmer temperatures and resulting snow melt can produce large amounts of runoff in a 
short period of time, as each cubic foot of compacted snow contains gallons of water.  During the early 
spring, frozen land prevents melting snow or rainfall from seeping into the ground.  The water then runs 
off the surface and flows into lakes, streams, and rivers, causing excess water to spill over their banks.  
Add seasonal storms to the mix, and the result is often severe spring flooding. 
Spring Rains.  Spring storms can bring several inches of precipitation in just hours or can stall out over 
an area for days.  These heavy rains can lead to severe flooding by oversaturating the ground, 
overfilling storm drains, or causing rivers to spill over their banks or levees.    
Flash Flooding.  A flash flood is a rapid flooding of low-lying areas in less than six hours, which is 
caused by intense rainfall from a thunderstorm or several thunderstorms.  Flash floods can also occur 
when there are drought-like conditions.  
Levees and Dams.  The U.S. has thousands of miles of levees and dams that are designed to protect 
against a certain level of flooding.  These structures can erode and weaken over time, and they can 
also be overtopped—or even fail—during larger flood events. 
KNOW YOUR RISK 
Everyone is at risk for spring flooding, yet many remain unprotected.  Just a few inches of water can 
cause tens of thousands of dollars in damage.  Between 2006 and 2010, the average flood claim was 
nearly $34,000.  That’s more than many survivors can afford to pay out of pocket for damages due to 
flooding, and without flood insurance, many must cover the costs to repair or rebuild on their own.  
Consider your risk and the consequences of a flood event, and make the choice to protect yourself. 

BE FLOODSMART – REDUCE YOUR RISK 
A flood does not have to be a catastrophic event to bring high out-of-pocket costs, and you don’t have 
to live in a high-risk flood area to suffer flood damage.  Around twenty percent of flood insurance claims 
occur in moderate-to-low-risk zones.  Property owners should remember: 
  The time to prepare is now.  Visit ready.gov/floods for more on family preparedness for flood 
and other emergencies.  There are a number of steps individuals and families can take to better 
prepare themselves for flooding and reduce their risks.  Remember to have a family evacuation 
plan, put an emergency kit together, and keep important papers and valuables in a safe, dry place. 
Gather supplies in case of a storm, strengthen your home against damage, and review your 
insurance coverages.   

  Only flood insurance covers flood damage.  Most standard homeowners policies do not cover 

flood damage. Remember: it typically takes 30 days for a new flood insurance policy to go into 
effect, so get your policy now.  Flood insurance is also affordable.  An average flood policy costs 
around $600 a year, and rates start at just $129 a year for homes in moderate-to-low-risk areas.   

	  

1 

 Federal	  Emergency	  Management	  Agency	  

 

Visit floodsmart.gov (or call 1-800-427-2419) to learn more about individual flood risk, explore 
coverage options, and to find an agent in your area. 
Before A Flood 
  Practice your family emergency plan.  Plan and practice flood evacuation routes from home, 

work, and school that are on higher ground. 

  Conduct a thorough home inventory.  Thorough documentation of your belongings will help you 

file your flood insurance claim.  For more information, visit http://www.ready.gov/insurance-vital-
records. 

During A Flood 
  Go to higher ground.  Get out of areas subject to flooding, including dips, low spots, washes, etc. 
  Avoid areas already flooded, especially when water flows fast.  Do not attempt to cross flowing 

streams.  Just six inches of moving water can knock you off your feet. 

  Never drive through flooded roadways.  Roadbeds may be washed out under flood waters and 

just two feet of moving water can sweep an SUV off the road. 

After A Flood 
  Check for damage.  Check for structural damage before re-entering your home.  If you suspect 

damage to water, gas, electric, or sewer lines, contact authorities. 

  Remove wet contents immediately.  Wet carpeting, furniture, bedding and any other items 

holding moisture can develop mold within 24 to 48 hours.  Clean and disinfect everything touched 
by floodwaters. 

  Plan before you repair.  Contact your local building inspections or planning office or your county 

clerk’s office to get more information on local building requirements. 

  File your flood insurance claim.  Be sure to provide: the name of your insurance company, your 

policy number, and contact information.  Take photos of any water in the house and damaged 
personal property.  Make a detailed list of all damaged or lost items. 

2 

