S
I
S
E
H
T
N
Y
S

SYNTHESIS

Lead Authors:
Fiona J. Warren and Donald S. Lemmen (Natural Resources Canada)

Recommended Citation: 
Warren, F.J. and Lemmen, D.S. (2014): Synthesis; in Canada in a 
Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, 
(ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
ON, p. 1-18.

SUMMARY 

Over the past 5 years, our understanding of climate change impacts and adaptation in Canada has increased both as a result 
of new research and through practical experience.  Key conclusions arising from this update to the 2008 assessment report  
‘From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate’ include:

1. Canada’s climate is changing, with observed changes in air temperature, precipitation, snow and ice cover and other

indicators. Further changes in climate are inevitable.

2. Changes in climate are increasingly affecting Canada’s natural environment, economic sectors and the health of Canadians.
Extreme weather events are a key concern for Canada and there is growing confidence that some types of extreme events
3.
will increase in frequency and/or intensity as the climate continues to warm.

4. Adaptation is accepted as a necessary response to climate change, complementing global measures to reduce greenhouse

gas emissions. Adaptation enhances the social and economic resilience of Canadians to climate change impacts.

5. Adaptation is occurring with increasing frequency and enhanced engagement.  Continued action will help to build capacity,

address information needs and overcome challenges.

6. Adaptation can sometimes turn risks into opportunities, and opportunities into benefits.
7. Collaboration and adaptive management are approaches that governments and industry are increasingly pursuing to

advance adaptation.

INTRODUCTION

The climate is changing – in Canada and throughout the world. Globally, international assessments continue to identify rising  
air and ocean temperatures, shifting precipitation patterns, shrinking glaciers, declining snow cover and sea ice extent, rising  
sea level and changes in extreme events (IPCC, 2013). While rates of change vary from one indicator to another, the directions  
of change are consistent with climate warming, and climate models project that many of the observed trends will continue  
over the coming decades and beyond. Reducing greenhouse gas emissions (GHGs; mitigation) is necessary to lessen the 
magnitude and rate of climate change, but additional impacts are unavoidable, even with aggressive global mitigation efforts, 
due to inertia in the climate system. Therefore, we also need to adapt – make adjustments in our activities and decisions in  
order to reduce risks, moderate harm or take advantage of new opportunities. All levels of government, researchers, the private 
sector and non-government organizations now view adaptation as an essential complement to mitigation.

In 2008, the Government of Canada released a national-scale science assessment of climate change impacts and adaptation 
(From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate). That assessment used a regional approach to discuss current and 
future climate change impacts and vulnerabilities in Canada, as well as adaptation options. It built upon the findings of Canada’s 
first national-scale assessment (The Canada Country Study, 1998) and drew conclusions from all available relevant literature.

This report – Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation – is an update to the 2008 assessment. 
It focuses on new information and knowledge, assessing advances made in understanding climate change impacts and 
adaptation from a sectoral perspective, based primarily on literature published up to the end of 2012. This synthesis draws from 
the individual chapters of the report, which include an overview of Canada’s changing climate (Ch. 2), thematic chapters focused 
on sectors (Ch. 3 to 8) and the concluding chapter on adaptation research and practice (Ch. 9). The key findings of chapters 3 
to 9 are summarized in Box 1. The rest of the synthesis is structured around high-level conclusions, supported by examples and 
insights from an integrative analysis across the report themes1.  

1    This Synthesis does not repeat the references provided in the underlying chapters, but rather directs the reader to individual chapters of the report where specific references can be 

found.  Occasional specific references are included when the source was not cited within another chapter or to provide additional context.

2       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

BOX 1
KEY FINDINGS FROM THE CHAPTERS

Natural Resources (Forestry, Energy and Mining, Chapter 3)

• Climate change will exacerbate existing climate risks related to the planning and management of natural resources.

These risks relate to impacts and natural hazards associated with climate extremes (e.g. heat, cold, precipitation)
and to gradual changes, such as permafrost degradation, sea level rise, and plant species migration.  Climate
change will also present new opportunities for the natural resource sectors, particularly in relation to northern
economic development.

• Consideration of multiple stressors is critical to understanding adaptation in the natural resource sectors.  Climate
change itself is rarely identified as a priority concern, with industry focused on other immediate stressors, such as
economic drivers. Opportunities exist to integrate consideration of climate change into current planning processes.

• Environmental assessment, risk disclosure, and sustainable forest management reporting are examples of processes
that can help advance adaptation actions.  These processes allow governments, investors and the public to evaluate
industry understanding of changing climate risks and influence the steps taken to address those risks.

• While awareness of climate change impacts and implementation of adaptation actions is most evident in

sectors where there is a clear and direct relationship between climate and resource supply, notably forestry and
hydroelectricity, the application of adaptive management approaches to address climate change impacts is seen
across all natural resource sectors.

Food Production (Chapter 4)

• The impacts of climate change differ significantly between agriculture, fisheries, and non-commercial food supply,

but common challenges include increased losses from invasive pests and diseases, and risks to transportation
systems upon which the sectors rely.

• The net medium-term outlook is for a likely modest increase in agricultural food production. Longer and warmer

growing seasons would allow higher-value warmer-weather crops to be grown further north (where soil
conditions permit), lengthen outdoor feeding seasons for livestock, and allow the maple syrup industry to expand
northward. However, there will likely be new pests and diseases, as well as more severe outbreaks of current ones,
and challenges associated with extreme weather events and the reduced predictability of inter-annual weather
variability that could negatively affect production.

• Northern and remote communities are likely to see great changes in their environment – some will ease food

security concerns, while others could exacerbate already decreasing country food stocks and difficulties in
delivering supplies into isolated areas.

• Canada is expected to remain a net exporter of aquatic foods at the aggregate level, with total biomass of

production from wild, capture fisheries in Canada expected to increase due to climate-induced shifts in fish
distributions. Regional impacts from invading species, physical habitat changes and societal responses to shifts
in availability and access to aquatic food resources will gradually determine future patterns of use and overall
economic implications.

• Aquaculture has a greater scope for adaptation to climate change than other fisheries, making it less vulnerable and

better positioned to take advantage of opportunities than capture fisheries, and subsistence fisheries in particular.

Box 1 continued on next page

Synthesis     3

Industry (Chapter 5)

•

Industrial activity is sensitive to variations in weather and in extreme events, with considerable differences in the types
and extent of impacts on production, operations, and revenue among and within sectors.

• Changes in industry practices have been predominantly reactive, responding to variation in the weather or extreme
events, rather than proactive anticipation of future climate change. Examples of adaptation tend to be isolated rather
than representative of a clear trend within the sector.

• Adaptive actions implemented by industry vary by sector, and may be under-reported for strategic reasons.  Relative

to other sectors, tourism and insurance show the most promise in using adaptive actions to take advantage of
potential opportunities.

• There is little published research about indirect impacts of climate change on industry, such as changes associated

with consumer demand, supply chains, real estate or other assets, adaptation by other sectors, legal liability or
government regulation.

• Barriers towards effective adaptation include limited information on local impacts to businesses, uncertainties about

the costs and benefits of different adaptive actions, and limited market demand for the implementation of adaptation.

Biodiversity and Protected Areas (Chapter 6) 

• Climate-related shifts in species distributions have already been documented for plants and animals in Canada.  In
many locations, differential range shifts among species are likely to result in novel ecosystems that have different
species assemblages, structural attributes, and ecological functions than existing ones.

• For some species, the current and projected rates of environmental change exceed their natural ability to adapt,

increasing stress and threatening biodiversity.  As a result, climate change is magnifying the importance of managing
ecosystems in a manner that enhances resilience and preserves biodiversity.

• Protected areas, including parks, wildlife reserves and marine protected areas will play an important role in the
conservation of biodiversity by providing “refuge” or migration corridors for native species, helping to maintain
genetic diversity.

• Many Canadian jurisdictions are expanding their parks and protected area systems as part of their overall management

plans and climate change adaptation strategies. Associated research, monitoring, citizen science, public awareness,
and visitor experience programs build understanding, engage the public and help them contribute to meaningful
participatory decision-making.

• Ecological restoration can strengthen resilience to climate change. Integration of climate change adaptation strategies

into restoration decision-making in Canada, as elsewhere, is complex.

Human Health (Chapter 7)

• Stronger evidence has emerged since 2008 of the wide range of health risks to Canadians posed by a changing

climate.  For example, climate-sensitive diseases (e.g. Lyme disease) and vectors are moving northward into Canada
and will likely continue to expand their range. In addition, new research suggests climate change will exacerbate
air pollution issues in some parts of Canada, although further reductions in air contaminant emissions could offset
climate-related changes to ground-level ozone and particulate matter concentrations.

• A range of climate-related natural hazards continues to impact communities, presenting increasing risks to future

health. Recent flood and wildfire events have severely impacted communities through destruction of infrastructure
and displacement of populations.

• Many adaptation activities are being taken from local to national levels to help Canadians prepare for the health

impacts of climate change. Adaptation planning considers the underlying causes of health vulnerability, which differ
across urban, rural, coastal and northern communities.

Box 1 continued on next page

4       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

• Provincial, territorial and local health authorities are gaining an increasing knowledge of climate change and health

vulnerabilities through assessments and targeted research, and some jurisdictions have begun mainstreaming climate
change considerations into existing health policies and programs. Efforts to increase public awareness about how to
reduce climate-related health risks are also evident.

• Adaptation tools and measures, such as heat alert and response systems, projections of vector-borne disease expansion

and greening urban environments can help protect Canadians from the effects of climate change being felt now, and
those from future impacts.

Water and Transportation Infrastructure (Chapter 8)

• Well-maintained infrastructure is more resilient to a changing climate. This is especially true with respect to gradual
changes in temperature and precipitation patterns. Key vulnerabilities are associated with the impacts of extreme
weather events, which can overwhelm the capacity of water infrastructure.

• Over the past five years, the work of the PIEVC (Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee) has been

an important driver of progress on understanding how to adapt Canada’s infrastructure to climate change. The broadly
applicable, risk-based assessment protocol developed by the PIEVC allows engineers and planners to view and address
climate change as one factor among many affecting system resiliency, and plan accordingly.

• Consideration of climate change as an element of adaptive asset management encourages consideration of climate
factors as part of ongoing system monitoring, and informs decisions regarding the most cost-effective approaches
for infrastructure design, operation and maintenance.

• Codes, standards and related instruments (CSRI) are recognized as a potentially important driver of infrastructure
adaptation, but there are few examples of CSRIs in Canada that considered historic changes or projected future
changes in climate when they were developed.  Further assessment of current and future climate-related risks to
infrastructure systems would help to inform appropriate adjustments to design codes and standards for addressing
future climate.

Adaptation: Linking Research and Practice (Chapter 9)

• Adaptation is being undertaken in Canada to achieve a range of goals, such as increasing capacity to adapt, improving

resilience to specific climate events (especially extremes), and enhancing ability to deal with different climate
conditions. Among sectors, those with a demonstrated high sensitivity and exposure to climate and weather are
generally most active in taking steps to understand, assess and manage vulnerability and risk related to climate change.

• Adaptation is not solely a local issue, although examples from the municipal level still appear to dominate. There are
examples of action by all levels of government, as well as community groups and industry, many of which represent
collaborative initiatives.

• Understanding of the barriers and challenges to adaptation has improved, with recognition that factors beyond the
basic determinants of adaptive capacity need to be addressed. As a result, understanding of how to overcome key
barriers and enable adaptation has improved.

• Adaptation implementation in Canada is still in its early stages. Planning and policy exercises, and efforts to build

capacity and raise awareness comprise much of the adaptation action documented, with relatively few documented
examples of implementation of specific changes to reduce vulnerability to future climate change, or take advantage
of potential opportunities.

• Several factors can help accelerate the transition between awareness and action, including leadership, targeted

awareness-raising and supportive strategies or policies. Experiencing extreme weather events, as well as observing
impacts of gradual changes (e.g. sea level rise) also stimulates adaptation.

Synthesis     5

CANADA’S CLIMATE IS CHANGING, WITH OBSERVED CHANGES IN AIR 
TEMPERATURE, PRECIPITATION, SNOW AND ICE COVER AND OTHER INDICATORS. 
FURTHER CHANGES IN CLIMATE ARE INEVITABLE (CHAPTER 2). 

Over the last six decades, Canada has become warmer, with average temperatures over land increasing by 1.5°C 
between 1950 and 2010 (Figure 1). This rate of warming is about double the global average reported over the same 
time period by Hartmann et al., (2013). Warming has been occurring even faster in many areas of northern Canada, 
and has been observed in all seasons, although the greatest warming has occurred in winter and spring. The annual 
number of extreme warm days has also risen, while the number of cold nights has declined. Table 1 provides 
examples of documented changes in Canada for a variety of indicators of the physical climate system.

FIGURE 1:    Patterns of change in annual mean temperature across Canada over the period1950–2010. Upward (red) and 

downward (blue) pointing triangles indicate positive and negative trends respectively. Filled triangles correspond 
to trends significant at the 5% level (Source: Vincent et al., 2012). Inset: Annual mean temperature change for 
Canada (°C), 1950–2010, relative to the 1961–1990 average (represented by zero on the Y-axis) (Source: Vincent  
et al., 2012; Environment Canada, 2011).

6       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

Climate System Element

Observed Trends

Temperature
Annual air temperature – 
Canada 

Temperature Extremes
Hot extremes – Canada

Cold extremes – Canada

The annual average surface air temperature over the Canadian landmass has warmed by 1.5°C over the period 
1950-2010

The frequency of warm days (when the daily maximum temperature is above the daily 90th percentile) during the 
summer has increased nationally since 1950
The frequency of cold nights (when the daily minimum temperature is below the daily 10th percentile) during the 
winter has decreased nationally since 1950

Precipitation and other hydrological indicators
Annual precipitation – Canada

Snowfall/Rainfall – Southern 
Canada
Streamflow – Canada

Snowfall – Canada
Snow cover – Canada 

Permafrost
Ground temperature – Canada

Sea Level
Sea level – Global
Relative sea level – Canada

Sea Ice 
Seasonal ice extent – Arctic

Ice Type – Arctic

Eastern Canada

Glaciers
Glacier mass – Yukon, British 
Columbia, Alberta

Glacier mass – High Arctic

Lake and River Ice
Spring ice thaw – Canada

Ocean Climate
Canada’s oceans

Canada has generally become wetter in recent decades, as indicated by the increasing trend in annual average 
precipitation
In several regions of southern Canada, there has been a shift in precipitation type, with decreasing snowfall and 
increasing rainfall
Observations suggest decreasing trends in maximum and minimum river flows over the period 1970-2005 in much 
of southern Canada, with increases in minimum flows in western Nunavut, Northwest Territories, Yukon and northern 
British Columbia
Annual snowfall has declined over most of southern Canada and increased in the north over the last 6 decades
Negative trends in snow cover extent have been observed during spring over the Canadian landmass, with largest 
declines observed in June

Permafrost temperatures at numerous borehole sites across Canada have increased over the past two to three decades

Global average sea level rose about 21 cm between 1880 and 2012 at an average rate of 1.6 mm/year
Relative sea level rise of over 3 mm/year has been observed on coastlines of Atlantic Canada and the Beaufort Sea 
coast, with lower amounts along Pacific coastlines. Relative sea level fall of 10 mm/year has been observed around 
Hudson Bay where the land is rising rapidly due to post-glacial rebound

End-of-summer minimum ice extent has declined at a rate of 13% per decade over 1979-2012, while maximum winter 
sea ice extent has declined at a rate of 2.6% per decade
A shift in ice cover from one dominated by thick multi-year ice (MYI) to one increasingly dominated by thin first-year 
ice (FYI) has been observed
Declines in winter sea ice extent have been observed in the Labrador-Newfoundland and Gulf of St. Lawrence region

Western Cordilleran glaciers are losing mass and shrinking rapidly to the smallest extents in several millennia.  
Glaciers in British Columbia and Alberta have lost, respectively, about 11% and 25% of their surface area over the 
period 1985-2005, while glaciers in Yukon have lost about 22% since the 1950s
Significant negative mass balances are evident from the early 1960s into the first decade of the 21st century. The 
rate of mass loss for glaciers throughout the High Arctic has increased sharply since 2005, in direct response to warm 
regional summer temperatures

Trends towards earlier ice-free dates (lakes) and ice break-up dates (rivers) have been observed for most of the country 
since the mid-20th century but are particularly evident in Western Canada

Long-term changes in ocean temperature (increasing), salinity (variable sign), and acidity (increasing) have been 
observed in all three of Canada’s oceans. Long-term decreases in subsurface dissolved oxygen levels have also been 
observed in the Atlantic and Pacific oceans off Canada

TABLE 1:   Examples of observed changes in Canada (from Chapter 2). The length of the observational record varies with the indicator. 

Synthesis     7

FIGURE 2:  Patterns of change in annual total precipitation over the period 1950–2010. Upward (green) and downward (purple) 

pointing triangles indicate positive and negative trends, respectively. Filled triangles correspond to trends significant at 
the 5% level (Source: Mekis and Vincent, 2011b). Inset: Annual total precipitation anomalies (expressed in % change from 
the 1961–1990 average) for Canada, 1950–2010 (Source: Mekis and Vincent, 2011a; Environment Canada, 2011).

Over the same time period (1950–2010), Canada as a whole has become wetter, with increasing annual average precipitation 
trends in many parts of the country and for the nation as a whole (Figure 2). Trends in annual precipitation have been less 
uniform across the Canadian landmass than those of annual air temperature. While significant changes in extreme precipitation 
have been observed in some areas of the country, no consistent pattern is evident for the country as a whole.

There have also been observed trends in other climate indicators in Canada (see Table 1). The Arctic has seen rapid declines in sea 
ice extent, both in summer and winter (Figure 3). In addition, snowfall has decreased across southern Canada, while snow cover 
is melting earlier in spring, and glaciers in western Canada and the Arctic are shrinking.

At the global scale, sea level over the past century has risen in 
response to warmer ocean temperatures (thermal expansion) 
and to the melting of glaciers, ice caps and ice sheets. Regional 
patterns of sea level rise along Canadian coastlines are strongly 
influenced by vertical land motion, with sea level rising rapidly 
at some sites where the land is subsiding, and falling in others 
where the land is rising (see Table 1). 

Further changes in climate are inevitable. On average, warmer 
temperatures and more rainfall are expected for the country as a 
whole, with increases in extreme heat and heavy rainfall events, 
and declines in snow and ice cover.  Sea level along many of our 
coastlines will continue to rise, and warmer waters and ocean 
acidification are expected to become increasingly evident in 
most Canadian ocean waters over the next century. An overview 
of projected changes in some key climate indicators for Canada is 
provided in Table 22. 

FIGURE 3:  Trends in Arctic sea ice extent over the period 1979–

2012 shown as time series of the percentage difference 
in ice extent in March and September relative to the 
mean values for the period 1979–2000. Both trends are 
statistically significant (Source: Perovich et al., 2012).

2    While the changes presented in Table 2 are based on climate change projections commonly used up to 2012, they are broadly consistent with results using newer projections (such as 

those used in the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report).

8       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

Temperature
Seasonal temperature 

Extremes in daily temperature

Long duration hot events

Rare hot extremes 

Projected Changes
Warming will be greatest in winter, and in this season, the largest increases in air temperature are projected for 
northern Canada. In summer, the largest increases are projected for southern Canada and the central interior. The 
magnitude of projected warming varies substantially with the emission scenario
Increases in the frequency and magnitude of unusually warm days and nights and decreases for unusually cold days 
and nights are projected to occur throughout the 21st century
The length, frequency and/or intensity of warm spells, including heat waves, are projected to increase over most 
land areas, including Canada
Rare hot extremes are currently projected to become more frequent. For example, a one-in-20-year extreme hot day 
is projected to become about a one-in-5 year event over most of Canada by mid-century

Precipitation and other hydrological indicators
Seasonal precipitation 

Increases in precipitation are projected for the majority of the country and for all seasons, with the exception of 
parts of southern Canada where a decline in precipitation in summer and fall is suggested
More frequent heavy precipitation events are projected, with an associated increased risk of flooding
Rare extreme precipitation events are currently projected to become about twice as frequent by mid-century over 
most of Canada
Increases in winter streamflow are projected for many regions in southern Canada. Mean annual streamflow is 
projected to decreases in some regions of Alberta and Saskatchewan, while projections for other regions vary across 
different scenarios

Widespread decreases in the duration of snow cover are projected across the Northern Hemisphere with the largest 
changes in maritime mountain regions, such as the west coast of North America
Maximum snow accumulation over northern high latitudes is projected to increase in response to projected 
increases in cold season precipitation

Warming of the permafrost is projected to continue at rates surpassing those observed in records to date. Low 
average temperatures of much of the permafrost in the Arctic mean it will take many decades to centuries for colder 
permafrost to completely thaw

Estimates of the magnitude of future changes in global sea level by the year 2100 range from a few tens of 
centimetres to more than a metre
Projections of global sea-level rise beyond 2100 indicate continuing global sea-level rise over the coming centuries 
and millennia. Global sea-level rise may eventually amount to several metres
Patterns of change along Canadian coastlines will continue to be influenced by land uplift and subsidence as well 
as by changes in the oceans. Sea-level rise will continue to be enhanced in regions where the land is subsiding, and 
sea level is likely to continue to fall in regions where the land is rapidly rising. Regions where the land is slowly rising 
may experience a transition from sea level fall to sea level rise.

A nearly ice-free summer is considered a strong possibility for the Arctic Ocean by the middle of the century 
although summer sea ice may persist longer in the Canadian Arctic Archipelago region

Heavy precipitation 
Rare precipitation events

Streamflow

Snow Cover
Snow cover duration 

Snow depth

Permafrost
Ground temperature

Sea Level
Global sea level rise to 2100

Global sea level rise beyond 2100

Relative sea level change

Sea Ice Extent
Arctic summer sea ice

Lake Ice

With the continued advance of ice cover break-up dates and delays in ice-cover freeze up, ice cover duration is 
expected to decrease by up to a month by mid-century

TABLE 2:   Examples of projected changes in the climate system for Canada, derived from ensembles of global climate models driven by the 

SRES scenarios3. In general, the magnitude of the stated changes will increase under higher emission scenarios. 

3   New projections for Canada will be available from the Canadian Climate Change Scenarios Network (cccsn.ec.gc.ca). 

Synthesis     9

CHANGES IN CLIMATE ARE INCREASINGLY AFFECTING CANADA’S NATURAL ENVIRONMENT, 
ECONOMIC SECTORS AND THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS (CHAPTERS 3 TO 8).

The natural environment is inherently sensitive to climate. Shifts in the range of some species of birds, butterflies and trees in 
response to warming temperatures have been documented, as have changes in the timing of life-history events (such as earlier 
migration to breeding areas and earlier flowering of plants). Maple trees, for example, have experienced a significant northward 
shift since 1971 (see Case Study 1, Ch. 4).  Northward shifts have also been observed in ecosystems of the Bering Sea, with 
examples of southern assemblages displacing northern aquatic populations (Ch. 4).  

Declines in bird populations have also been documented, with 20 common North American bird species losing over 50% of 
their populations over the last 40 years (Ch. 7). Increased forest disturbance associated with insects, drought and forest fires  
have increased tree mortality in BC and the Prairies. Mortality rates have also risen in sockeye salmon, in response to higher  
water temperatures in the Fraser River (Ch. 7), while salmon production rates have declined (Ch. 4). 

In addition to impacts on the natural environment, changing climate is affecting many of Canada’s economic sectors as well 
as human health. This includes impacts on sectors with obvious climate sensitivities such as forestry, agriculture, fisheries, 
hydroelectricity, transportation, tourism and insurance. A prime example is the mountain pine beetle outbreak in western 
Canada. Warmer winter temperatures in the region are one factor that has allowed beetle populations to expand  
to unprecedented sizes, leading to the largest and most severe outbreak on record (see Case Study 1, Ch. 3). As of 2012, about 
18.1 million hectares of forest were affected (Figure 4; Ch. 3). Health impacts include lengthening of the ragweed season 
(between 1995 and 2009, the season increased by more than 25 days in Saskatoon and Winnipeg (Ch. 7)) and spreading of  
Lyme disease vectors (ticks), which has resulted in the annual number of Canadian cases increasing from 30 to more than  
250 in recent years (Ch. 7). 

Northern Canada has experienced particularly rapid rates of warming over recent years (see Figure 1). Climate change impacts 
on livelihoods, culture, mental health and well-being have been reported by northern residents (Ch. 7). Safety concerns 
associated with less predictable ice conditions and marine storms are an issue, for example, as are the effects of reduced  
sea ice on traditional hunting activities (Ch. 4) and the impacts of permafrost thaw on infrastructure (Ch. 8). Winter roads in 
northern Canada have experienced reduced ice thickness and shortened operating seasons, which decreases their reliability  
and constrains the load volumes that can be safely transported. For example, the shortened road season in 2006 forced the 

FIGURE 4:  Map of Mountain Pine Beetle distribution, showing change for the 2002–2006 and 2007–2011 time 

periods and direction of change (Source: Natural Resources Canada, 2012c).

10       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

Diavik Diamond Mine to spend an extra $11.25 million to fly in fuel (Ch. 3). Northern communities also depend upon the winter 
road network for the supply of affordable food, medicines and other goods.   

Together, these observed impacts illustrate that climate change is happening now, with impacts being felt across the country. While 
climate is one of several contributing factors in most cases, these examples provide an indication of the types of impacts that we can 
expect to see more of as the climate continues to change. 

EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS ARE A KEY CONCERN FOR CANADA (CHAPTERS 3 TO 8) AND 
THERE IS GROWING CONFIDENCE THAT SOME TYPES OF EXTREME EVENTS WILL INCREASE  
IN FREQUENCY AND/OR INTENSITY AS THE CLIMATE CONTINUES TO WARM (CHAPTER 2).

Losses from severe weather have been rising across the country. Extreme events, including storms (wind, ice and snow), flooding 
and heat waves have had significant economic (Figure 5) and health and safety impacts on Canadians. In 2011, the Canadian 
insurance industry paid out a record $1.7 billion for property damage associated with weather events, such as flooding, wind and 
wildfires. This record will be broken in 2013, as the insured losses from flooding damage in Southern Alberta (June) and Toronto 
(July) are finalized (IBC, 2013a; IBC, 2013b).  While factors other than climate also contributed to the rising payout trend (e.g. 
increased exposure of property, increasing wealth and aging infrastructure), these losses, along with the many possible health 
impacts (Ch. 7) demonstrate that Canadians are vulnerable to extreme weather events. 

There is growing confidence that some types of extreme events will increase in frequency and/or intensity due to climate 
change (Ch. 2). For example, at the global scale, warm days and nights are virtually certain4 to increase in frequency and 
magnitude and heat waves are very likely4 to increase in duration, frequency and/or intensity. Heavy precipitation events and 
extreme sea levels are also projected to occur more frequently. In Canada, studies have suggested that droughts, especially in the 
southern Prairies, heavy precipitation events, with associated increased risk of flooding (Ch. 2), forest fires (Ch. 3), storms (Ch. 5) 
and hot days and warm nights (Figure 6; Ch. 7) would increase in frequency and/or intensity in a warmer climate.

FIGURE 5:  Examples of insured losses from extreme weather events in Canada (Sources: IBC, 2008, 2011b, 2013a, b; McBean, 2012).

4   The IPCC denotes likelihood with the following scale: Virtually certain- 99-100% probability; Very likely- 90-100% probability;  Likely- 66-100% probability; About as likely as not- 

33 to 66% probability; Unlikely- 0-33% probability; Very unlikely- 0-10% probability; Exceptionally unlikely- 0-1% probability.

Synthesis     11

Extreme events were identified as key issues for all sectors 
discussed in this report. For example, events relating to 
water availability – both excesses and shortages – represent 
concerns for most economic sectors, as well as for 
biodiversity and human health. Flooding can overwhelm 
infrastructure, causing not only significant local impacts, but 
also leading to broader impacts by damaging transportation 
networks and compromising access and supply chains (Ch. 
8). Drought is also associated with many immediate and 
long-term economic and social impacts (Ch. 4). 

As an industry, farming relies upon the inter-annual 
predictability of seasonal weather as it facilitates 
crop selection and infrastructure investments (Ch. 4). 
Unpredictable conditions can cause unanticipated farm 
losses. For example, an unprecedented heat wave in Ontario 
in March 2012 caused fruit trees to blossom 5 weeks 
earlier than usual, and subsequent frosts in April destroyed 
approximately 80% of apple blossoms (Environment 
Canada, 2013). Total losses for tender fruits that year were 
estimated at $100 million (Environment Canada, 2013).

FIGURE 6:  Historical and projected number of hot days and warm 
nights for selected cities in Canada (Source: Casati and 
Yagouti, 2010).

ADAPTATION IS ACCEPTED AS A NECESSARY RESPONSE TO CLIMATE CHANGE. IT 
ENHANCES THE SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC RESILIENCE OF CANADIANS TO CLIMATE CHANGE 
IMPACTS (CHAPTERS 3 TO 9). 

Across Canada, there is evidence of increasing awareness and acceptance of the need to adapt to climate change (Ch. 
9). Broadened engagement in adaptation is reflected across sectors, at all levels of government, in certain industries and 
companies, as well as in the academic literature (Figure 7) and the media. Discussions now tend to focus on determining where 
adaptive action is required and improving understanding of the process of adaptation – i.e. how adaptation can be addressed 
and where capacity to adapt needs to be enhanced.

This is especially evident for those sectors with greater 
exposure to weather and weather variability. Direct 
experience with changing conditions, such as shorter snow 
seasons for winter tourism (Ch. 5), shifting flow patterns 
for hydroelectricity generation (Ch. 3) and increasing 
health impacts from heat (Ch. 7), as well as extreme 
weather events (e.g. floods, droughts and wildfires) raises 
awareness of climate change and the severity of potential 
impacts. In the forest sector, for example, severe wildfires 
and pest outbreaks in British Columbia and Alberta have 
contributed to increased awareness of climate change 
adaptation, spurring industry and governments to begin 
to move towards adaptive management approaches 
that proactively address risks and opportunities, rather 
than depending on crisis management strategies (Ch. 3). 
Following the 2013 spring flood in Alberta, the provincial 
government introduced policies to help reduce losses 
from future flooding events, including new restrictions on 
redevelopment in floodways and flood fringes (Alberta 
Government, 2013).  

FIGURE 7:  Number of climate change adaptation articles by 

Canadian researchers by sector (2000–2012).

12       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

Policies, regulations and guidelines are mechanisms that governments can use to raise awareness and encourage or 
require adaptive action. The City of Vancouver, for example, reviewed its flood-proofing policies and now encourages 
applicants with projects in identified flood hazard areas to plan for 1 metre of sea level rise (Ch. 8). For the private sector, 
factors that enhance awareness include reporting requirements for material risk, and the drive to stay competitive and 
meet trade demands. Financial disclosure of climate change risks shows promise as a tool to promote climate change 
adaptation within industry (Ch. 3, 5).

ADAPTATION IS OCCURRING WITH INCREASING FREQUENCY AND ENHANCED 
ENGAGEMENT.  CONTINUED ACTION WILL HELP TO BUILD CAPACITY, ADDRESS 
INFORMATION NEEDS AND OVERCOME CHALLENGES (CHAPTERS 3 TO 9).  

Since publication of the 2008 assessment there has been a significant increase in the number of adaptation activities in 
Canada, primarily with respect to planning (including strategies, frameworks, and guidance documents) and initiatives 
aimed at enhancing adaptive capacity (Table 3).  From the breadth and scope of these examples, it is evident that there 
are many different approaches to adaptation. However, adaptation actions have been mostly incremental in nature, 
building on existing initiatives, assuming a continuation of current climate trends, and focused on no-regrets actions 
that are beneficial regardless of future climate. In many cases, action on adaptation was spurred by observed impacts 
or experience with extreme weather events.

Adaptation Activities
Provincial governments in BC, Alberta and Quebec are modifying seed transfer guidelines for 
reforestation to take shifting climate envelopes into account
A hydroelectric corporation is integrating climate change considerations in demand forecasts, 
informing rate adjustments and procurement plans
The mining industry is applying techniques to protect northern infrastructure from permafrost 
warming (e.g. deeper pile foundations, adjustable foundations)
The federal government is revising taxation schemes to help producers manage weather-related risk 
(e.g. allowing income to be deferred)
Industry associations in BC are developing a tourism action plan to respond to mountain pine  
beetle damage
Insurers are adjusting property insurance coverage (e.g. no longer offering sewer back up insurance in 
communities with recurring losses)
Subsidy programs have been adopted by a number of municipalities to encourage the installation 
of backwater valves that can help to reduce flood damage from an increase in the frequency and 
intensity of rainfall events
The Manitoba government is protecting winter habitat for the Qamanirjuaq barren-ground caribou 
herd in the transition zone between boreal and tundra ecosystems
The federal government is developing tools to guide public health managers on vector-borne disease 
surveillance and control methods
Communities across the country are developing heat alert and response systems to protect health 
from extreme heat events
A risk assessment of three coastal roads in Nova Scotia led to recommendations that include 
engineered shoreline protection and relocation of selected roads further inland
Cambridge and Milton, ON are performing economic assessments of the implications of climate 
change for drainage infrastructure design

TABLE 3:   Examples of adaptation activities from different sectors.

Sector
Forestry (Ch. 3)

Energy (Ch. 3)

Mining (Ch. 3)

Agriculture (Ch. 4)

Tourism (Ch. 5)

Insurance (Ch. 5)

Residential Housing (Ch. 5)

Biodiversity and Protected 
Areas (Ch. 6)
Health (Ch. 7)

Health (Ch. 7)

Infrastructure (Ch. 8)

Infrastructure (Ch. 8)

Synthesis     13

Progress on adaptation is evident, and the examples presented in this report are indicative of the type of actions that will 
become increasingly necessary as the climate continues to change.  However, more work is needed. All chapters in this 
report identify information needs and knowledge and data gaps, and many discuss barriers and challenges to adaptation, 
including limited resources, limited motivation and issues related to governance (Ch. 9). In addition, by analyzing the 
examples available, it is apparent that there are relatively few examples of concrete, on-the-ground adaptation measures 
being implemented specifically to reduce vulnerability to projected changes in climate. This indicates that, similar to other 
developed countries, adaptation in Canada is still in its early stages overall.  It is also recognized that the methodology of 
this assessment, with its focus on scientific literature, may result in an underestimation of the actual number of adaptation 
actions being undertaken in Canada. 

Planned adaptation takes time.  Adaptation often requires research, stakeholder engagement and adjustments to policies 
and regulations. For example, while a year-round road has been proposed to ensure access to northern mining sites 
to help address the declining reliability of ice-road networks (Ch. 8), this type of project cannot be undertaken without 
detailed planning, consultations and environmental impact studies. In the fisheries sector, fishers cannot simply adjust 
their harvests in response to shifting species assemblages – this requires governments to revise management plans and 
fishing permits (Ch. 4). 

There will also be cases where maintaining current activities is not feasible and/or cost-effective, requiring discussions 
to extend beyond consideration of incremental, no-regrets approaches to more transformative changes. The emerging 
concept of transformational change refers to larger-scale, more extensive adaptations that are new to a region or resource 
system (Ch. 9).  Transformational change may also challenge the status quo and thereby question perceptions of what is 
acceptable. Examples include relocating entire towns due to sea level rise; converting forest plots to parkland to reduce 
losses from forest fires; and designing flood-control infrastructure to fail safely (with minimal damage and losses), rather 
than withstand large-magnitude events. The need for transformational adaptation is likely to become more prevalent as 
the climate continues to change.

ADAPTATION CAN SOMETIMES TURN RISKS INTO OPPORTUNITIES, AND OPPORTUNITIES 
INTO BENEFITS (CHAPTERS 3 TO 9).  

While adaptation research and programming tend to focus on reducing vulnerability to negative impacts, some impacts of 
climate change could represent opportunities. Capturing these opportunities requires appropriate adaptation. 

This may be most evident in the tourism and agriculture sectors, which both stand to potentially benefit from longer 
summers. With effective adaptation (e.g. strategies to deal with potential water shortages), major warm-weather tourism 
markets in Canada could benefit from climate change, with the golf industry, for example, profiting from increased season 
length and demand (Ch. 5). Similarly, with higher summer temperatures, different types of crops may be able to be grown 
farther north (e.g. corn and soybeans in new areas in Quebec, canola in Prince George, BC, and spring seeded small grains 
in western Alberta and northeastern BC; Ch. 4). Producers would need to adapt their crop selections and timing (e.g. 
seeding earlier in order to decrease exposure to drier late summer conditions) to take advantage of these opportunities. In 
all cases, risks related to increased pests, heat waves and other extreme events will also need to be addressed. In the North, 
changing climate and ice conditions bring potential economic opportunities related to natural resource development and 
tourism (Ch. 3, 5, 6). However, in addition to presenting opportunities for employment and investment, such activities also 
bring environmental and cultural risks.  

Innovative ideas and approaches may help reduce losses associated with climate change, at least on a short-term basis. 
For example, faced with a surplus of blue stained wood from the Mountain Pine Beetle outbreak, the forest industry in BC 
began marketing the product for interior paneling and unique wood furniture, after completing studies to confirm the 
wood would perform to acceptable standards (Ch. 3). Also in BC, the city of Vancouver used the damage caused by the 
2006 windstorm in Stanley Park as an opportunity to increase public engagement in the park and replant a more wind-
resilient forest (Ch. 3).  Some tourism operators and recreation sites are considering promoting “last chance tourism”, where 
additional tourists are drawn to a park to see either changing landscapes or certain features (e.g. glaciers or certain wildlife 
species) before they decline or disappear (Ch. 5, 7).

14       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

COLLABORATION AND ADAPTIVE MANAGEMENT ARE APPROACHES THAT GOVERNMENTS 
AND INDUSTRY ARE INCREASINGLY PURSUING TO ADVANCE ADAPTATION (CHAPTER 9). 

Collaboration has emerged as an important mechanism for successful and efficient adaptation to climate change. Across 
sectors, there is a common challenge of needing to adapt to continuous cumulative changes with limited resources. By 
learning from the work of others (e.g. through assessments, communities of practice and workshops) and collaborating 
with organizations that share similar goals, efficiencies and synergies can be found.  Numerous examples of collaborations 
between different levels of government, as well as industry and non-governmental groups are discussed throughout this 
report (Box 2) and continued collaboration will be a key driver moving adaptation forward. While roles and mandates may 
differ between jurisdictions and organizations, the end goals of reducing vulnerability to climate change and enhancing 
resilience are shared.

Many sectors are starting to use adaptive management approaches (Figure 8) to deal with changes in climate and other 
stressors and related uncertainties (which will always be present in adaptation decision-making). Adaptive management 
involves ongoing monitoring, adjusting, experimenting and re-evaluating, and requires a flexible and responsive approach to 
adaptation. Examples of adaptive management approaches discussed in this report include operations related to hydroelectric 
generation (Ch. 3), water level management on the Great Lakes (Ch. 8, 9), and forest stand management (Ch. 3). 

FIGURE 8:  Adaptive management assessment process (modified from Leger and Read, 2012, Figure 2-1, p. 8).

Synthesis     15

BOX 2
EXAMPLES OF CASE STUDIES HIGHLIGHTING COLLABORATION 

Collaboration to enhance adaptation decision-making (Chapter 9, Case Study 1): Canada’s federal, provincial and 
territorial governments have invested in collaborative programming as a cornerstone for advancing knowledge and action 
on adaptation, through past activities (e.g. the Canadian Climate Impacts and Adaptation Research Network [C-CIARN]) and 
ongoing initiatives. The most recent mechanism to enhance collaboration on adaptation across Canada is the Adaptation 
Platform which brings together governments, professional organizations, industry associations and financial sector 
representatives to address shared adaptation priorities.  

A Historical Example of Institutional Capacity for Adaptation in the Agricultural Sector – The Prairies (Chapter 
4, Case Study 3):  Local communities and the farm industry worked in collaboration with academic researchers and the 
provincial/federal governments to establish solutions to improve resiliency to drought conditions experienced in the 
early 1900s. Through this collaboration, new innovative farming methods were introduced and agricultural management 
was made more efficient. 

The Municipal Risk Assessment Tool (Chapter 5, Case Study 2): The Insurance Bureau of Canada brought together 
a team of experts including hydrologists, climate scientists, risk managers and infrastructure engineers to develop a 
tool (The Municipal Risk Assessment Tool – MRAT) that identifies risk zones for exposure to basement flooding at the 
neighbourhood level. 

Building a “Better than Building Code” Home (Chapter 5, Case Study 4): The Institute for Catastrophic Loss 
Reduction and The Co-operators General Insurance Company worked together to demonstrate the benefits of enhanced 
construction by building a demonstration home in West Point, Prince Edward Island. Designed to be more weather 
resilient, the demonstration home incorporated new technologies and practices to ensure the home’s ability to withstand 
extreme wind events.

A landscape approach to ecological restoration (Chapter 6, Case Study 4): Conservation partners from the public 
and private sectors supported efforts to plant over 4.5 million native trees and shrubs, and currently use restoration 
techniques to mimic features of old-growth Carolinian forests to help preserve biodiversity in the Long Point World 
Biosphere Reserve, which includes the Long Point National Wildlife Area along the north shore of Lake Erie (Ontario). 
This work is helping to create corridors and enhance ecosystem resilience and adaptive capacity throughout the 
Biosphere Reserve. 

Citizen-based Monitoring Programs (Chapter 6, Case Study 5): As part of The Reef Environmental Education 
Foundation’s (REEF) volunteer fish and invertebrate monitoring program, participants are trained to identify target species 
and implement a simple roving diver survey method. More than 3700 volunteer surveys have been carried out along the 
British Columbia coastline through this program, representing more than 2800 hours of underwater observations at more 
than 300 sites.

Manitoba Flood 2011: Impetus for a Provincial Approach to Psychosocial Adaptation to Natural Hazards 
(Chapter 7, Case Study 3): Many organizations, including Manitoba Health’s Office of Disaster Management,  
Emergency Social Services, Emergency Measures Organization, Aboriginal Affairs and Northern Development Canada, 
Manitoba Agriculture and Food Rural Initiatives, Manitoba Family and Rural Support Services, Water Stewardship and 
Conservation, and Aboriginal and Northern Affairs worked in collaboration to establish the Provincial Psychosocial 2011 
Flood Recovery Table in response to the 2011 flood in Manitoba. 

Box 2 continued on next page

16       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

City of Calgary Water Supply Infrastructure Vulnerability Assessment (Chapter 8, Case Study 1): In 2011, the City 
of Calgary, together with Engineers Canada, conducted a vulnerability risk assessment of its water supply infrastructure. The 
team worked together to determine which climatic conditions pose the greatest risks to the design, construction, operation 
and management of the water supply infrastructure, in order to enhance the resiliency and quality of the system.

British Columbia Sea Dyke Guidelines (Chapter 8, Case Study 2): The BC provincial government, the Association 
of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of British Columbia, and others worked with policymakers and planners to 
incorporate sea level rise into coastal floodplain mapping, sea dyke design and land use planning. Building on these 
outputs, a working group went on to develop a national Sea Level Rise Primer (www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/pdf/
SLR-Primer.pdf) to help other communities identify, evaluate and compare adaptation options, and showcase different 
types of tools for adaptation. 

Promoting adaptation by sharing information and knowledge through a virtual community of practice 
(Chapter 9, Case Study 4): The Climate Change Adaptation Community of Practice (CCACoP) is an interactive online 
portal that provides space for researchers, experts, policymakers and practitioners from across Canada to come together 
to ask questions, generate ideas, share knowledge and communicate with others working on climate change adaptation. 
It is a key information and knowledge-sharing network on climate change adaptation in Canada.

CONCLUSION 

Changes in the climate system and associated impacts on both natural and human systems are occurring in Canada. As 
a result, the need to adapt is increasingly recognized and acted upon by governments, industry and other organizations. 
Over the past 5 years, our understanding of the adaptation process has improved and examples of adaptation 
implementation have grown. We have seen broadened engagement on the issue, and changes being made to policies, 
plans and practices to increase resilience to climate change. Further adaptation is necessary to complement mitigation in 
helping to prevent and reduce future impacts, as well as to take advantage of potential opportunities. We now have the 
awareness and capacity to adapt in many cases; translating this to action will require continued collaborative efforts to 
reduce barriers, overcome challenges and enhance motivation to adapt. 

Synthesis     17

REFERENCES
Alberta Government (2013):  Flood Choices for Albertans, online,  <https://pabappsuat.

alberta.ca/albertacode/images/Flood-Choices-for-Albertans.pdf>.

Casati, B. and Yagouti, A. (2010): Analysis of extreme temperature indices in nine 

Canadian communities using the Canadian Regional Climate Model projections 
for public health planning; Ouranos.

Environment Canada (2011): Annual 2011 Summary, Climate Trendsand Variability 
Report, online, <ec.gc.ca/adsc-cmda/default.asp?lang=En&n=F3D25729-1>.

Environment Canada (2013): Canada’s Top Ten Weather Stories for 2012, online,  

<ec.gc.ca/meteo-weather/default.asp?lang=En&n=70B4A3E9-1>. 

Hartmann, D.L., Klein Tank, A.G., and Rusticucci, M. (2013):  Chapter 2: Observations: 

Atmosphere and Surface – Final Draft Underlying Scientific-Technical 
Assessment; in Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of 
Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change, (ed.) T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. 
Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P.M. Midgley, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2008): Facts of the General Insurance Industry  

in Canada; Toronto: Insurance Bureau of Canada.

IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2011b): Southern Alberta Windstorms Cost $200 

Million in Insured Damage; Insurance Bureau of Canada; <http://www.ibc.ca/en/
Media_Centre/News_Releases/2011/12-22-2011.asp>. 

IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2013a): June Alberta Floods are Costliest Insured 
Natural Disaster in Canadian History – Estimate of insured losses exceed $1.7 
billion; Media Release, September 23, 2013, online, <ibc.ca/en/Media_Centre/
News_Releases/2013/June_Alberta_Floods_are_Costliest_Insured_Natural_
Disaster_in_Canadian_History.asp>.

IBC [Insurance Bureau of Canada] (2013b): Preliminary insured losses released in the 
most expensive natural disaster in Ontario history – IBC expects the number 
to go even higher; Media Release, August 14, 2013, online, <ibc.ca/en/Media_
Centre/News_Releases/2013/Preliminary_insured_losses_released_in_the_
most_expensive_natural_disaster_in_Ontario_history.asp>. 

IPCC (2013): Summary for Policymakers; in Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science 

Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, (ed.) T.F. Stocker, D. Qin, G.-K. 
Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, Nauels, A., Xia, Y. Bex, V., P.M. Midgley, 
Casati, B. and Yagouti, A. (2010): Analysis of extreme temperature indices in nine 
Canadian communities using the Canadian Regional Climate Model projections 
for public health planning; Ouranos. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Leger, W. and Read, J. (2012): Adaptive management: strategy and legacy; in Lake 

Superior Regulation: Addressing Uncertainty in Upper Great Lakes Water Levels; 
Final report to the International Upper Great Lakes Study Board, Adaptive 
Management Technical Work Group, 167 p.

McBean, G. (2012): Telling the Weather Story; Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 

and Insurance Bureau of Canada. 

Mekis, E. and Vincent, L.A. (2011a): An overview of the second generation adjusted 

daily precipitation dataset for trend analysis in Canada; Atmosphere-Ocean, v. 2, 
p. 163-177.

Mekis, E. and Vincent, L.A. (2011b): Trends in indices related to agroclimatic conditions 

based on homogenized temperature and adjusted precipitation in Canada; 
19th Conference on Applied Climatology, 18–20 July 2011, Asheville, NC, USA. 
<http://ams.confex.com/ams/19Applied/webprogram/Paper190186.html>.
Natural Resources Canada (2012c): The threat of mountain pine beetle to Canada’s 

boreal forest; <http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/insectsdiseases/13381>.

Perovich, D., Meier, W., Tschudi, M., Gerland, S., and Richter-Menge, J. (2012): Sea ice; in 
Arctic Report Card 2012, (ed.) M.O. Jeffries, J. A. Richter-Menge and J. E. Overland, 
online, <http://www.arctic.noaa.gov/report12/>.

Vincent, L. A., Wang, X. L., Milewska, E. J., Wan, H., Yang, F., and Swail, V. (2012): A second 

generation of homogenized Canadian monthly surface air temperature for 
climate trend analysis; Journal of Geophysical Research, v. 117, D18110. 

Zaturecky I. and Chiu, I. (2005): Alternative wood products from blue-stained mountain pine 

beetle lumber: non-structural laminated products; Mountain Pine Beetle Initiative 
Working Paper 2005–7, Natural Resources Canada, online, <cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/
pubwarehouse/pdfs/25479.pdf>.

CHAPTER CITATIONS

Chapter 2
Bush, E.J., Loder, J.W., James, T.S., Mortsch, L.D. and Cohen, S.J. (2014): An Overview of 

Chapter 6
Nantel, P., Pellatt, M.G., Keenleyside, K. and Gray, P.A. (2014): Biodiversity and Protected 

Canada’s Changing Climate; in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives 
on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of 
Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 23-64.

Areas; in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, 
ON, p. 159-190.

Chapter 3
Lemmen, D.S., Johnston, M., Ste-Marie, C. and Pearce, T. (2014): Natural Resources; in 

Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, p. 65-98.

Chapter 4
Campbell, I.D., Durant, D.G., Hunter, K.L. and Hyatt K.D. (2014): Food Production; in Canada 

in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) 
F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 99-134.

Chapter 5
Kovacs, P. and Thistlethwaite, J. (2014): Industry; in Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector 

Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. 
Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 135-158.

Chapter 7
Berry, P., Clarke, K., Fleury, M.D. and Parker, S. (2014): Human Health; in Canada in a 
Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. 
Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 191-232.

Chapter 8
Andrey, J., Kertland, P. and Warren, F.J. (2014): Water and Transportation Infrastructure; in 

Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and 
Adaptation, (ed.) F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, 
Ottawa, ON, p. 233-252.

Chapter 9
Eyzaguirre, J. and Warren, F.J. (2014): Adaptation: Linking Research and Practice; in Canada 

in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation, edited by 
F.J. Warren and D.S. Lemmen; Government of Canada, Ottawa, ON, p. 253-286.

18       Canada in a Changing Climate: Sector Perspectives on Impacts and Adaptation

