PreParing for 
Climate Change

an implementation guide  
for local governments  
in British Columbia

Prepared by 
West Coast 
Environmental Law

PreParing for Climate Change:  
an implementation guide for local governments in British Columbia

Copyright ©2012

October 2012

This report was prepared by Deborah Carlson at West Coast Environmental Law.

The views expressed are those of the author and West Coast Environmental Law. 
Any errors or omissions are the sole responsibility of the author and  
West Coast Environmental Law.

Disclaimer

This report provides educational information only. It does not constitute legal or other 
professional advice. It is essential that local governments and others considering legal 
measures consult legal professionals for advice.

Funding and support for this project was provided by NRCAN, the Province of British 
Columbia, and the Fraser Basin Council.

West Coast Environmental Law would also like to acknowledge the generous support of:

enviroFund

This guide is a project of Preparing for Climate Change: Securing BC’s Water Future, 
also known as the BC Regional Adaptation Collaborative (RAC). The program consists 
of 21 collaborative projects aimed at helping decisionmakers consider climate change 
impacts, with a focus on water allocation and use, forest and watershed management, 
flood protection and floodplain management and community planning.

ISBN 978-0-919365-32-2

Canadian Cataloguing in Publication Data for this publication  
is available through the National Library of Canada

Graphic design by Nadene Rehnby and Pete Tuepah, Hands on Publications

Cover photos courtesy Province of BC; Melissa Wall; Michelle Laurie

West Coast Environmental Law
200 – 2006 West 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC Canada, V6J 2B3
Phone: 604-684-7378, Toll-free in BC: 1-800-330-WCEL
Fax: 604-684-1312
Email: admin@wcel.org

www.wcel.org

Contents

Acknowledgments ....................................................................................................................5

introDuCtion ........................................................................................................6

Part 1: unDerstanDing Climate Change aD aPtation ..........................8

setting the context: a changing climate in BC ............................................8

What is climate change adaptation and why is it important  
for local governments in BC? ....................................................................... 10

Defining climate change adaptation..........................................................10
Climate change adaptation and local governments ............................10
Climate change adaptation and climate change mitigation ............12
Benefits of a strategic approach to climate change adaptation ......13

an overview of the adaptation process .................................................... 18

Identifying climate change impacts and assessing risks  
and vulnerabilities .............................................................................................18
Identifying and evaluating adaptation options .....................................20
Implementing, monitoring, and updating adaptation strategies ...21

Building adaptive capacity and resilience ................................................ 22

Mainstreaming ....................................................................................................22
Adaptive management ....................................................................................24
Collaboration .......................................................................................................25

3

Part 2  imPlementing Climate Change aD aPtation strategies ....26

overview of Part 2 ......................................................................................... 26

land use planning ......................................................................................... 28

Regional Growth Strategies ...........................................................................28
Official Community Plans ...............................................................................30
Development Permit Areas ............................................................................35
Development Approval Information Areas ..............................................39
Zoning (or land use) bylaws and density bonuses ................................40
Development cost charges ............................................................................43
Flood plain regulation ......................................................................................44
Subdivision and servicing bylaws ................................................................45

specific regulatory powers .......................................................................... 48

Tree protection ....................................................................................................48
Run-off control, landscaping, and soil removal and deposit ............50
Animal control bylaws ......................................................................................53
Some notes on permitting and enforcement .........................................54

emergency management planning ........................................................... 55
long term financial planning and reporting............................................ 59
asset management ........................................................................................ 62
infrastructure .................................................................................................. 64
Civic building policy and building regulation ......................................... 67
Watershed management planning ............................................................ 69
liquid waste management plans ............................................................... 70
air quality planning ....................................................................................... 71
Biodiversity and conservation ..................................................................... 72
Community and economic development services ................................. 74
legal liability ................................................................................................... 76
insurance ......................................................................................................... 78
final thoughts ................................................................................................. 79

aPPenDiCes

appendix a: further resources .................................................................... 80
appendix B: three land use scenarios:  
Planning for climate change in BC communities .................................... 81
appendix C: Developing climate change adaptation strategies:  
Checklist for local governments ................................................................. 90
appendix D: Considerations for local governments  
with limited resources .................................................................................103
appendix e: BC regional adaptation Collaborative resources ..........107

IMPORTANT NOTE!

This guide focuses on 
ways to implement 
climate change 
adaptation strategies. 
A very brief overview 
of climate change 
impacts and climate 
change assessment 
processes is also 
provided in Part 1.

Further information 
about past and future 
climate change and 
potential impacts 
in BC regions is 
available from the 
Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium. 
http://pacificclimate.
org/tools-and-data/
plan2adapt

Further resources to assist 
in understanding how 
a changing climate will 
affect communities in BC, 
assessing vulnerabilities 
or risks, and setting 
adaptation priorities 
can be found in the 
Appendices to this guide.

4

Acknowledgments

Special thanks to Cathy LeBlanc, Senior Planner, Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural 
Development (MCSCD), who was the project manager for this report and also generously 
provided significant input and assistance. Special thanks as well to Jenny Fraser, BC Ministry of 
Environment. Many thanks also to the panel of experts that was invited to review and comment 
on this document in various drafts, including: Allan Douglas, Ontario Centre for Climate Impacts 
and Adaptation Resources; Angela Danyluk, District of Delta; Bill Huot, MCSCD; Brian Bedford, 
MCSCD; Bruce Simard, Peace River Regional District and on behalf of the Planning Institute 
of BC; Chris Jensen, MCSCD; Dave Dyer, City of Prince George; Deborah Harford, Adaptation 
to Climate Change Team, Simon Fraser University; Diana Brooks, BC Ministry of Jobs, Tourism 
and Innovation; Gerard LeBlanc, District of Sooke; Gregory Richardson, Natural Resources 
Canada; Heike Schmidt, MCSCD; Ingrid Liepa, The Connecting Link; Jared Wright, Union of 
BC Municipalities; Jennifer Hill, MCSCD; Jim Vanderwal, Fraser Basin Council; Karen Rothe, 
MCSCD; Kate Miller, Cowichan Valley Regional District; Laurie Cordell, Fraser Basin Council; 
Margo Daykin, City of Richmond; Meggin Messenger, MCSCD; Nicholas Heap, Canadian Wind 
Energy Association; Phil Hill, Natural Resources Canada; Stewart Cohen, Environment Canada; 
Talitha Soldera, MCSCD; Tammy Keats and Kimberly Bitterman, Newfoundland Department of 
Environment and Conservation; Tamsin Mills, City of Vancouver; Trevor Murdock, Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium, University of Victoria. Many thanks as well for review and ideas to Mark 
Allison, Whistler Centre for Sustainability; Carrie Baron, City of Surrey; Laura Byrne, District 
of Sooke; and Andrew Gage, West Coast Environmental Law. Finally, many thanks to Susan 
Rutherford, former staff counsel at West Coast Environmental Law, who recognized the need for 
a guide and prepared draft materials that contributed to the development of this guide.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

5

introduction

BC’s climate is changing, and scientists who study the climate are projecting further 
changes over the next decades. Preparing for these changes and the impacts they will 
have  on  natural  systems  and  human  communities  is  usually  called  “climate  change 
adaptation,” and is the subject of this guide. Understandably, much attention has been 
focused  to  date  on “climate  change  mitigation,”  or  efforts  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas 
(GHG)  emissions  in  the  atmosphere  and  help  slow  the  rate  of  climate  change.1  How-
ever, no matter how successful we are at reducing GHG emissions, we still face climate 
change impacts linked to past and ongoing GHG emissions that will be present in the 
atmosphere for many years to come. This means that both types of climate action are 
necessary: mitigation to avoid even more dangerous impacts, and adaptation to deal 
with the inevitable level of change that scientists advise we will continue to face for the 
next century or longer.

Preparing  for  Climate  Change:  An  Implementation  Guide  for  Local  Governments  in  BC  is 
designed to assist local government elected officials and staff, including planners, en-
gineers, chief administrative officers, financial officers and others, to plan and act in ways 
that will make their communities more resilient to the impacts of climate change.

The effects of a changing climate vary and will continue to vary significantly from region 
to region in BC, from sea level rise and flooding in some areas to drought and increased 
risk of wildfire and invasive species in others. Local governments can access information 
about regional climate change impacts in BC through Plan2Adapt http://pacificclimate.
org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt, the website specially developed for BC communities by 
the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium based at the University of Victoria. As well, a num-
ber of publications and approaches have been developed to assist local governments in 
understanding the risks they face, how vulnerable they are, and how to set priorities for 
action. This guide also provides a very brief overview of processes for assessing risk and 
vulnerability to climate change impacts and prioritizing actions, but it is expected that 
local governments will rely on other resources to guide them in these areas. Appendix A 
offers information on further resources on all of these topics.

This resource identifies the tools that local governments can use to implement climate 
change adaptation strategies. Preparing for and responding to climate change impacts 
will, in most communities, engage a wide range of existing local government services 

1  Resources to help local governments reduce their GHG emissions can be found in the BC Climate 

Action Toolkit www.toolkit.bc.ca.

This guide 
identifies the 
tools that local 
governments can 
use to implement 
climate change 
adaptation 
strategies.

66

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Wherever possible, 
this guide provides 
concrete examples, 
drawing on the 
growing experience 
of local governments 
in BC, and also some 
examples from 
outside the province. 

and responsibilities, such as, for example, land use planning, transportation systems, infra-
structure, emergency response planning and delivery, community services, corporate servi-
ces and management, financial planning and asset management.

Wherever possible, this guide provides concrete examples, drawing on the growing experi-
ence of local governments in BC, and also some examples from outside the province. Many 
of the strategies that can help to address a changing climate are also good practices that 
will benefit communities regardless of the climate change impacts they face. These benefits 
may assist local governments in developing a “business case” for climate change adaptation 
action. For example, using green infrastructure solutions like topsoil requirements, rain gar-
dens, bioswales and other measures can provide greater resilience with respect to increased 
precipitation.  At  the  same  time,  in  some  instances  they  can  also  save  local  governments 
money as a result of the reduced life cycle costs associated with these measures compared to 
traditional pipe and drain infrastructure. 

There is no one way to prepare for climate change, however there are emerging practices 
that can be followed or modified to fit local circumstances. It is hoped that this guide will help 
local governments better understand the scope and nature of the challenge that a changing 
climate presents, and how they can use existing tools and resources to implement climate 
change adaptation strategies.

7

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia PARt 1

Understanding climate 
change adaptation

setting the context: A chAnging climAte in Bc

Climate is usually defined as the “average weather” in a given location, over a period of 
time ranging from months up to thousands of years. Temperature, precipitation, humidity, 
cloudiness, air pressure and wind are some of the aspects of climate that are measured.

“Climate change” refers to a change in the mean state of the climate, or in climate variabil-
ity, that persists for decades or longer. Thus climate change can mean general warming in 
mean annual air temperature, or warmer winters, but also changes in the frequency and 
intensity of extreme weather events, including heat waves, heavy rain and snow storms, 
and drought. The global climate has changed over long periods of time as a result of 
natural causes. However, more recent and rapid climate change is being attributed to 
human activities, such as burning fossil fuels and land use changes.2

Historical measurements indicate that British Columbia’s climate has changed over the 
past century: average annual temperature increased by 0.6oC on the coast, 1.1oC in the 
interior and 1.7oC in northern BC. Much of the warming was likely due to an increase in 
nighttime minimum temperatures.3

Lakes and rivers now become free of ice earlier in the spring, on average, and two large 
BC glaciers have each retreated by more than a kilometre. The Fraser River discharges a 
larger share of its total annual flow sooner in the year, and has warmer water in summer. 
Since the beginning of the 1900’s, average sea levels have risen by 4 to 12 centimeters 
along most of the coast, with maximum levels up 16 to 34 cm in the Vancouver area. 
Average coastal sea surface temperatures are 0.9oC to 1.8oC higher.4

Climate change science suggests that by mid-century (2050s), mean annual temperatures 
across BC will be 1.4°C to 3.7°C warmer, on average. Extremely warm temperatures will 
become more frequent. A warmer climate will result in more growing degree days and 
frost free days — increasing the potential for plant growth. At the same time, in winter, 

2  Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K. and Reisinger, A. (Eds.), Climate Change 2007 — Synthesis Report 
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Geneva: IPCC, 2007. www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_
ipcc_fourth_assessment_report_synthesis_report.htm

3  British Columbia Ministry of the Environment; Indicators of Climate Change for British Columbia, 

4 

2002. www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/pdfs/indcc.pdf
Ibid., and Bornhold, Brian D. (2008) Projected Sea Level Changes for British Columbia in the 21st 
Century. Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Natural Resources Canada and the Government of British 
Columbia. www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/pdfs/sea-level-changes-08.pdf

While these changes 
in temperature 
and precipitation 
may seem small, 
they will have 
significant impacts 
on natural systems.

88

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia most of BC will likely receive more precipitation (up to 26% more in some locations). In 
summer, northern BC maybe up to 15% wetter, while southern BC may be up to 20% 
drier. In winter and spring, snowfall will decrease.5

While  these  changes  may  seem  small,  they  will  have  significant  impacts  on  natural 
systems.  Water  resources  and  the  hydrologic  cycle,  for  example,  are  highly  sensitive 
to  year-to-year  climate  variability  as  well  as  long  term  changes  in 
climate.  Changes  in  air  temperature  and  precipitation  patterns 
are already having noticeable effects on weather, water cycles and 
ecology, which in turn have impacts on forests, fisheries, agriculture, 
recreational opportunities and other resource-based sectors.

Many  of  the  most  costly  impacts  of  climate  change  are  associated 
with increased frequency and intensity of extreme weather events. 
Heavy “pineapple  express”  rainfall  events  have  caused  widespread 
urban flooding in the Lower Mainland in recent years, and may have 
heightened the risk of slides on steep slopes in some communities.6 
However,  gradual  changes  will  also  have  significant  impacts  over 
time. Some examples are set out below:

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

The mountain pine beetle infestation, linked to milder 
winters and decades of forest fire suppression, has 
significantly affected ecosystems, communities, and the 
economy;

Sea level rise associated with warming, combined with 
higher storm surges, increases the likelihood of flooding and 
erosion in low lying coastal communities;

The 2003 and 2009 wildfire seasons were the most 
dangerous and expensive on record; as summers continue 
to warm and become drier, such seasons will likely become 
more frequent;

Smaller snow packs and shrinking glaciers contribute to 
lower summer stream flows and increased probability of 
summer water shortages in some regions; and

The seasonal droughts of 2003 and 2009 demonstrate the 
vulnerability of water supplies. BC can expect droughts like 
this to become more frequent.

CLIMATE CHANGE:  
GLOBAL PROBLEM, REGIONAL IMPACTs

While climate change is a global problem, 
the way the climate changes, and its 
impacts on natural systems, varies from 
region to region. Sea level rise is an issue 
for coastal communities in BC, for example, 
while increased wildfires are more likely 
to be a problem in the interior regions. As 
well, in some cases geographic features or 
settlement and land use patterns might 
mean that even nearby communities face 
different challenges. In the Lower Mainland, 
sea level rise creates different issues for 
Surrey and Delta, with direct impacts to 
agricultural lands, compared to Vancouver 
where urban areas will be most affected.

5  Zwiers, F.W., Schnorlous, M.A., & Maruszoczka, G.D. (2011), Hydrologic Impacts of Climate Change 
on BC Water Resources, Summary Report for the Campbell, Columbia and Peace River Watersheds, 
Annex 1: Climate Projections for BC. Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium. The summary of future 
climate change also includes information from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium Regional 
Analysis Tool http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/regional-analysis-tool and Plan2Adapt 
http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt websites.

6  Nicholas Heap (2007) Hot Properties: How Global Warming Could Transform B.C.’s Real Estate Sector. 

David Suzuki Foundation, Vancouver, p. 19.

Map figure from: British Columbia 
in From Impacts to Adaptation: 
Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, 
edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, 
J. Lacroix and E. Bush. Government 
of Canada, Ottawa ON, pp. 329-386

9

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia whAt is climAte chAnge AdAPtAtion And why 
is it imPoRtAnt foR locAl goveRnments in Bc?

defining climate change adaptation

The most widely used definition of climate change adaptation is from the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change:

adjustment in natural or human systems in response to actual or expected 
climatic stimuli or their effects, which moderates harm or exploits beneficial 
opportunities.7

According to this definition:

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Adaptation involves “adjustment,” or change;

Both natural and human systems adapt;

They adapt to climate change and/or to its impacts;

Adaptation includes adjusting to actual climate change after the fact, and also 
preparing for expected climate change before it happens; and

Adaptation can moderate harm or take advantage of new opportunities.

Natural systems will only respond to climate change as it happens. By contrast, human 
systems,  including  local  governments,  can  use  increasingly  reliable  information  from 
climate scientists about future climate and its impacts to be pro-active, anticipate and 
prepare ahead. Local governments can consider the costs and benefits of taking action 
in advance compared with making adjustments after the climate changes.

climate change adaptation and local governments

The provincial government has a climate change adaptation strategy8 that recognizes 
local governments as important decisionmakers with respect to climate adaptation. BC 
local governments have powers and responsibilities related to land use, public infrastruc-
ture and finances, and a range of services, from emergency management to economic, 
cultural and social programs that can be used to develop and implement an integrated 
approach to local climate change adaptation.

For  local  governments,  putting  adaptation  to  climate  change  into  practice  will  mean 
enhancing  the  resilience  of  the  built  and  natural  environments  within  their  jurisdic-
tions, managing risk, making sound capital investments, managing infrastructure costs, 

7  Core Writing Team, Pachauri, R.K. and Reisinger, A. (Eds.), Climate Change 2007 — Synthesis Report 
Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change. Geneva: IPCC, 2007. www.ipcc.ch/publications_and_data/publications_
ipcc_fourth_assessment_report_synthesis_report.htm [accessed April 2012]

8  Preparing for Climate Change: British Columbia’s Adaptation Strategy at www.livesmartbc.ca/

attachments/Adaptation_Strategy.pdf

“Successful adaptation 
does not mean that 
impacts will not occur, 
only that they will 
be less severe than 
would be experienced 
had no adaptation 
occurred.”

 —  D.S. Lemmen, F.J. 
Warren and J. Lacroix, 
From Impacts to 
Adaptation: Canada 
in a Changing Climate 
2007. www.nrcan.
gc.ca/earth-sciences/
climate-change/
community-
adaptation/
assessments/132

10

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia ensuring service continuity, advancing public health and safety, reducing liability, and main-
taining or enhancing the liveability of communities.

PLANNING FOR 
(CLIMATE) CHANGE

Adaptation  actions  can  include  changes  in  policy,  technology,  behaviour,  management,  or 
regulation. While  the  tools  used  by  local  government  will  be  familiar  ones,  there  are  some 
important new considerations:

•	

•	

•	

The time horizon for adaptation planning will in many cases be much longer than the 
typical five-year cycles of official community plans or financial plans;

The past will no longer be a reliable indicator of the future, particularly with respect to 
natural hazards and conditions and the demands they place on infrastructure. While 
there is uncertainty about future climate change impacts, scientific information about 
trends is available and in most cases enough to begin preparing; and

Community consultation and engagement in solutions will be more important than 
ever, particularly because of the potential trade-offs that will be required.

The goal of adaptation is to reduce vulnerability and risk associated with climate change. Some 
possible examples include:

•	

•	

•	

•	

Adapting to more extreme precipitation by increasing the area of permeable surface 
to slow run-off and decrease erosion;

Adapting to sea level rise by buffering shorelines or considering alternative strategies;

Adapting to increased wildfire risks by developing a fuel treatment program and 
making changes to zoning and development permitting; and

Adapting to more frequent water shortages by improving water conservation and 
planting drought-tolerant species.

Adaptation  may  also  include  actions  that  realize  any  opportunities  presented  by  climate 
change — for example, longer growing seasons may present enhanced opportunities for local 
market gardening.

Local governments 
already plan for 
medium- and 
long term 
change — whether 
it is population 
growth, shifting 
demographics, 
new economic 
drivers or changing 
social needs — and 
climate change is 
just another factor 
of change that 
will need to be 
accounted for.
PHOTO COURTESy 
CIBOULETTE/FLICKR

11

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia climate change adaptation and climate change mitigation

Climate change adaptation and climate change mitigation (reducing greenhouse gas emissions) are 
related, and both are important for local government. However, they serve different ends: climate 
change  adaptation  is  about  dealing  with  the  problems  created  by  climate  change,  and  climate 
change mitigation is about not making the problem worse.

While  adaptation  and  greenhouse  gas  reduction  decisions  often  occur  within  the  same  con-
texts — land use, infrastructure, park, water use, and other planning processes — there may or may 
not be obvious practical linkages.

For example, addressing increased flooding risks by raising dikes or changes to zoning and require-
ments for development permits does not directly affect the greenhouse gas emissions produced by 
a community. On the other hand, planting urban trees helps communities cope with more frequent 
heat waves and increased stormwater run-off, while at the same time removing carbon from the 
atmosphere as the trees grow — a case where climate change mitigation and adaptation overlap.

Generally speaking, this guide favours approaches to adaptation that increase overall community 
resiliency, and have multiple benefits, however the first priority for adaptation actions should be 
to effectively address the climate change impacts that the community has identified as needing 
attention. It would be ideal if all the adaptation actions local governments choose to implement 
also reduced greenhouse gas emissions, for example, or had other important co-benefits. However, 
many adaptation actions will likely be neutral with respect to greenhouse gas emissions. The dia-
gram below outlines how some adaptation and mitigation policies overlap, and some do not.

Mitigation 

Reduces Emissions

Adaptation 
Reduces Harm 

Renewable energy 

Energy conservation and efficiency 
measures that reduce fossil fuel use 

More Permeable surfaces 

Basement sewer backflow valves 

Green roofs

Upgrades to sewers, culverts &
overland flow routes for extreme 

Combined heat & power systems 

Shade programs

rainfall 

More active transportation 
(cycling and walking)

Expanded transit use 

Fuel efficient & electric vehicles 

Reduced air travel 

Better insulated buildings

Expand tree canopy

Enhanced  emergency & business 
continuity  planning  for extreme 
weather events 

Deep lake water cooling 

Enhanced  heat response system 

Local food 

West Nile & Lyme Disease Programs 

Capture & use landfill gas

Identification & control programs 
for invasive species 

Downspout disconnection

Source:   J. Penney 2008. Climate Change Adaptation in the City of Toronto: Lessons for the Great Lakes 

Figure 2:   Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation Options 

Communities. Clean Air Partnership. Toronto, Canada, www.cleanairpartnership.org/files/Climate%20
The potential for “win-win” solutions did not, however, drive the selection of the short-term 
Change%20Adaptation%20in%20the%20City%20of%20Toronto%20-%20Lessons%20for%20
adaptation actions that were included in Toronto’s adaptation strategy. It is possible that they 
Great%20Lakes%20Communities%20(Penney,%20J.%202008).pdf
may be more important in developing the longer-term strategy.  Certainly TEO recommended 
that in budget proposals for climate change activities in 2009 City Divisions should consider the 
contribution that the proposed actions would make to emissions reduction and to reducing 
impacts.

It remains to be seen the extent to which mitigation and adaptation can be planned together. 
There is no question that these strategies should complement each other wherever possible. It 

12

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Benefits of a strategic approach to climate change adaptation

Because the climate is changing, and will continue to change, local governments will find them-
selves adapting to the changes, whether they have planned to do so, or not. What is at stake is 
how successful local governments will be at minimizing the potential negative impacts of climate 
change on their communities, and realizing any opportunities that may arise.

To make the best use of scarce resources, local governments can plan ahead and use a strategic 
approach to climate change adaptation. Of course, after weighing options, a local government 
may still decide to take no action with respect to a future climate impact, but 
there is an important distinction between deciding not to act, and not acting 
because of inertia or failing to consider alternatives.9

A strategic, or planned approach to climate change adaptation has a number 
of key benefits for local governments:

•	 Greater opportunities for adopting measures that have co-benefits 

and align with other community goals can be explored; 

•	

•	

•	

•	

Time can be taken to evaluate and address potential insurance and 
liability issues arising from climate change impacts;

Cost savings can be realized by considering climate change impacts in the regular 
maintenance/updating/renewal schedule of existing infrastructure and by planning for 
new infrastructure to avoid expensive upgrades later; 

Adaptation measures that have unintended adverse impacts are more likely to be 
avoided if they have been identified and evaluated in advance;

Emergency needs can be identified and prioritized in advance of crises;

•	 Opportunities for cooperation with other governments and agencies can be explored;

•	

•	

•	

Communities can be consulted and engaged in developing and implementing 
responses;

Steps can be taken to enhance the resilience of vulnerable ecosystems before 
environmental thresholds are reached; and

Local governments can avoid committing to development patterns or development in 
areas that will pose significant risks for inhabitants over the longer term as a result of 
climate change impacts.

The table on the following pages is based on materials from Canada’s National Assessment for 
British Columbia and a format prepared for King County, Washington. The table lists some poten-
tial climate impacts in different sectors that are relevant to local governments in BC. It should be 
noted that not all impacts listed will occur in all regions.

Because the climate 
is changing, and will 
continue to change, 
local governments 
will find themselves 
adapting to the 
changes, whether 
they have planned 
to do so, or not. 

9  A central government perspective on climate change impacts, vulnerability and adaptation, Andy Reisinger, 
Policy Analyst/Science Adviser, New Zealand Climate Change Programme, www.lgnz.co.nz/library/files/
store_001/impacts-of-climate-change.pdf

13

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia initiAl scoPing: A sAmPle of sectoRs And PotentiAl climAte chAnge imPActs

Sector

Impacts in some regions could include…

•	 Reduced snowpack and earlier snowmelt, meaning earlier spring flows and 

•	
•	
•	

reduced April to September streamflows 
Increased risk of drought (more prolonged and intense) in some areas
Increased risk of flooding in some areas
Increased competition for water with implications for local and regional 
allocations, as well as transborder agreements
•	 Warmer water temperatures in lakes and rivers
•	 Changes in water quality
•	 Hydrological changes in watersheds affected by mountain pine beetle 

resulting from tree mortality and increases in logging activity

•	 Reduced groundwater recharge and discharge, while at the same time 

increased demands for groundwater as a result of reduced surface water 
flows
Increased contamination of surface water due to flooding

•	
•	 Aquifer contamination or depletion; saltwater intrusion in coastal areas

•	

Increased demand for irrigation for the south coast and southern interior 
regions at the same time that summer flows will be decreasing
Increased pest pressure resulting from winter survival of pests and diseases

•	
•	 More frequent and sustained droughts
•	
•	 Waterlogged soils in some areas due to flooding and increased winter 

Increased salinity in coastal areas

precipitation
Increased flooding leading to increased leaching of agricultural chemicals
Increased risk of smoke-damaged crops in some regions

•	
•	
•	 Possible increase in productivity for some crops and new opportunities for 

heat-requiring species in some areas

•	 Potential opportunities for new crops in northern areas resulting from longer 

growing seasons, depending on soil suitability, water availability and other 
factors

•	 Shift in the distribution and range of species
•	 Loss of species not able to adapt to changes
•	
Increased competition from invasive species
•	 Loss and fragmentation of habitat
•	

Increased wildfire frequency and severity, which will challenge some 
ecosystems but may benefit fire-maintained ecosystems

•	 Large-scale pest outbreaks
•	 Challenges to the capacity of BC’s system of protected areas as species are 

forced to migrate

Hydrology 
and water 
resources

Agriculture

Biodiversity

14

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Sector

Impacts in some regions could include…

Forests, forest 
industry, parks 
and urban 
trees 

Tourism and 
recreation

Energy

•	 Ongoing impacts from the mountain pine beetle outbreak
•	 Losses in productivity in drier and warmer regions
•	 Shift in the distribution and range of species
•	
•	
•	
•	 Potential reduction in access to timber resulting from warmer, wetter weather 

Increased risk of insect outbreaks
Increased risk of forest fire, and potential for larger fires of higher intensity
Increased competition from invasive species

in winter, and increased risk of wildfire in summer

•	 Extreme winds leading to windfall
•	 Drier conditions leading to increased maintenance needs for urban trees 

(water, mulching, replacement)

•	 Modest increases in productivity in northern BC where soil moisture is 

adequate and fire risk is low

•	 Reduced opportunities for cold season recreation due to inadequate 

•	

snowfall, rising snowlines and/or reduced snow or ice quality
Increased reliance on snow-making at ski areas, requiring significant capital 
and water resources and favouring larger ski operators

•	 Decreased opportunities for warm season activities during the hottest part of 
the year, particularly in southern areas (e.g., from heat, forest fires, low water 
levels, reduced air quality)

•	 Coastal erosion and flooding affecting tourism in coastal communities, such 

as vacation housing and resort infrastructure
Increased need for hazard reduction and emergency management in the 
tourism and recreation sector to deal with increased floods, landslides, 
wildfires and avalanches
Increased opportunities for warm season activities in some regions

•	

•	

•	 Risk of decreased hydroelectric generating capacity due to water shortages 

resulting from reduced snow packs, declining glacier contributions and 
frequent drought 

•	 Reduced heating demand during winter months
•	
•	 Potential for increasing energy prices due to carbon pricing policies within BC 

Increased cooling demand during summer months

and outside BC
Increased likelihood of grid power interruption from extreme weather events

•	
•	 Emerging incentives to develop district energy systems and decentralized 

renewable energy sources that are less vulnerable to large-scale disruptions

•	 Ongoing incentives from utilities to encourage energy efficiency

15

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Sector

Impacts in some regions could include…

Transportation 

•	 More travel disruptions associated with landslides, road washouts, flooding, 

•	
•	
•	

ice jams and wildfires
Increased road surface damage from higher temperatures 
Increased frequency of freeze-thaw cycles and damage to roads
Increased maintenance requirements and brushfires for roadside and median 
strip vegetation

•	 Potential reductions in water-based navigation due to lower summer stream 

flows

•	 Need for alternate modes of transportation of food/medical supplies to 

communities that rely on ice roads for access in winter

•	 Milder winter weather leading to reductions in motor vehicle accidents 

•	

•	

Increased risk of windstorms, forest fires, storm surges, landslides, 
snowstorms, ice jams, hail and floods
Increased demands on storm water management systems with the potential 
for more combined storm water and sewer overflows, and need to explore 
integrated storm water management practices

Infrastructure

•	 Reduced effectiveness of sea walls as a result of sea level rise
•	 Need for new or upgraded flood control and erosion control structures or 

alternative strategies

•	 Need for retrofit upgrades of existing vulnerable infrastructure, including 

port facilities, transportation network, electricity and communications 
distribution infrastructure

•	 Potential for more green infrastructure and low impact development due to 

greater resilience to climate change impacts offered by these practices

•	

Increased erosion or damage to coastal infrastructure, dunes, beaches, and 
other natural features due to sea level rise and storm surge

•	 Loss of coastal wetlands and other coastal habitats due to sea level rise and 

•	

increased storm surges contributing to erosion
Increased costs for maintenance and expansion of coastal erosion control 
(natural or man-made)

•	 Saltwater intrusion into coastal aquifers 
•	 Potential increased risk of pollution from coastal industrial sites due to sea 

level rise

•	 Loss of cultural and historical sites on coastline due to sea level rise and 

related impacts

•	 Coastal squeeze implications, i.e. loss of coastal habitat in areas where 

man-made defensive structures or natural features form a barrier along the 
coast that prevents the landward movement of ecosystems and habitats in 
response to sea level rise
Increased salinity of low-lying farmland

•	

Coastal 
resources and 
ecosystems

16

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Sector

Impacts in some regions could include…

Aquatic 
ecosystems 
and fisheries

Business

•	 Shifts in species range and distribution
•	
•	 Rising ocean and freshwater temperatures leading to increased stress on 

Invasion of coastal waters by exotic species

coldwater species such as salmon

•	 Changes in the amount, timing and temperature of river flows
•	 Potential increased conflicts of fisheries with other water uses (e.g. 

hydroelectric power generation, irrigation, drinking water), particularly in the 
southern interior

•	 Price volatility in energy and raw product markets due to more extreme 

weather events
Increased insurance premiums due to more extreme weather events
Impacts on business infrastructure located in floodplains or coastal areas

•	
•	
•	 Decreased availability of water resources potentially affecting water-intensive 

activities, such as agriculture, pulp and paper processing, fish hatcheries, 
food processing, mining, chemical and petrochemical processing and 
manufacture, small and large hydro installations and airport operations

•	 Potential for business interruption due to extreme events and the 

subsequent need for business continuity planning

•	 Concern from business community regarding security of investments and 

assets in face of climate change impacts

•	 More heat-related stress, particularly among seniors, children, those with low 

income, and other vulnerable segments of the population (e.g. homeless)

•	 Fewer extreme cold-related health risks
•	
•	 Reduced air quality in urban areas such as Greater Vancouver, Prince George 

Increase in diseases spread by water, air and vectors (e.g. West Nile)

Health

and the Okanagan Valley

•	 Reduced air quality due to increases in forest fire frequency
•	

Increased risks for vulnerable populations as a result of extreme weather or 
related events (e.g. special evacuation needs, access to regular medical care 
and prescription drugs) 

•	 Reduced drinking water security in water-stressed regions

•	

Increased demands on emergency response services related to extreme 
weather events (e.g., heat, flooding, storms) and forest fires

Emergency 
response

•	 Heightened vulnerability of remote communities dependent on limited 

essential services and infrastructure in case of extreme weather events and 
natural hazards

•	 Greater possibility of simultaneous multiple impacts
•	 Greater need to coordinate emergency response across regions

Table adapted 
from Snover, A.K., 
L. Whitely Binder, J. 
Lopez, E. Willmott, J. 
Kay, D. Howell, and 
J. Simmonds. 2007. 
Preparing for Climate 
Change: A Guidebook 
for Local, Regional, and 
State Governments. 
In association with 
and published 
by ICLEI — Local 
Governments for 
Sustainability, 
Oakland, CA. pp. 
40-42, with materials 
from Walker, I.J. and 
R. Sydneysmith. 2008. 
British Columbia 
in From Impacts to 
Adaptation: Canada 
in a Changing Climate 
2007, edited by D.S. 
Lemmen, F.J. Warren, 
J. Lacroix and E. 
Bush. Government of 
Canada, Ottawa ON, 
pp. 329-386.

17

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia An oveRview of the AdAPtAtion PRocess

identifying climate change impacts and assessing risks and vulnerabilities

The first stage in local government adaptation is to assess how climate change will likely 
affect the community so that priorities for action can be identified. Climate change and 
its impacts vary from one location to another, and communities vary in their exposure 
and ability to cope. In order to develop a climate change adaptation strategy, a local gov-
ernment will need to learn about the potential regional impacts facing its community, 
identify ways in which the community is vulnerable, and quantify risk related to climate 
change.  Appendix A  identifies  resources  that  can  help  local  governments  carry  out  or 
participate in assessments of vulnerability and risk.

Good information about climate change is the foundation for this stage in the adaptation 
process.

Additional scientific information, in particular on the regional impacts of climate change, 
exists in various forms, mostly technical reports and analyses. The amount available in 
plain language, however, is currently limited, but growing. Appendix A includes a few 
key sources of such information, including the comprehensive high level summary of 
the scientific literature on climate change impacts in BC produced by Natural Resources 
Canada.10

WHERE TO FINd INFORMATION ABOuT REGIONAL CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTs

Plan2Adapt 
interactive 
planning tool 
website

The Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) at the University of Victoria produces regionally 
and locally relevant information about past and future climate and some of its impacts on 
hydrology and ecosystems. PCIC also aims to “bridge the gap” between climate science experts 
and decisionmakers, by supporting the two-way transfer of knowledge, and by making 

scientific information more accessible.

Some communities in BC have engaged PCIC to produce 
information specific to their communities, while others have 
relied on “off the shelf” information about regional climate change 
available from the Plan2Adapt website. The website provides 
access to climate data tables, user-friendly graphs and maps of 
future temperature, precipitation, snowfall, and other climate 
variables, and written summaries of this information. For example, 
Plan2Adapt indicates that mean annual temperature in the Peace 
River Regional District will be 1.4°C to 2.8°C warmer in the 2050s. 
Users can download contents for further analysis, reporting, 
and for use in presentations. See http://pacificclimate.org/
tools-and-data/plan2adapt.

10  D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren and J. Lacroix (2007), From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing 

Climate 2007. www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/
assessments/132

18

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Local observations and expertise are also an important source of information about climate change 
impacts and vulnerabilities. Making a connection between local knowledge and higher-level scien-
tific information will both enhance understanding of the impacts of a changing climate and help to 
engage the community in considering adaptation strategies.11

Uncertainty about the rate of climate change, and severity of impacts

There are two main sources of uncertainty in scientific climate projections. First, climate change is 
linked to the concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, and future levels depend on 
how successful the global community is at reducing greenhouse gas emissions in coming years. 
Second, scientists obtain information about future climate change from computer models of the 
global climate system, and these models, though sophisticated, may not fully reflect the intricacies 
of the climate system.

Despite the uncertainty in projections of future climate, most experts agree there is enough informa-
tion for decisionmakers to start to prepare. The uncertainty is not whether the climate is changing, 
but how rapidly. It is important to view adaptation as a process; as new information becomes avail-
able or certain physical changes become apparent, actions can be re-evaluated and updated.

Some of the resources in Appendix A discuss uncertainty and provide guidance on how local gov-
ernments can address it in their assessment and planning processes. Section 4 of this guide also 
provides an introduction to ways that local governments can build adaptive capacity and resilience 
in their communities so that they can better cope with uncertainty. Part 2 looks at ways to implement 
climate change adaptation strategies, and integrate climate change adaptation into local govern-
ment planning and decision-making. It also considers how certain approaches, for example, green 

11  See, for example, Ingrid Liepa (2009) Adapting to Climate Change in Kimberley, BC, Executive Summary.  

www.city.kimberley.bc.ca/sites/kimberley.civicwebcms.com/files/media/iWeb/%7B0647EEC8-854E-424A-
A28A-026746766D52%7DExecutiveSummary-June30.pdf

despite the 
uncertainty in 
projections of 
future climate, 
most experts agree 
there is enough 
information for 
decisionmakers to 
start to prepare.

PHOTO COURTESy 
ECSTATICIST/FLICKR

19

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia infrastructure  measures  (relying  on  natural  and  engineered  features  to  more  closely 
mimic the natural hydrologic cycle), offer greater flexibility in the face of uncertainty 
around future climate change projections as opposed to making changes to conven-
tional pipe and drain infrastructure.

identifying and evaluating adaptation options

After assessing risk and vulnerability, the next stage is to identify and evaluate com-
munity adaptation options, strategies, and actions. It should be emphasized that the 
scientific information about climate change in a region or local area will not in itself 
determine the action that needs to be taken. As with any matter within their jurisdiction, 
local governments will still need to consider the relevant information and make policy 
choices about the actions that are most appropriate for their communities.

This  guide  provides  many  practical  ideas  about  how  communities  can  increase  their 
resilience and manage risk related to climate change, and ways to deliver adaptation 
strategies. Local government case studies, sector-specific guides, and other resources 
identified in Appendix A are other good sources of adaptation ideas. Many commun-
ities,  once  they  understand  their  vulnerabilities,  can  identify  adaptation  options  and 
priorities through consultation and discussion in their communities.

Not  all  adaptation  options  are  equally  cost-effective  or  appealing. Vision,  values,  risk 
tolerance, priorities, resources, and other factors vary from one community to another, 
so  even  those  facing  similar  risks  and  opportunities  may  make  different  adaptation 
choices. Actions that address current issues at the same time as potential future climate 
change impacts are particularly effective. In some cases, science can help to inform deci-
sions about which adaptation options to select; for example an engineering study might 
provide solid information about the cost and effectiveness of several different engin-
eered solutions to urban flooding. In other cases, for example where there are difficult 
trade-offs  to  be  made,  significant  community  engagement  and  consultation  may  be 
required. Robust adaption strategies typically include a range of adaptation measures 
or actions to be implemented.

PRIORITIZING ACTIONS 
IN KIMBERLEy, BC

In 2008–2009 the City 
of Kimberley was a 
pilot community in the 
Columbia Basin Trust’s 
Communities Adapting to 
Climate Change Initiative. 
Working with climate 
information prepared 
by the Pacific Climate 
Impacts Consortium, 
combined with local 
input, the community 
identified three priority 
issue areas: Water and 
Forests, Municipal 
Infrastructure, and 
Tourism. A series 
of working groups 
identified vulnerabilities 
in these areas 
and came up with 
recommendations for 
adaptive actions.  
www.city.kimberley.
bc.ca/sites/kimberley.
civicwebcms.
com/files/media/
iWeb/%7B0647EEC8-
854E-424A-A28A- 
026746766D52%7D 
ExecutiveSummary 
-June30.pdf 

PHOTO COURTESy  
CITy OF KIMBERLEy

20

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

Adaptation is a 
process. Local 
governments and 
their communities 
will need to 
continue to be 
engaged with 
assessing climate 
change impacts, 
prioritizing actions 
and implementing 
responses, as 
long as the 
climate continues 
to change.

CHETWyND 
PHOTO COURTESy 
ENERGETICCITy/FLICKR

implementing, monitoring, and updating adaptation strategies

Finally, the adaptation process involves implementing strategies, monitoring results, and updating 
strategies and decisions over time to reflect new information, priorities, and resources. 

Some communities have chosen to directly address the climate change vulnerabilities they have 
identified through modifications to existing plans and strategies for land use, infrastructure, parks, 
stormwater and other areas of responsibility. This is sometimes called “mainstreaming” and is ad-
dressed further in Section 4. Alternatively, some communities choose to first develop stand-alone 
“adaptation plans.” In this case further steps are necessary to integrate the actions identified in the 
adaptation plans into planning documents and decision-making processes. 

In terms of monitoring results, there is no standard measure of adaptation success. In general, the 
goals of adaptation are to increase community resilience, reduce risk, and advance opportunities. 
Many adaptation actions will also advance broader sustainability goals. In practice, the results of 
adaptation will look different for every community, based on how local impacts are addressed. 

Over time, climate change adaptation strategies and actions will need to be regularly updated and 
refined to take into account both new information and evolving realities about climate change im-
pacts. They will also need to reflect other factors that may be relevant in a given community, such as 
increasing or decreasing populations and shifting demographics, changing economic drivers, new 
technologies, opportunities for cooperation or funding, and others. Adaptation is a process. Local 
governments and their communities will need to continue to be engaged with assessing climate 
change impacts, prioritizing actions and implementing responses, as long as the climate continues 
to change.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

21

Building AdAPtive cAPAcity And Resilience

Because adaptation to climate change needs to be ongoing, successful adaptation will 
require not only good information about climate change, and prioritization of actions, but 
also the ability to implement responses and modify those responses over time. “Adaptive 
capacity” refers to the capabilities of a region, community or group to implement effective 
adaptation actions.12

Most practitioners and experts working in this field seem to agree that it is useful to con-
sider how local government services and functions can continue to be delivered in the 
face of a range of plausible climate change outcomes. As one commentator has observed, 
the question to ask is not “What are all the changes that will happen and how can we 
respond?” but “What do we do, and how should we adjust that for the reality of climate 
change.” The idea is to integrate climate change adaptation into existing activities.13

Once they have assessed risk and vulnerability to impacts, it may be useful for local govern-
ments to undertake a “capacity assessment.” This can look at adaptive capacity both from a 
broader community perspective, as well as with respect to the main institutional bodies in 
a community, including local government. An example is the Atlin Adaptive Capacity As-
sessment.14 In looking at ways to strengthen adaptive capacity, communities might want 
to consider how they responded to events in the past that were similar to those expected 
in the future, such as natural hazards like flooding or wildfire. It is important to build on 
existing strengths and programs within the community.

Three related approaches that can help strengthen adaptive capacity across local gov-
ernment  are  discussed  below:  “mainstreaming”  climate  change  adaptation  into  local 
government planning and decision-making; adaptive management, a way to incorporate 
innovation and responsiveness into planning and decision-making; and cooperating and 
collaborating.

mainstreaming

“Mainstreaming”  adaptation  means  ensuring  that  planning  and  decision-making  take 
climate change impacts and vulnerability assessment into account wherever relevant. It 
puts in place an integrated response to a changing climate, assists in ensuring that op-
portunities to address vulnerabilities are explored, and also helps to avoid policies and 
projects that have an adverse effect on adaptation because climate change impacts were 
not considered. Mainstreaming will not happen overnight, but it is an open-ended process 
that can be improved over time.

COMMUNITY ADAPTATION PROJECT

ATLIN ADAPTIVE CAPACITY
ASSESSMENT 

MARCH 2011

The Atlin Climate Change 
Project assessed the extent 
to which the community of 
Atlin, BC was vulnerable to 
the impacts of a changing 
climate and evaluated 
adaptive capacity, as the 
first stage in developing 
a community climate 
adaptation plan. 

Northern Climate Exchange, 
Atlin Adaptive Capacity 
Assessment, March 2011. 
www.taiga.net/nce/
adaptation/Atlin_Adaptive_
Capacity_Assessment.pdf

12  Definition taken from Natural Resources Canada, Adaptive Capacity in Canada, www.nrcan.gc.ca/

earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/adaptation102/218

13  Hoffman, J. (2010). Adapting your work to climate change. EcoAdapt. Retrieved from CAKE: www.

cakex.org/virtual-library/2355

14  Northern Climate Exchange, Atlin Adaptive Capacity Assessment, March 2011. www.taiga.net/nce/

adaptation/Atlin_Adaptive_Capacity_Assessment.pdf

22

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia CLIMATE CHANGE 
AdAPTATION REsEARCH 
ANd POLICy

Some of the many actors 
involved in climate 
change adaptation 
research and policy 
include: 
•	 Ministry of Community, 

Sport and Cultural 
Development

•	 BC Climate Action 

Secretariat

•	 Natural Resources 

Canada

•	 Pacific Climate 

Impacts Consortium
•	 Pacific Institute for 

Climate Solutions

•	 Environment Canada
•	 Planning Institute of BC
•	 Engineers Canada
•	 Columbia Basin Trust
•	 Fraser Basin Council
•	 Okanagan Basin 

Water Board

•	 Asset Management BC
•	 Agriculture and 

Agri-Food Canada
•	 Ministry of Forests, 
Lands and Natural 
Resource Operations

•	 Canadian Water 

Resources Association

•	 Canadian Standards 

Association

•	 Canadian Forest Service
•	 FORREX
•	 Universities and 

colleges across BC

...and others. 

For more information  
see Appendix A.

23
23

Once they have assessed risk and vulnerability to impacts, it may be useful for local 
governments to undertake a “capacity assessment.” PHOTO COURTESy BC HyDRO

In general, mainstreaming climate change adaptation involves the following:

•	 Obtaining the relevant climate information in a form that can be used by local 

government staff and decisionmakers;

•	 Developing adequate knowledge and understanding of climate change impacts 
on the part of local government land use and financial planners, engineers and 
decisionmakers in relation to their areas of responsibility. This  will likely mean 
consulting with climate scientists and other scientific and technical specialists 
who have relevant expertise;

•	

•	

•	

Creating appropriate triggers in planning and decision-making processes — for 
example, including climate change impacts on development checklists, or 
having a certain level of investment in infrastructure trigger a requirement 
that any climate change impacts be considered in the context of infrastructure 
vulnerabilities. Even where climate change impacts have already been identified, 
these types of triggers are important to ensure that current measures are 
periodically reassessed in the context of updated climate science;

Carrying out robust community consultation processes so that businesses, 
households, individuals and community groups understand the basic science 
and will participate to some degree in developing and implementing adaptation 
strategies; and

Cooperating and collaborating with other local governments, provincial and 
federal  governments, government agencies, First Nations, and local associations 
to access adequate resources and capacity to assess climate change impacts and 
implement effective responses.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Adaptive management15

Adaptive management is a way to continuously adapt and improve a system or a policy framework, 
Managers actively plan to revise policies on a regular basis using updated information about per-
formance as well as about external circumstances that affect performance. It is sometimes referred 
to as “learning by doing.” Adaptive management was developed to accommodate the complexity 
and uncertainty associated with natural systems.  It may be a useful approach to help better meet 
management objectives over time in the context of a changing climate.

For adaptive management to work, practical and contextual information needs to flow to man-
agers that are designing policies so that guidance for operational-level decisions can be improved. 
For example, in terms of climate change, as more information about climate change impacts be-
comes available, this could be used to adjust and refine policies. 

Adaptive management is already being applied in the development of green infrastructure. While 
the expected performance of different rainfall capture methods aimed at protecting water quality 
and habitat can be modeled, all the real-life 
variables that affect performance can never 
be  fully  simulated,  or  predicted.  Through 
adaptive management, performance can be 
monitored  and  evaluated,  and  adjustments 
made  as  necessary.  The  experience  gained 
can  also  be  used  to  inform  the  design  of 
future systems.

Adaptive 
management is 
a more flexible 
approach 
than trying to 
predict all future 
conditions and 
design a perfect 
set of policies.

SOURCE: WWW.FOR.GOV.
BC.CA/HFP/AMHOME/
ADMIN/INDEX.HTM

AdAPTIvE MANAGEMENT IN THE PROPOsEd CITy OF vICTORIA OFFICIAL COMMuNITy PLAN (APRIL 2012)

“An adaptive management approach involves deliberately learning from implementation successes and 
failures to improve subsequent policies and actions over time. It is based on the notion that policies 
are developed with inherent uncertainties and that the wider social, cultural, economic and ecological 
environment inevitably changes over time. Change can originate from external factors such as climate 
change or global economic crisis, or from factors particular to Victoria, such as changes to the city’s 
socio-economic conditions, community values or a localized natural disaster. Changes of this kind may 
undermine the goals, broad objectives and policies of this plan and impede progress towards their 
achievement. Anticipating and responding to potential changes or risks is fundamental to the adaptive 
management framework and policies that follow. A system of regular plan review, monitoring and 
adjustment enables the City to incorporate new information, prepare for uncertainty and adapt to change.” 
www.shapeyourfuturevictoria.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/OCP_Section22.pdf 

15  This section is based primarily on materials developed by West Coast Environmental Law. See “Address risk.” 
www.wcel.org/address-risk, and The Green Infrastructure Guide, s.6.4. www.wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie See also ICLEI Oceania, 
Local Government Climate Change Adaptation Toolkit, www.iclei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/ANZ/
CCP/CCP-AU/Projects/AI/AdaptationToolkit/Toolkit_CCPAdaptation_Final.pdf, and www.for.gov.bc.ca/hfp/
amhome/Admin/index.htm

24

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia In 2011, the City of duncan, Cowichan Tribes, Cowichan valley Regional district, and district of North 
Cowichan signed an MOu to help manage increased flood risks in the region.  
PHOTO COURTESy COWICHAN VALLEy REGIONAL DISTRICT

collaboration

Most local governments, when confronted with the challenge of climate change, will have 
to deal with capacity issues related to expertise and resources. They may also grapple with 
issues  related  to  jurisdiction,  where  some  of  the  information  needed  to  assess  impacts  or 
levers needed to implement responses lie with other governments or agencies.

One way to enhance the capacity of local governments to assess impacts is to work collabora-
tively, with other local governments, provincial and federal governments, government agen-
cies, First Nations, the academic community and professional associations, many of which are 
already working to understand how the climate is changing and what the impacts will be. A 
number of these groups are already working with various local governments in BC.

Collaboration  is  also  a  way  to  coordinate  responses  to  climate  changes  that  have  impacts 
across a region, and require a larger-scale response in order to be effective. They can ensure 
increased resources and coordinated action in a larger geographic area.

For example, facing increased wildfire risks in the region, the City of Kamloops has recognized 
the need to work with the Thompson-Nicola Regional District, the Ministry of Forests and the 
Kamloops Indian Band to develop cross-jurisdictional community fuel breaks along City of 
Kamloops municipal boundaries.16 In the Okanagan, the Okanagan Water Basin Board17 brings 
together  local  government  and  community  representatives  in  an  innovative  collaborative 
organization  that  engages  in  research  and  outreach  designed  to  support  the  sustainable 
management of water resources in the region. The Board and its members are actively work-
ing on a number of initiatives relating to climate change, and they also work together with 
other levels of government and various government agencies, academics and associations on 
different projects.

16  www.city.kamloops.bc.ca/firerescue/pdfs/cwpp.pdf
17  www.obwb.ca

Facing increased 
wildfire risks in the 
region, the City 
of Kamloops has 
recognized the need 
to work with the 
Thompson-Nicola 
Regional district, 
the Ministry of 
Forests and the 
Kamloops Indian 
Band to develop 
cross-jurisdictional 
community fuel 
breaks along City of 
Kamloops municipal 
boundaries.

25

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia PARt 2

Implementing climate change 
adaptation strategies

intRoduction to PARt 2

Local governments have many tools at their disposal to implement climate change 
adaptation strategies. Of course, it is also true that local governments have a lot to 
consider in order to ensure that their communities are prepared for climate change. 
The good news is that a number of BC local governments have already begun to take 
action to address the impacts of a changing climate, and local governments that are 
just getting started have a growing number of examples to consult. The information 
that is provided in this part of the guide is complemented by references to many of 
these examples.

Part 2 first examines the higher-level community plans under the Local Government 
Act that local governments can use to implement climate change adaptation strat-
egies. Regional growth strategies and official community plans can provide a sup-
portive framework for the development and implementation of integrated climate 
change adaptation strategies. The policy guidance offered by these documents can 
help direct action with respect to land use planning and other areas of local govern-
ment jurisdiction such as infrastructure, emergency management planning, asset 
management and financial planning, the protection of biodiversity, and community 
and economic development services.

Also  important  for  developing  an  integrated  response  to  a  changing  climate  are 
the tools that can be used to implement land use planning, such as development 
permits, zoning, and various other measures as outlined below. Some local govern-
ments may be tempted to carry on with status quo land use plans for their com-
munities. However, the decisions made today about land use will have long term 
consequences, enduring until later this century when some of the more significant 
impacts of a changing climate will have become a reality.

Local governments need to start planning now for a climate that is outside the range 
of what has been “normal” for the past century or longer here in BC. As well, plan-
ning for the “new normal” in an integrated way will mean more opportunities to be 
proactive, create additional community benefits and save costs down the road. And 
while liability related to climate change impacts is still a very new area of the law, 
it would be wise for local governments to act prudently in light of projected im-
pacts. For these reasons it is important to begin thinking about how climate change 
preparedness can be integrated into land use planning policies and regulations. A 

2626

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

number of BC local governments are leading the way, and some of their actions are dis-
cussed below. There are many ways that governments can use land use planning and re-
lated regulatory powers to help make their communities more resilient to climate change 
impacts over time.

Adaptation brings home the need to break down silos within local governments. Climate 
change impacts cut across nearly every area of local government service and responsibility.

For  example,  planning  for  infrastructure  that  will  be  resilient  to  future  climate  change 
impacts raises questions about capacity and vulnerability, patterns of development and 
green infrastructure options, costs of maintenance, operation, upgrading and replacement, 
options for financing, and operations during emergencies. Engineers, land use planners, 
asset managers or financial planners and emergency planners all need to be engaged at 
some stage. Internal communications are very important. Some communities have found 
it useful to develop a climate change adaptation committee or team that can explore how 
to identify and manage climate change impacts and responses across a local government. 
Building communities that are resilient in the face of future changes will require internal 
cooperation and collaboration in addition to the external collaboration described in Part 1.

In terms of adaptation strategies themselves, several themes emerge from practices and 
experience to date:

•	

•	

•	

Approaches that maintain and enhance the interconnectedness of communities 
with natural systems — low impact development, green infrastructure 
for rainwater management, protecting ecological values within urban 
boundaries — seem to offer increased resilience to a changing climate as well as 
important co-benefits;

Strategies that emphasize more efficient use of resources and operation of 
equipment and facilities are also important for improving resilience where the 
impacts of climate change may result in shortages of resources such as energy or 
water, or increased demands on infrastructure during extreme weather event; and

The need to adapt to a changing climate points towards regional scale responses 
in certain areas: for example, watershed management, food security and 
emergency planning and response. 

All of these themes are illustrated with references to examples from BC and in some cases 
elsewhere in Canada.

Not all of the examples provided in Part 2 were developed specifically as climate change 
adaptation strategies, but they have been included because they nonetheless offer signifi-
cant adaptation benefits, and can be considered to be part of the toolkit available to local 
governments developing climate change adaptation strategies.

Part 2 concludes with a brief discussion of some of the legal liability and insurance issues 
that may arise for local governments in the context of climate change adaptation.

Part 2 first examines the 
higher-level community 
plans under the Local 
Government Act that 
local governments 
can use to implement 
climate change 
adaptation strategies. 

ANNACIS ISLAND PHOTO 
COURTESy LORI&TODD/FLICKR

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

27

lAnd use PlAnning

Regional growth strategies

Integrating climate change adaptation into  
regional growth strategies or regional-scale planning

There are three main areas where regional growth strategies can promote climate change 
adaptation:

1.  Regional  growth  strategies  should  require  that  regional  district  policies,  plans  and 

regulations consider climate change impacts.

•	

The Okanagan Similkameen Regional District regional growth strategy states 
that the region’s vulnerability to climate change should be considered in 
planning. South Okanagan Regional Growth Strategy (amended September 2011). 
www.rdosmaps.bc.ca/min_bylaws/contract_reports/planning/Regionalgrowth/
RGSByLAW2421_ScheduleA_071008reread2nd_forOct22BoardAgenda.pdf

•	 Metro Vancouver’s regional growth strategy states that climate change 

and natural hazard risk assessments should be incorporated into the 
planning and location of Metro Vancouver utilities, assets and operations. 
Metro Vancouver 2040, Shaping Our Future (adopted July 2011). www.
metrovancouver.org/planning/development/strategy/RGSDocs/
RGSAdoptedbyGVRDBoardJuly292011.pdf

•	

Policy documents prepared in 2010 for the development of the regional growth 
strategy for the Capital Regional District also propose that climate change 
adaptation be considered in all decision-making, planning and regulatory 
measures. Climate Change (Fall 2010). http://sustainability.crd.bc.ca/media/1280/
climate_change_policy_brief_small.pdf

2.  High level objectives regarding climate change impacts of common concern among 

local governments within a regional district should be established.

•	

The Comox Valley Regional District regional growth strategy identifies water 
supply shortages as an issue that is being exacerbated by climate change 
in the region and sets out a number of high-level policies targeted at water 
conservation. Comox Valley Regional Growth Strategy (adopted March 2011). 
www.comoxvalleyrd.ca/uploadedFiles/Regional_Growth_Strategy/RGS/120_
Comox_Valley_Regional_Growth_Strategy_2010_1.pdf

3.  Regional  scale  climate  change  issues  should  be  addressed,  to  ensure  that  local  ap-

proaches have a coordinated and mutually beneficial effect overall.

•	

The Comox Valley Regional District proposes regional floodplain mapping 
and management to deal with climate change and sea level rise. Comox Valley 
Regional Growth Strategy (adopted March 2011). www.comoxvalleyrd.ca/
uploadedFiles/Regional_Growth_Strategy/RGS/120_Comox_Valley_Regional_
Growth_Strategy_2010_1.pdf

Approaches that 
maintain and enhance 
the interconnectedness 
of communities with 
natural systems — low 
impact development, 
green infrastructure for 
rainwater management, 
protecting ecological 
values within urban 
boundaries — seem 
to offer increased 
resilience to a changing 
climate as well as 
important co-benefits.

28

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

•	

The Capital Regional District is proposing to support coordinated efforts to plan for 
and protect the region’s urban forests and environmentally sensitive and significant 
areas. Climate Change (Fall 2010) http://sustainability.crd.bc.ca/media/1280/
climate_change_policy_brief_small.pdf

Promoting connectivity at the landscape level to enhance the resilience of natural 
ecosystems, managing invasive species, and investigating the impacts of climate 
change on water supply and the natural environment in the region are identified 
as priorities for regional management in the Squamish-Lillooet Regional District 
Regional Growth Strategy. (adopted June 2010) www.slrd.bc.ca/files/%7B44E626F3-
81DC-4A10-90E5-7D66BAA6882C%7DBL1062.pdf

To consider:

Many regional districts in BC do not have regional growth strategies. However, preparing 
for climate change may offer cost savings and synergies if undertaken at a regional level, 
both with respect to assessing impacts and implementing responses. Without a regional 
growth strategy this can still be reflected in regional level policy or in a regional-scale 
climate change adaptation strategy. See, for example, the Cariboo-Chilcotin Climate 
Change Adaptation Strategy. www.retooling.ca/_Library/docs/Executive_Summary_-_
Cariboo_Chilcotin_Climage_Change_Adaptation_Strategy_-_September_2011.pdf

REGIONAL GROWTH sTRATEGIEs

Local Government Act, ss. 848-871

Regional growth strategies (optional for regional districts) are land use plans and 
policies designed to apply broadly across regional districts in BC, to “promote human 
settlement that is socially, economically and environmentally healthy and makes 
efficient use of public facilities and services, land and other resources.” Regional 
growth strategies are required to cover a broad range of topics related to regional 
sustainability (sprawl, pollution, adequate, affordable housing, public health 
concerns, efficient use of energy, protection of water and environmentally sensitive 
areas, waste management, efficient movement of goods and people, sustainable 
transportation options). They should provide a comprehensive statement of policies 
and objectives for the region covering a period of at least 20 years.

Regional growth strategies are adopted after an iterative process in which “all 
reasonable efforts” are made by regional boards and affected local governments 
to reach agreement on their contents. Consultation with citizens, First Nations, 
district boards and other levels of government is required, but no public hearing is 
necessary before adoption.

All bylaws and services undertaken by a regional district must be consistent with 
its regional growth strategy, and each municipality must include a regional context 
statement in its OCP describing the relationship between the OCP and regional 
growth strategy and how the OCP will be made consistent with the regional growth 
strategy over time.

Preparing for climate 
change at a regional 
level may offer cost 
savings and synergies, 
both with respect to 
assessing impacts 
and implementing 
responses.

PHOTO COURTESy  
CITy OF COURTENAy

29

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia official community Plans

Integrating climate change adaptation into an OCP

An  Official  Community  Plan  is  one  of  the  key  planning  tools  available  to  a  local  gov-
ernment to put in place climate change adaptation strategies that will be reflected in 
decision-making about land use and development within its jurisdiction. Both the plan-
ning process and the product are important. Depending on how far a local government 
has  advanced  in  assessing  climate  change  impacts  and  developing  climate  change 
adaptation strategies, an OCP can be used in different ways to support action:

•	 When a local government has already assessed its risks and vulnerabilities to 

climate change impacts, or is prepared to undertake this process together with 
a significant revision of its OCP, there is the possibility to address climate change 
adaptation comprehensively across the policies and objectives within the OCP, 
and mainstream associated action throughout all guidelines and regulations; or

•	

•	

For local governments that are just beginning to look at climate change impacts 
and the risks and vulnerabilities in their community, and have limited resources, 
the OCP can be used to frame specific climate change adaptation objectives to 
advance climate change assessment and planning, and/or to modify specific 
policies and objectives to incorporate adjustments to climate change impacts 
where there is enough existing information to do so; or

For local governments that develop stand-alone plans the OCP will need to 
be amended to include the appropriate policies, objectives, maps and related 
material.

Whichever  approach  is  selected,  the  goal  over  time  should  be  for  local  governments 
to develop a comprehensive approach to managing climate impacts, and to have this 
reflected  in  the  OCP.  Climate  change  impacts  cut  across  different  local  government 
policy  areas  and  functions,  and  through  its  OCP  a  local  government  can  put  in  place 
a holistic and integrated approach to addressing impacts across its jurisdiction. It is a 
way to support the mainstreaming of climate change adaptation into local government 

Over time local 
governments should 
aim to mainstream 
climate change 
adaptation into local 
government policy 
and decision-making, 
incorporating 
input from climate 
science experts.

NELSON PHOTO COURTESy 
78SPEED/FLICKR

OFFICIAL COMMuNITy PLAN

Local Government Act, ss. 875-884

An official community plan (OCP) is a forward-looking document that sets out overarching policies and 
objectives that apply to land use and development within the area covered by the plan. It also addresses 
infrastructure, housing, and greenhouse gas reduction targets, and can extend to social needs, agriculture 
and environmental protection and other matters. The OCP provides the framework for local government 
decision-making: all bylaws and local government decisions, including capital expenditures, must be 
consistent with the OCP, once it has been legally adopted by a local government. As well, an OCP is developed 
through a process that includes public consultation, and this provides an opportunity to have a community 
dialogue about climate change impacts and possible actions. OCP policies and objectives can also inform 
considerations of public interest made by Approving Officers with respect to subdivision applications.

30

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Current

2050s

2080s

Visualization of snowpack reductions on the north shore mountains of the District of north Vancouver, 
under a “do nothing” baseline scenario, courtesy Collaborative for advanced landscape Planning, uBC

decision-making. Although the OCP itself does not legally bind a local government to proceed with 
any project, putting climate change adaptation policy objectives in the OCP ensures that subsequent 
legal enactments, such as zoning bylaws, must be consistent with those objectives.

The OCP can offer a relatively long term planning horizon, and local governments could consider 
a planning horizon of 50–100 years in relation to the development of climate change policies and 
objectives aimed at shifting developments and land use patterns over time. It is important to antici-
pate future climate impacts now, before decisions made today result in safety hazards or expensive 
damage to infrastructure over the longer term. The draft City of Prince George OCP indicates, for 
example, that the climate change impact priorities it has identified should be considered in new 
development proposals.18

Having climate change adaptation objectives identified in the OCP can also provide ongoing mo-
mentum for local government action, and a rationale for committing resources for adaptation work. 
The Thetis Island OCP states that “The Local Trust Committee should consider the development of 
new criteria for assessing official community plan or land use bylaw amendment applications from 
the perspective of climate change adaptation and mitigation.”19

An  OCP  can  also  direct  a  local  government  to  take  action  to  further  its  own  strategic  objectives 
through cooperation and partnership with other governments and organizations. The draft Victoria 
OCP offers this policy:

Continue and enhance partnerships with senior, regional and local governments, public 
agencies, community organizations, businesses and individuals for the efficient and 
effective coordination of climate change and energy resiliency plans, policies and initiatives 
including….[r]isk and vulnerability assessment of local climate change impacts.20

Although the OCP 
itself does not 
legally bind a local 
government to 
proceed with any 
project, putting 
climate change 
adaptation policy 
objectives in the 
OCP means that 
subsequent legal 
enactments, such as 
zoning bylaws, must 
be consistent with 
those objectives.

18  Draft City of Prince George OCP (November 2011) www.mypg.ca/progress/Documents/BL8383_The%20

ByLAWOCP_Merged.pdf

19  Thetis Island OCP www.islandstrust.bc.ca/ltc/th/pdf/thbylbaseocp0088.pdf
20  Draft City of Victoria OCP (April 2012), s 12.1 www.shapeyourfuturevictoria.ca/wp-content/uploads/2012/03/

OCP_Section12.pdf 

31

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia The District of 
Elkford OCP, with 
integrated climate 
adaptation strategy, 
has been featured by 
the UN Framework 
Convention on 
Climate Change in 
a new guidebook.

The District of North Vancouver OCP directs its local government to “work with the North Shore 
Emergency Management Office and service organizations to prepare for and respond to emergen-
cies created by extreme weather events.” 21

Some examples of OCPs with integrated climate change adaptation strategies:

•	

•	

•	

•	

The District of Elkford has developed an OCP with a fully integrated climate change 
adaptation strategy (see www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan). Some of the policies 
included in the Elkford OCP include protecting water resources over the long term through 
aquifer mapping and reductions in community water consumption, addressing the 
increased risk of wildfire and flooding, and exploring economic opportunities associated 
with adaptation. 

The City of Richmond City Centre Area Plan (a local area plan that is a Schedule to its OCP) 
included a direction to explore adaptation strategies that would strengthen community 
resiliency to climate change. www.richmond.ca/__shared/assets/city_centre556.pdf

The City of Prince George is continuing to develop its climate change adaptation strategy; 
its draft OCP (November 2011) has incorporated a number of policies and objectives 
related to climate change impacts. See www.mypg.ca/progress/Documents/BL8383_
The%20ByLAWOCP_Merged.pdf

The Village of Kaslo OCP includes a number of key policies supporting climate change 
adaptation. Council must consider climate change impacts when reviewing new 
development applications and when undertaking long term planning initiatives, and bids, 
tenders and contracts for planning and development must reference climate change and 
Kaslo’s Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. No development will be considered for lands 
subject to significant increased risks due to natural hazards related to climate change 
without mitigation measures. https://kaslo.civicweb.net/Documents/DocumentDisplay.
aspx?Id=1838

CONsuLTATION

The consultative process that is generally undertaken to develop or significantly revise an OCP is an 
excellent opportunity to have a dialogue with the public about climate change impacts occurring 

and expected to occur in the community, and to build 
support for policies and measures to address those impacts. 
Consultation also needs to include climate scientists and 
others with relevant expertise, such as emergency planners 
and responders, and staff responsible for infrastructure asset 
management, finances and parks. Sufficient time and space 
will need to be allocated to consider potentially challenging 
material and the range of policy areas and decision-making in 
the community that will be affected.

PHOTO COURTESy MICHELLE LAURIE

21  The District of North Vancouver 2011 OCP, s. 10.4.1 http://identity.dnv.org 

32

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia To consider:

•	

•	

•	

•	

Input from climate science experts is essential: developing policies and objectives related to 
climate change impacts requires broader consultation than typically undertaken for OCPs. 
Climate scientists and local experts can provide information about regional climate change 
impacts. The Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium has developed regional climate scenarios 
and tools that local governments can use to help understand climate impacts in their regions. 
Historical conditions and projected scenarios are available by regional district. Some potential 
impacts are also listed. http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt

Public consultation about climate change impacts and adaptation strategies requires 
a thoughtful approach. Strong community buy-in helps to ensure support for and 
implementation of adaptation measures. At the outset some community members might not 
be well informed about the science of climate change, even if they have valuable personal 
observations about changing weather patterns. It might be helpful to start with familiar local 
weather-related events (e.g. wildfire, extreme weather events, flooding, drought) and how 
these may be expected to become more frequent or more severe as a result of climate change, 
using climate science from Plan2Adapt and other scenarios.

•	

To develop its climate change adaptation strategy and updated OCP, the District of 
Elkford, assisted with resources and funding from the Columbia Basin Trust, pursued 
a varied community engagement strategy that included a community advisory 
committee, mall displays, paper and web-based surveys and kitchen table meetings, as 
well as extensive involvement of climate scientists and local experts. www.elkford.ca/
include/get.php?nodeid=93

If a local government is not ready to fully implement a climate change adaptation strategy, 
it can use the OCP to identify specific actions or planning processes that it commits to 
undertake. For example, the District of Saanich’s OCP (2008) included the objective “Prepare 
and implement Saanich’s “Climate Change Adaptation Plan” (and a plan has now been drafted). 
www.saanich.ca/living/community/ocp/ocp_adopted_jul808_amended_may1710.pdf

A local government might not be prepared to engage in a revision or update of its OCP. In 
that case other tools may be more appropriate to use to begin integrating climate change 
adaptation measures into local government policy and practice; it isn’t essential to begin with 
the OCP. It is important to start with climate science, assess the risks and vulnerabilities and 
determine how best to proceed.

Climate scientists 
and local experts 
can provide 
information about 
regional climate 
change   impacts.

PHOTO COURTESy 
PROVINCE OF BC

33

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia At one Community Open 
House, 90% of participants 
indicated that visualizations 
helped — 29% said they 
helped a little and 61% 
said they helped a lot.

LOCAL CLIMATE CHANGE vIsIONING ANd LANdsCAPE 
vIsuALIzATIONs: GuIdANCE MANuAL

Visualization  tools  increase  community  and  practitioner  awareness  and 
understanding  of  local  climate  change  impacts  and  response  options. The 
BC Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development supported the 
development  of  the  Local  Climate  Change  Visioning  and  Landscape  Visual-
izations: Guidance Manual,  which  offers  material  on  processes  and  the  use 
of tools that will be available (free of charge) to local governments in BC to 
use with existing planning resources including Google Earth, GIS and Com-
munityViz capabilities. The Manual will help to build resilient communities by 
building support for local climate change adaptation and mitigation policies. 
It was developed by the Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning at 
University of British Columbia (CALP).

The Manual:

•	 Addresses the visioning process, citizen participation, participatory 
scenario building, data and modelling and final visioning packages;

•	 Provides a platform for discussing and evaluating adaptation and 

mitigation options;

•	 Shows how visualizations can enhance the communication of and 

engagement with complex and future-oriented information within a 
local setting: people may for the first time ”see” future climate change 
in their own backyards, and better understand their choices; and

•	 Was based on use of the model in a number of communities and 
on a variety of climate change impacts including: snow pack melt/
snow line projections (District of North Vancouver), sea level rise/ 
flood adaptation (Delta), wildfire events (Kimberley) and FireSmart 
actions, multiple events (tree blow down, pests and diseases) and 
biomass production potential (Prince George). See the Executive 
Summary www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/
CALP-Visioning-Guidance-Manual-Version-1.1_EXEC_SUMMARy1.
pdf and Guidance Manual www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/wp-content/
uploads/2010/02/CALP-Visioning-Guidance-Manual-Version-1.1.pdf

34

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

development Permit Areas

Creating a DPA is a way to shape the development or redevelopment of a given area, and guide-
lines for the DPA (in the OCP or in a zoning bylaw) can include both broad prescriptions for 
land use as well as site specific requirements. Preparing for climate change impacts may mean 
updating existing DPAs to account for different levels of risk or changes to best practices, or in 
some cases developing new DPAs.

There is already well-established practice in BC with respect 
to using DPAs to manage land use in areas with defined haz-
ards, such as interface wildfires, or slope stability issues — and 
many examples to draw on. DPAs for wildfire hazards may also 
include requirements about landscaping and the siting, form, 
exterior design and finish of buildings. DPAs can also be used 
to  restrict  development  and  protect  and/or  restore  natural 
features and areas, and can be used to help protect key nat-
ural ecosystems in the face of climate change.

DPAs can offer local governments a more flexible approach to 
regulating development than zoning because guidelines can 
specify results and allow site-specific solutions. For example, a 
DPA can specify a certain level of onsite stormwater infiltration, while a zoning bylaw could only 
specify the site coverage allowed.

The  Local  Government  (Green  Communities)  Statutes  Amendment  Act  (2008)  created  the  op-
portunity  for  new  types  of  DPAs,  including  those  designed  to  promote  energy  and  water 
conservation.  Local  governments  can  employ  these  DPAs  to  help  make  their  communities 
more  resilient  to  climate  change  impacts  like  water  shortages  and  potential  disruptions  in 
centralized  energy  supply  due  to  heavy  seasonal  demand  or  extreme  weather  events.  Like 
DPAs  for  wildfire  hazards,  they  may  also  include  requirements  about  landscaping  and  the 
siting, form, exterior design and finish of buildings to further energy and water conservation 
and greenhouse gas reduction goals. For more information see http://toolkit.bc.ca/resource/
development-permit-areas-climate-action

DPAs can offer local 
governments a more 
flexible approach to 
regulating development 
than zoning because 
guidelines can specify 
results and allow site-
specific solutions.

CLOVER POINT, VICTORIA PHOTO 
COURTESy NRTPHOTOS/FLICKR

dEvELOPMENT PERMIT AREAs (dPAs)

Local Government Act, ss. 919.1-920

In an OCP a local government may designate areas within its jurisdiction where development 
permits are required before any subdivision, rezoning, construction or (in some cases) any 
disturbance of the land may occur, the reason the development permit is required, along with 
guidelines outlining the requirements for obtaining a development permit (which may be in the OCP 
or a zoning bylaw). The range of purposes that may be relied on for creating development permit 
areas is quite broad. Those of most interest with respect to climate change adaptation measures 
are likely protection of the natural environment, protection of the community from hazardous 
conditions, and establishing objectives to promote conservation of water and energy.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia 

35

DPAs for energy and water conservation may also establish restrictions on the type and place-
ment of trees and other vegetation in proximity to the buildings and other structures in order 
to provide for the conservation of energy, which can be considered in the context of reducing 
the heat island effect in urban areas.

DPAs  can  be  used  together  with  complementary  measures  such  as  servicing  requirements, 
development cost charges and other local government tools to achieve climate change adap-
tation objectives.

Some examples of how DPAs can be used to address climate change impacts:

•	

Interface wildfire hazards:

•	 The City of Langford prepared a study that discusses local government powers 
and practices with respect to managing wildfire hazards, and includes a model 
DPA. www.cityoflangford.ca/assets/Documents~Library/Brochures/fire-hazard-
planning-model.pdf

•	 The District of Elkford Wildfire DPA includes requirements for pre-development 
hazard and risk assessments, that FireSmart building materials and construction 
practices be used, and that new developments include roads and trails that 
can function as firebreaks and access corridors. http://elkford.ca/include/get.
php?nodeid=203

•	 The City of Williams Lake OCP has a Wildfire Interface DPA with comprehensive 

guidelines for development that recognize the risks in forested communities. 
The guidelines note that climate change is one of the factors that may alter the 
fire hazard over time. www.williamslake.ca/files/1/doc_OCP_Final_Chapter_7_
Development_Permit_Areas.pdf

•	

Steep slope hazards:

•	 The District of North Vancouver is proposing several Natural Hazards DPAs 
including one for slope hazards that will minimize development on steep 
slopes, manage development on and near steep slopes, and ensure on-going 
maintenance and monitoring of steeply sloped lands. www.dnv.org/article.
asp?a=5018&c=1024

•	 Water shortages / increased precipitation:

•	 The Resort Municipality of Whistler, Water Conservation Area (draft OCP, November 

2011): DPA includes requirements for landscaping, using drought-tolerant, native 
vegetation, adequate topsoil to assist in infiltration, rainwater capture systems, 
onsite use of stormwater, maximizing pervious surfaces and measures like 
bioswales and rain gardens. www.whistler2010.com/pdf/maps11-15/Draft%20
Development%20Permit%20Area%20Guidelines.pdf

•	 The City of Castlegar, Energy, Water and GHG Reduction Development Permit Area:  

DPA requires a landscape plan prepared by a qualified professional that includes 
hydrozones, site grading that minimizes disruption of natural drainage patterns, 
stormwater best management practices, and the use of native vegetation and 
xeriscaping. See www.castlegar.ca/pdfs/OCP_Bylaw_1150.pdf

DPAs of most interest 
with respect to climate 
change adaptation 
measures are likely 
protection of the 
natural environment, 
protection of 
the community 
from hazardous 
conditions on land, 
and establishing 
objectives to promote 
conservation of 
water and energy.

OKANAGAN PHOTO COURTESy 
yOUGUE_STyLE/FLICKR

36

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

Aquifer protection:

•	 Local governments have used DPAs to protect aquifers by helping to maintain the 

groundwater absorption capacity of land, protecting water quality and limiting demand 
for groundwater. Possible measures include restricting development, setbacks from 
watercourses, requiring hydrologic studies, retaining vegetation, etc. See www.obwb.
ca/fileadmin/docs/4.7_Aquifer_Protection_Development_Permit_Areas.doc

•	

Regional District of Nanaimo, yellow Point Aquifer Protection DPA www.rdn.bc.ca/
cms/wpattachments/wpID402atID4292.pdf

•	

Flood hazards:

•	 The District of Sechelt DPA for Watercourses (Habitat protection and creek hazards) 
requires that a hazard assessment report accompany applications for DPs, and that 
it “[A]ssess long term risks or changes to the defined floodplain or slope stability, 
including potential increases in rainfall, flood frequency or flood severity associated 
with climate change” www.district.sechelt.bc.ca/Portals/0/Public%20Document%20
Library/Community%20Plans/DPA%202%20Watercourses.pdf

•	 The District of Elkford Climate Adaptation Strategy proposes a requirement that natural 

vegetation be maintained or enhanced to support the ability of the riparian area to 
mitigate flooding. www.elkford.ca/include/get.php?nodeid=93

•	

Climate change impacts on the natural environment:

•	 The City of Comox DPA for Garry Oak Habitat justification notes that most Garry Oak 

ecosystems have been destroyed or significantly degraded, and “Less than 5% remains 
in near-natural condition, and ecosystems at extremes, such as those in Comox, are 
especially vulnerable. Ecosystems at the edges of their distribution typically contain 
high biodiversity and have important adaptive value in the face of climate change.” 
http://comox.ca/hall/bylaws/official-community-plan-ocp-bylaw-1685-consolidated/

•	 Thetis Island, Islands Trust is considering a Marine Shorelands Development 
Permit Area, investigating options to protect sensitive terrestrial ecosystems 
as sea level rises and shorelines shift inland. www.islandstrust.bc.ca/ltc/th/pdf/
thstrptmarineshoredpajan262011.pdf

•	 The West Howe Sound, Sunshine Coast Regional District OCP has a Shoreline Protection 

and Management DPA aimed at protecting the ecological values in the shoreline and 
foreshore, as well as hazards to the built environment. Development permits must 
include an assessment by a professional of the impact of the proposed development 
on “[e]xisting and anticipated shoreline processes, including erosion and deposition 
of land and beach materials, given projected environmental trends including climate 
change and sea level rise.” www.scrd.ca/files/File/Community/Planning/WHS%20
OCP%20/11%20-%20Development%20Permit%20Areas%202011(2).pdf

•	

Energy efficiency and resiliency:

•	 The City of Castlegar OCP has an Energy, Water and Greenhouse Gas Reduction DPA that 

applies to a number of different zones within the municipality and includes objectives 
regarding passive solar design, green roofs, building orientation, landscaping, and 
renewable energy generation. www.castlegar.ca/pdfs/OCP_Bylaw_1150.pdf

Thetis Island, Islands 
Trust is considering 
a Marine Shorelands 
Development Permit 
Area, investigating 
options to protect 
sensitive terrestrial 
ecosystems as 
sea level rises 
and shorelines 
shift inland.

PHOTO COURTESy 
LIANNE504/FLICKR

37

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Given evolving 
understanding of 
climate change 
impacts, it would 
be wise to consider 
reviewing dPAs and 
dPA guidelines with 
regards to climate 
change impacts at 
least every five years, 
or sooner if new and 
pertinent information 
becomes available.

COBBLE HILL PHOTO 
COURTESy SAM BEEBE, 
ECOJUST/FLICKR

To consider:

•	 DPAs are most useful in areas where significant development and re-development is 

anticipated.

•	

•	

There may be challenges in developing guidelines due to the level of technical 
expertise required. For areas where natural hazards are present, it may be useful to 
have requirements that qualified third-party professionals assess whether proposed 
development or re-development adequately mitigates risk, as well as making reference 
to external standards or practices.22 Local governments could require an assessment by 
a hydrologic engineer where increased risk of flooding as a result of climate change is at 
issue.

Legal enforcement of DPAs and DPs may be challenging, requiring a court injunction. 
However, local governments may require that security be posted with respect to 
performance of specific conditions, including landscaping, safety, and damage to the 
natural environment (Local Government Act, s.925). A municipality may also withhold 
an occupancy permit until DP conditions are met. Additionally, regulatory bylaws with 
permitting and enforcement provisions may supplement the DP process.

•	 Given evolving understanding of climate change impacts, it would be wise to consider 

reviewing DPAs and DPA guidelines with regards to climate change impacts at least every 
five years, or sooner if new and pertinent information becomes available.

•	

Because of their far-reaching impact on development within a community, and potential 
costs to developers and property owners, it is important to incorporate meaningful 
stakeholder consultation into the creation of new DPAs.

•	 When creating the guidelines for DPAs appropriate exemptions should be specified, i.e. 

activities that do not trigger the requirement for a development permit. Factors to consider 
include the scale or location of the development, for example, and whether it is likely to 
significantly affect the objectives of the DPA or face risks related to natural hazards.

22  For example, the forthcoming Association of Professional Engineers and Geoscientists of BC guidelines for 

flood hazard management.

38

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia dEvELOPMENT APPROvAL INFORMATION AREAs (dAIAs)

Local Government Act, ss. 920.01, 920.1

In an OCP local governments may designate areas or specify circumstances where applicants for 
zoning bylaw amendments, development permits, or temporary use permits must provide, at 
their expense, specific impact information, usually reports prepared by qualified professionals. 
The OCP must set out the justification for the DAIA, and a separate bylaw is needed to establish 
the process for requiring the information and the substance of the information that is required. 
Development Approval Information Areas are sometimes used by local governments to obtain 
information about the potential impact of proposed new developments on environmentally 
sensitive areas, or how risks related to natural hazards will be handled.

development Approval information Areas

Development approval information areas can be used to require professional impact as-
sessment at a site-specific level that can help inform local government decision-making 
about the conditions to place on development, before development takes place.23

They may be useful in cases where climate change is anticipated to increase the vulner-
ability of environmentally sensitive areas to development, or to affect natural hazards in a 
given area, or to affect the availability of critical resources, such as groundwater.

 To consider:

•	

•	

A local government may require that the professional carrying out any required 
impact assessment has relevant expertise in relation to climate change impacts.

The Development Approval Information Area requirements should not be used 
as a replacement for the broader process of community risk and vulnerability 
assessment with respect to climate change, but could potentially be used to help 
understand site specific impacts related to proposed development or activities. 

Examples:

•	

•	

The Village of Port Alice has used development approval information areas 
to obtain information about interface wildfire hazards. http://portalice.ca/
wp-content/uploads/569-DAIA-OCP_Bylaw.pdf See also the City of Chilliwack 
bylaw: www.chilliwack.com/main/attachments/files/363/BL%203815%20
Development%20Approval%20Information%20Bylaw.pdf

The North Pender Island Local Trust Area has designated areas and circumstances 
where development approval information is required, including information 
about sensitive ecosystems and hazardous conditions. www.islandstrust.bc.ca/
ltc/np/pdf/npdaibasebyl0134.pdf

23  Deborah Curran, Doug Geller, Barbara Everdene, Kellie Garcia and Nelson R. Jatel, (2009) 

Groundwater Bylaws Toolkit. Okanagan Basin Water Board. Kelowna. Section 4.8. www.obwb.ca/
fileadmin/docs/groundwater_bylaws_toolkit.pdf 

A local government 
may require that the 
professional carrying 
out any required impact 
assessment has relevant 
expertise in relation to 
climate change impacts.

PHOTO COURTESy 
WRIGHTWOOD CROSSING

39

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Zoning (or land use) bylaws and density bonuses

Where hazards resulting from or amplified by climate change can be identified for specific 
geographic areas within a community, zoning can be used delineate those areas and pro-
vide requirements that apply uniformly to all development within each zone. In the case 
of wildfire hazards, for example, zoning can be used to direct new residential, commercial 
and industrial development to lower risk areas, and reserve high risk areas for parks and 
open  spaces  for  other  activities,  such  as  grazing,  golf  courses,  airstrips,  tennis  courts, 
sports field and swimming pools. These areas can also function as firebreaks.24

A number of water-related climate impacts (decreased freshwater supplies, increased ero-
sion from run-off during storms, saltwater intrusion in aquifers, and others) may be at least 
partly addressed through the use of the zoning power. Through zoning a local govern-
ment can limit site coverage, or the impervious “footprint” of buildings, structures, and 
paved parking areas and in this way promote onsite rainwater infiltration. As well, in areas 
where climate change is predicted to reduce the available supply of freshwater enough to 
have a significant negative impact on the availability of water, a local government could 
consider the option of low-density zoning to match demand to water supply.25

Along marine shorelines, zoning can include requirements for density, buildings and site 
coverage aimed at creating resilient development in the face of climate impacts like sea 
level rise and the potential for increased storm intensity. Sensitive shoreline areas can be 
designated as conservation areas to protect habitat and species. Setbacks within a zone 
can be used to require that buildings and structures are a certain distance back from sensi-
tive marine and lakeside areas, although those setbacks do not apply to landscaping and 
the removal of vegetation.26

zONING OR LANd usE ByLAWs

Local Government Act, s.903

With zoning or land use bylaws local governments can regulate development 
by establishing permitted (and prohibited) land uses, densities, and the siting, 
size and dimensions of buildings and their uses. A range of measures that may 
be relevant for implementing climate change adaptation strategies can be ac-
complished through the local government zoning power, from setbacks to pro-
hibiting uses that may increase risk of harm in sensitive areas. It is likely that this 
power will be most effective when used together with other local government 
tools such as development permit areas that can provide site-specific guidelines 
aimed at addressing climate impacts and changing environmental conditions.

24  See FireSmart: Protecting your Community from Wildfire www.firesmartcanada.ca/

resources-library/protecting-your-community-from-wildfire

25  Supra note 23.
26  To address landscaping and vegetation local governments must rely on DPAs or bylaw 

powers under s. 909 of the Local Government Act. See The Green Infrastructure Guide: Issues, 
Implementation Strategies and Success Stories www.wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie

To address concerns 
about drought in the 
Comox Valley the 
Regional District created 
a “Water Supply and 
Resource Area” zone, 
where density is limited 
to a single family 
dwelling on any lot. 
www.comoxvalleyrd.
ca/uploadedFiles/
Community_Planning/
Bylaws/2781/Bylaw%20
2781%20Complete.pdf

COMOX PHOTO COURTESy 
MISS604/FLICKR

40

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia To consider:

•	

•	

Local governments can also re-zone/pre-zone areas to increase the density or type 
of development in existing zones as they are redeveloped over time, lessening 
development pressure on areas that will be subject to greater risk from hazards (e.g. 
wildfire, flood, sea level rise) over time as a result of climate change.

Energy use in communities will be affected both directly and indirectly by climate 
change. Hotter summers may drive up energy demand for cooling, for example, 
while carbon pricing policies within BC and globally are likely to increase the cost of 
traditional energy sources. Greater resiliency to these changes might be achieved 
through measures to relax some common zoning requirements. For example, 
setbacks can be reduced to allow buildings with thicker walls, or building height 
requirements adjusted to allow solar energy installations. See www.toolkit.bc.ca/
diverse-zoning-strategies-diverse-communities#zoning%20for%20low%20carbon%20bldgs

•	 While it may be possible to take a “wait and see” approach to dealing with climate 

change impacts in some circumstances, zoning requirements have long term impacts 
themselves. For example, structures built today in a certain area, or respecting a given 
setback, are likely to be around for 50–100 years or more, and will need to be safe 
and viable over at least that time period. The provision of local government services 

A reminder: new 
or revised DPAs 
and guidelines 
may require 
amendments to the 
zoning bylaw to 
ensure consistency. 
All local government 
enactments must be 
consistent with OCP.

dENsITy BONusEs

Local Government Act, s.904

Local governments can designate zones where increased density, up to a specified 
amount, is available to applicants in exchange for providing community amenities, 
or contributing to a fund that will be used by the local government to 
create amenities. In the climate change context local governments must 
be careful to ensure that density is not being increased in areas that are 
prone to greater risks of natural hazards, such as flooding.

There may be opportunities to use density bonuses to assist in imple-
menting climate change adaptation measures through the provision of 
amenities, such as acquiring/developing land for community gardens to 
enhance  food  security,  creating  greenways  that  connect  natural  areas 
and enhance the resilience of natural species. Gardens and greenways 
may  also  have  important  cooling  benefits  in  urban  areas  subject  to 
rising temperatures. Parks and greenways can protect environmentally 
sensitive areas that are at even greater risk as a result of climate change, 
and preserving trees and natural vegetation can contribute to rainwater 
management.  It  should  be  noted  that  density  bonusing  can  be  con-
troversial,  and  the  process  should  involve  community  dialogue.  Good 
practices would include setting an upper limit on density and where it 
will be located in the OCP after public dialogue, and creating a public 
and transparent process for calculating the value of increased density. 
See www.wcel.org/sites/default/files/publications/TheGreenBuildingsGuide.pdf

41

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Food security has been 
identified in a number 
of communities in BC 
as a climate change 
impact of concern. The 
City of Castlegar has 
proposed changes to its 
zoning bylaw to allow 
greenhouses in certain 
areas and community 
gardens in parks. www.
cbt.org/uploads/pdf/
Castlegar_Climate_
Change_Adaptation_
Report_Final.pdf. The 
City of Parksville has 
already amended its 
zoning bylaw to allow 
urban food gardens. 
www.civicinfo.bc.ca/
weekly/Parksville_
urban_Gardens.pdf

42

There may be opportunities to use density bonuses to assist in implementing climate change 
adaptation measures through the provision of amenities, such as acquiring/developing land for 
community gardens to enhance food security, creating greenways that connect natural areas and 
enhance the resilience of natural species. PHOTOS COURTESy DORyWITHSERIFS/FLICKR

associated with any zone will also need to be considered with this longer term climate 
change lens. For this reason a precautionary approach based on hazard mapping 
informed by up-to-date climate modeling data, or other pertinent information, is 
prudent. As well, periodic reviews of zoning requirements should be undertaken to 
ensure that they are informed by current information about climate impacts.

•	 When defining zones, planners need to work with others who have the appropriate 
expertise. In terms of wildfire hazards, for example, fire and forestry officials should 
be involved in the planning process at the earliest stages so that hazards are well 
articulated before developments are planned. The costs of not mitigating hazards 
must be evaluated. As well, both the suitability of the zone itself for a given type of 
development, and access to the area for the provision of emergency services and 
secondary evacuation routes needs to be considered.

•	

Zoning requirements may be seen by local governments as less resource-intensive 
to administer when compared to development permits. However, the zoning powers 
(uses, density, and siting, size and uses of buildings) also offer less opportunity to 
tailor development to site specific environmental conditions which may be important 
from the point of view of climate change adaptation. For example, zoning can address 
the density and type of development in areas prone to wildfire hazards, but it cannot 
specify the type of landscaping that must be carried out, exterior materials that must 
be used on buildings, the types of reports that must be prepared and submitted, etc. 
For this reason zoning bylaws will likely be more effective in terms of implementing 
climate change adaptation measures when used in concert with development permit 
areas and other local bylaw powers.

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia dEvELOPMENT COsT CHARGEs

Local Government Act, ss.932 – 937

Local governments in BC have the power to enact bylaws to set development cost 
charges (DCCs). DCCs are one-time charges imposed at the time of subdivision 
approval or the issuance of a building permit to help cover the capital costs of 
infrastructure associated with new subdivisions and buildings, including water, 
sewer, drainage, roads and parkland. Development cost charge (DCC) rates can be 
set for different geographic areas in a community and can vary by land use and 
density. DCCs are subject to the approval of the Inspector of Municipalities. The 
Ministry publishes “best practice” guidance for local governments considering DCCs. 
www.cscd.gov.bc.ca/lgd/finance/development_cost_charges.htm

development cost charges

Where DCCs are in place, local governments have the power to lower DCCs or create exemp-
tions for certain types of development, including subdivisions of small lots designed to have 
low greenhouse gas emissions and developments designed to result in a low environmental 
impact. Both of these types of developments may be considered as possible climate change 
adaptation measures. For example, an adaptation strategy may involve using subdivisions of 
small lots to create greater density in certain areas of the community and avoid the need to 
have development in areas vulnerable to natural hazards. As well, creating incentives for low 
impact developments can have multiple benefits in terms of climate change, by decreasing 
reliance on energy sources that may become more costly, using less water, managing storm-
water more efficiently and others.

Examples:

•	

•	

•	

The City of Penticton reduced DCCs for low impact developments by 50%.  
www.penticton.ca/assets/City~Hall/Bylaws/Land~Use/Development%20Cost%20
Charge%20Reduction%20(Bylaw%202010-11).pdf

The City of Surrey has used development cost charges to help 
finance sustainable drainage infrastructure. See pp. 34-35 in The 
Green Infrastructure Guide. www.wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie

The District of Elkford has proposed using DCCs to help fund the improved 
development of parks, trails and greenspace in riparian areas along with design 
features that will help retain water during flooding, as a means to help mitigate 
flooding in other areas. www.elkford.ca/include/get.php?nodeid=93

To consider:

•	

Reducing DCCs will mean a loss of revenue for local governments.

Creating incentives 
for low impact 
developments 
can have multiple 
benefits in terms of 
climate change.

PHOTO COURTESy SVR DESIGN

43

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia flood plain regulation

Flood plain designation is a way to help reduce the risk of flooding for any new develop-
ment or re-development. Local governments will want to consider how a changing climate 
might impact any designated flood plains, whether any revisions to the area designated 
are called for, and whether any new areas should now be designated as flood plains.

“Sea level rise planning areas” have been proposed as a potential tool to deal with coastal 
areas affected by future sea level rise associated with climate change. The boundaries of 
these areas would be revised periodically over time as sea levels rose. Local governments 
could use tools such as OCPs, zoning and DPAs to regulate setbacks and the types of de-
velopment that would be allowed within sea level rise planning areas.27 

Examples:

•	

•	

The City of Vancouver is proactively encouraging a 1m increase in flood 
construction levels in flood prone areas in the interim while updating flood 
proofing policies. The interim measure is to incorporate sea level rise projected 
for 2100 and is in response to the Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea 
Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use released in May 2011 by the Ministry 
of Environment. www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/pdfs_word/
sea_dike_guidelines.pdf

The City of Prince George updated its flood plain bylaw in 2010 as part of a 
broader strategy to manage flood hazards developed after the 2007-2008 
Nechako River ice jam and flood event. http://princegeorge.ca/environment/
climatechange/adaptation/pages/default.aspx

To consider:

•	 Watersheds where forests have been devastated by mountain pine beetle may 

be subject to increased flooding risks downstream.28

•	

For planning purposes in coastal areas, provincial guidelines regarding sea level 
rise are currently 1m by 2100 and 2m by 2200. See www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/
public-safety/flood/pdfs_word/sea_dike_guidelines.pdf

FLOOd PLAIN REGuLATION

Local Government Act, s. 910

Local governments have the exclusive power within their jurisdictions to designate flood 
plains, after considering guidelines established by the Minister of the Environment (see www.
env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/pdfs_word/sea_dike_guidelines.pdf). Within the flood 
plain area the local government can specify the flood level and setback required for buildings. 
Requirements can vary for different locations within the floodplain and according to the type of 
structure and use.

27   www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/pdf/SLR_webinar_DavidReid-SLRPlanningGuidelines.pdf 
28  See Walker, I.J. and R. Sydneysmith. 2008. British Columbia in From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in 
a Changing Climate 2007, edited by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush. Government of 
Canada, pp. 329-386. 

Local governments will 
want to consider how 
a changing climate 
might impact any 
designated flood plains, 
whether revisions 
are called for, and 
whether any new areas 
should be designated 
as flood plains.

PHOTO COURTESy 
BC MINISTRy OF 
TRANSPORTATION

44

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia subdivision and servicing bylaws

In regions where increased precipitation and extreme storm events are likely to result from climate 
change, using a subdivision and servicing bylaw to require green infrastructure can help decrease 
the future burden on what is sometimes referred to as “grey” infrastructure (pipes and drains) 
by reducing the amount of water that the conventional infrastructure needs to handle. Other 
benefits include reducing erosion, limiting pollution and helping to protect sensitive streams and 
wildlife habitat. Subdivision servicing bylaws can specify measures such as bioswales, boulevards, 
rain gardens, topsoil requirements, sloping streets to drain into infiltration areas, landscaping re-
quirements to increase onsite infiltration, and others. Much work has already been done on green 
infrastructure approaches in BC with valuable experience gained, and there are many examples 
and resources available to assist communities.

suBdIvIsION  ANd sERvICING ByLAWs

Local Government Act, s. 938

Subdivision and servicing bylaws set out the infrastructure requirements for 
subdivisions, buildings and other structures in the case of new developments and 
redevelopment. These bylaws usually contain engineering specifications for roads 
and trails, street lighting, water distribution, and sewage and drainage systems, and 
provide an opportunity to incorporate green infrastructure and low impact design 
parameters into new developments. Subdivision and servicing bylaws can also 
include infrastructure specifications that will help make communities more resilient to 
hazards such as interface wildfires. Subdivision and servicing bylaws can have different 
requirements for different geographic areas within a local government’s jurisdiction.

using a subdivision 
and servicing bylaw 
to require green 
infrastructure can help 
decrease the future 
burden on what is 
sometimes referred to 
as “grey” infrastructure 
(pipes and drains) 
by reducing the 
amount of water that 
the conventional 
infrastructure 
needs to handle.

INLAND KENWORTH 
BIOSWALE/POND, NANAIMO. 
PHOTO COURTESy 
INLAND KENWORTH

45

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia subdivision 
servicing bylaws 
can specify 
measures such 
as bioswales 
(see photo), 
boulevards, rain 
gardens, topsoil 
requirements, 
sloping streets 
to drain into 
infiltration areas, 
landscaping 
requirements to 
increase onsite 
infiltration, 
and others.

Certain aspects of wildfire hazards can also be addressed through subdivision and servicing bylaws. 
For  example,  the  District  of  Elkford’s  climate  change  adaptation  strategy  recommends  updating 
subdivision and servicing requirements to ensure that sidewalks, boulevards and highways serve 
as firebreaks and so that they will provide effective fire evacuation routes. Trails, particularly in per-
imeter areas can also be useful firebreaks. It is also important that roads be designed to provide 
access for firefighting efforts, that there is an adequate water supply for fire suppression, and that fire 
hydrants are provided where appropriate. Underground wiring may be specified.29

Examples:

•	

The District of North Vancouver’s Development Servicing Bylaw incorporates the Provincial 
Stormwater Guidebooks criteria as a reference for design professionals. www.dnv.org/
upload/pcdocsdocuments/11bg01!.pdf

NEW TECHNIquEs OFFER WAys TO IMPROvE PLANNING ANd REsOuRCE ALLOCATION

Researchers are developing innovative ways to evaluate the performance of drainage 
systems and assess how they will deal with increased precipitation. Taylor David (a LIDAR 
applications specialist with Terra Remote Sensing Inc.) and Chris Jensen (currently, Policy 
Analyst, Integrated Policy Branch, MCSCD) used integrated airborne remote sensing to get 
a better understanding of how the Bowker Creek watershed handles major storm events. 
See Climate-Change Adaptation Planning: Reducing Uncertainty via Integrated Airborne 
Remote Sensing www.geoplace.com/ME2/dirmod.asp?sid=&nm=&type=MultiPublishing&
mod=PublishingTitles&mid=13B2F0D0AFA04476A2ACC02ED28A405F&tier=4&id=E87ED4
FF165D47898D9D0D55A5FC3323

29  District of Elkford: Climate Change Adaptation Strategy www.elkford.ca/include/get.php?nodeid=93

46

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

•	

•	

The District of Lantzville Subdivision and Development Bylaw incorporates green 
infrastructure measures for rainwater management and requires the developer to 
post security equivalent to the cost of three years of maintenance, to ensure that the 
measures are operational. www.lantzville.ca/cms/wpattachments/wpID478atID3187.pdf

The District of Sooke is drafting a new Subdivision and Development Standard Bylaw 
that promotes green infrastructure for rainwater capture, and will likely include a 
requirement for developers to employ the Water Balance Model (a decision support 
tool that looks at rainwater management and stream health protection, http://
bc.waterbalance.ca/) for new developments. www.sooke.ca/EN/main/government/
devservices/environment/lwm_rain.html

The City of North Vancouver amended its Subdivision and Development Control Bylaw 
to ensure greater resilience in its energy infrastructure after a 2008 windstorm caused 
trees and branches to fall on overhead power lines, resulting in neighbourhood power 
outages. Underground power and communications connections are now required for 
some developments. www.cnv.org/c//data/1/84/subdivision%20&%20development%20
control%20bylaw%208014,%202010.pdf

To consider:

•	

•	

The decisions made about infrastructure in new developments and re-developed areas 
will have long-lasting consequences — what is specified today will need to perform 
well in conditions decades from now, and to be resilient to the future impacts of climate 
change. Retrofits to existing infrastructure can be very costly, so it will be important to 
employ design approaches that offer flexibility, anticipate a range of possible climate 
change impacts and reduce the risk of infrastructure failures.

Pedestrian and bike friendly neighbourhoods where motorized transportation is less 
necessary will be more resilient to rising energy costs, an indirect impact of climate 
change, and subdivision servicing bylaws can include requirements for pedestrian and 
bike trails, and roads that are safe and attractive for pedestrian and bicycle use. The City 
of Courtenay OCP was recently amended to promote such measures.30

subdivision servicing 
bylaws can include 
requirements for 
pedestrian and bike 
trails, and roads that 
are safe and attractive 
for pedestrian and 
bicycle use.

FOR MORE INFORMATION ON GREEN INFRAsTRuCTuRE ANd suBdIvIsION  
ANd sERvICING ByLAWs sEE:

•	 The Partnership for Water Sustainability in BC: Guidance and Resources:  

www.waterbucket.ca/guidance-resources.htm

•	 The Green Infrastructure Guide: Issues, Implementation Strategies and Success 

Stories www.wcel.org/resources/publication/green-infrastructure-guide-
issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie

•	 The Water Balance Model http://bc.waterbalance.ca/

•	 Okanagan Basin Water Board Groundwater Bylaws Toolkit  

www.obwb.ca/fileadmin/docs/4.9_Subdivision_Servicing_Bylaws.doc

30  www.courtenay.ca/media/161500/2638%20%20ocp%20amendment%20climate%20action-final.pdf

47

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia sPecific RegulAtoRy PoweRs

tree protection

Trees  with  their  canopies  and  roots  are  increasingly  understood  to  be  important  for 
addressing the impacts of climate change. For example, trees help to cool urban areas, 
absorb rainwater, protect steep slopes from sliding and reduce soil erosion. Intact forests 
in watersheds are also important for maintaining water quality. And trees provide im-
portant co-benefits including wildlife habitat, aesthetic value and carbon sequestration.

Urban Forests:
A Climate Adaptation Guide

To consider:

•	

Tree protection bylaws can focus on preserving natural species of trees.

•	

The District of Esquimalt has a Tree Protection Bylaw that requires a 
permit for any activities that may damage or alter trees defined as 
“protected,” which include native species of a certain size or greater 
on both private and municipal property. www.esquimalt.ca/files/PDF/
Bylaws/2664_Tree_Protection_Bylaw.pdf

•	

Some municipalities have bylaws and policies that target only trees on 
municipal property, which may nonetheless be significant in number.

•	

The City of North Vancouver has a Street Tree Master Plan and has 
implemented a number of measures to protect its urban trees. The Plan 
also suggests a number of non-regulatory approaches to encourage the 
planting and retention of trees on private property, including design 
guidelines for multi-residential developments that encourage planting 

See the Ministry of 
Community, Sport and 
Cultural Development 
publication Urban 
Forests: A Climate 
Adaptation Guide for a 
number of examples of 
local regulations and 
policies in BC. www.
retooling.ca/_Library/
docs/Urban_Forests_
Guide.pdf

TREE PROTECTION

Community Charter, ss.8(3)(c),50-52,73(1)(c); Local Government Act, s.923

Under the Community Charter, municipalities have relatively broad powers related to tree 
regulation. They may use bylaws to establish licensing and permitting requirements for tree-
cutting, and they may also impose requirements with respect to tree planting, provided that 
the requirements do not prevent uses or density permitted under the zoning bylaw, unless 
compensation is provided. For example, a municipality might decide that a development 
permit over a certain value triggers the requirement to plant a certain number of trees on that 
property.

It should be noted that regional districts do not have the same broad powers regarding trees. 
Instead, under the Local Government Act, regional districts may designate areas of land that they 
consider to be subject to flooding, erosion, land slip or avalanche as tree cutting permit areas, 
and regulate or prohibit cutting down trees in those areas, provided there is evidence that the 
area is subject to the specified hazard.

48

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia native conifer species or in lieu contributions to a tree fund, and public education about 
the benefits of tree planting and retention coordinated with the zoning, subdivision and 
building permit processes. www.cnv.org/c/data/3/509/Street%20Tree%20Master%20
Plan%202004.pdf

•	

Local governments facing pest infestations or increased interface fire risks may need to consider 
an approach that includes thinning trees in some areas.

•	

•	

Prince George has an exemption to its tree protection bylaw to address mountain pine 
beetle infested trees. Any applications for the exemption must also address slope stability 
issues. http://princegeorge.ca/environment/urbanforestry/mountainpinebeetlecontrol/
Documents/circular_exemptions_tree_protection.pdf

Prince George also has a Wildland/Urban Interface Wildfire Management Strategy that 
has provided the basis for its thinning and pruning activities to reduce interface wildfire 
risk that was exacerbated by mountain pine beetle infestation. http://princegeorge.ca/
environment/urbanforestry/urbanwildland/Documents/Wildland_Urban_Interface_
Wildfire_Mgmt_Plan.pdf

An urban 
forest strategy 
prepared for the 
City of Kelowna 
recommended 
modifying species 
selection and 
increasing diversity 
where possible to 
increase resilience 
to climate change. 
www.bablackwell.
com/forestry_
reports/City_of_
Kelowna_urban_
Forest_strategy.pdf

PHOTO COURTESy MISTER 
WIND-UP BIRD/FLICKR

uRBAN TREEs Add vALuE

The City of North Vancouver had a  
consultant put a value on the services provided 
to the City by its 5,415 trees. It was calculated 
that the benefits from the trees amounted to 
$501,000 per year, which would total $25 million 
over 50 years. The maintenance and replacement 
costs associated with the trees only cost $94,000 
per year. The services provided by the trees 
included energy savings as a result of their 
cooling effect in summer, GHG reductions, air 
quality enhancement, stormwater management, 
and increased liveability and property values.

49

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Run-off control, landscaping, and soil removal and deposit

There are a number of ways that these regulatory powers can be used to help address climate 
change impacts:

•	 Managing increases in precipitation — as climate change is expected to increase 

precipitation and extreme storm events in some regions, putting in place requirements 
to increase onsite infiltration and retention by improving the depth and quality of 
topsoil, for example, and lessening the burden on the conventional drainage system can 
help mitigate the need to make upgrades to pipes and other infrastructure.

•	 Managing drought and decreased water supply — well-rooted, climate tolerant 

landscaping requires less irrigation water, stays green longer during a drought, and 
contributes to sustainability of water supply.

•	

•	

•	

•	

Reducing urban heat island effects — shade and evapo-transpiration from green roofs 
and landscaped areas have the potential to cool urban areas.

Protecting streams and waterways from increased risk of contamination — increasing 
onsite filtration can reduce the contaminants that find their way into streams and 
waterways without infiltration. Increased precipitation could lead to more surface 
contamination from impermeable surfaces being flushed into streams, while droughts 
could mean lower water levels and greater sensitivity to contaminants.

Increasing connectivity — landscaping can increase availability and connectivity of 
habitat for local species.

Enhancing local food security by providing opportunities for urban gardens — green 
roofs and other green spaces have the potential to provide space to grow food.

RuN-OFF CONTROL, LANdsCAPING, ANd sOIL REMOvAL ANd dEPOsIT

Local Government Act, ss. 907, 909; Community Charter, s.195; Local Government Act, s.723

Local governments have a number of specific bylaw powers relating to run-off, 
landscaping, and soil within their jurisdictions (in addition to the more broadly framed 
powers discussed above with respect to development permits, and subdivision and 
servicing requirements):

•	 They can regulate how new paved and roofed areas manage and dispose of surface 

water run-off and stormwater, and can set the maximum area of land that can be 
covered by impermeable material.

•	 They also have the power to set standards for, or regulate the provision of 

landscaping in relation to zones and within zones for the purpose of masking or 
separating uses, protecting, restoring or enhancing the natural environment, or to 
prevent hazardous conditions.

•	 Local governments have the power to regulate the deposit and removal of soil, 

subject to approval by the province.

Landscaping and 
run-off bylaws 
can apply to all 
properties, while DPs 
only apply to new 
development and 
re-development.

50

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

Additional water absorption — permeable surfaces and swales can ensure 
additional water absorption during heavy precipitation events that assists both 
with flood reduction and recharge of groundwater/aquifers.

Examples:

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

The City of Surrey Soil Conservation and Protection Bylaw recognizes that soil 
is an important resource in the City and its unregulated deposit may obstruct 
water courses or aquifers, and have an impact on flood control strategies.   
www.surrey.ca/bylawsandcouncillibrary/ByL_reg_16389.pdf

The District of Central Saanich has an award-winning ISMP (Integrated 
Stormwater Management Plan) for rainwater management. The bylaw 
requires rainwater capture, encourages use of the Water Balance Model. www.
centralsaanich.ca/hall/Departments/Engineering___Public_Works/Integrated_
Stormwater_Management_Plan__ISMP__Study.htm www.centralsaanich.ca/
hall/Departments/Administration/bylaws_and_policies.htm

The City of Richmond identified green roofs as a key way to manage and 
reduce run-off in industrial areas outside the city centre, where the surface is 
mostly covered by buildings, paved parking areas, loading bays and outside 
storage areas, and other options to manage and reduce run-off were limited. 
The Richmond bylaw takes a flexible approach, and provides several options 
for compliance with run-off and landscaping requirements, including the 
construction and maintenance of a green roof on 75% of the roof area of a new 
building. www.richmond.ca/__shared/assets/Bylaw_838521490.pdf

The City of Toronto has a green roof bylaw that applies to all new commercial, 
industrial and residential buildings over a certain size. The bylaw was enacted 
after a study from Ryerson University showed that green roofs could have 
significant benefits to the City related to stormwater management and 
reduction of the urban heat island and associated energy use. www.toronto.ca/
greenroofs/findings.htm

Regulation of landscaping and irrigation is a key tool for local governments to 
achieve water conservation, especially in drier climates. The City of Kelowna was 
one of the first to build this approach into landscaping and irrigation bylaws. 
www.cwra.org/publications/bookstore/assets/CanWaterResAbstract.pdf

To consider:

•	

A number of similar objectives with respect to landscaping and run-off can 
be achieved through the development permitting process or landscaping 
and run-off bylaws. In practice, combining a planning (development permits) 
and regulatory (bylaw) approach may be most effective. Bylaws can include 
permitting requirements (a possible revenue opportunity) and fines, apply to 
landscaping of existing development, and may also require financial security for 
performance. Landscaping and run-off bylaws can apply to all properties, while 
DPs only apply to new development and re-development. For a discussion of 

A study carried out at 
the university of victoria 
demonstrated that 
in the Bowker Creek 
watershed on southern 
vancouver Island just 
three green infrastructure 
tools — rain gardens, 
green roofs and absorbent 
landscaping — could 
mitigate 95% of the 
peak flows estimated 
to result from increased 
precipitation due to 
climate change by 
2080. www.obwb.ca/
fileadmin/docs/rain_to_
resource/2010_10_29_
technical_5_chris_jensen_
bigger_pipes_or_greener_
communities.pdf

BOWKER CREEK WATERSHED PHOTO 
COURTESy ALEXABBOUD/FLICKR

51

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia some of these considerations in the context of promoting topsoil requirements, see Topsoil 
Law and Policy Primer: http://wcel.org/sites/default/files/publications/Topsoil%20-%20
Law%20and%20Policy%20Primer%20for%20Rainwater%20Management%20and%20
Water%20Conservation.pdf

•	

•	

•	

Some local governments may be reluctant to try new approaches to dealing with 
stormwater management, for example, because of a fear of liability. However, 
there are a number of ways to manage risks that can be explored. Relying 
on certificates from third parties such as engineers or architects, obtaining 
insurance, implementing pilot projects to evaluate performance, and “over-
engineering” to provide a back-up in case of failure are all possibilities. For more 
information see “The Liability Elephant” in the Green Infrastructure Guide: Issues, 
Implementation Strategies and Success Stories www.wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie

BC’s Living Water Smart website includes information and resources for local governments, 
such as the Water Conservation Calculator, a tool for small water purveyors and local 
government conservation initiatives. http://livingwatersmart.ca/business/becoming_
efficient.html

Public education and citizen engagement can complement regulatory measures. 
Okanagan Basin Water Board Homeowner’s Guide to Using Rain as a Resource  
www.okwaterwise.ca/pdf/HomeDrainageGuide_Okanagan.pdf

Landscaping and 
run-off bylaws 
can apply to all 
properties, while 
development 
permits only 
apply to new 
development and 
re-development.

ELECTRONIC ARTs GREEN ROOF

Electronic Arts, the City of Burnaby and BCIT Centre for Architectural Ecology collaborated 
on a green roof project for a new studio facility in Burnaby. After construction BCIT 
monitored performance, and in 2007 it was found that the green roof delayed run-off 
for three hours and reduced peak flow by 90%. During the summer, temperatures of the 
membrane under the green roof fluctuated by 3°C instead of 41°C.

Source: www.burnaby.ca/Assets/city+services/planning/Environmental+Planning/
Electronic+Arts+Green+Roof.pdf

52

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Animal control bylaws

With risks to food security being identified as a climate change impact in a number of BC 
communities, there is growing interest in small-scale urban agriculture, such as poultry and 
beekeeping.  Depending  on  community  support  and  interest,  this  may  be  an  option  for 
local governments to explore.

Examples:

•	

A number of BC local governments have animal control bylaws that allow citizens 
to keep “backyard chickens,” bees and other livestock in limited numbers, subject 
to conditions regarding lot size, zoning, registration, enclosures, etc. See, for 
example, District of Saanich www.saanich.ca/living/pdf/animals8556.pdf and 
the amendments to the City of Vancouver animal control bylaw and zoning and 
development bylaw. http://vancouver.ca/commsvcs/LICANDINSP/animalcontrol/
chicken/index.htm

To consider:

•	

•	

Backyard chickens and other types 
of urban livestock activities can be 
controversial, and local governments 
that are considering the regulation of 
these activities in their communities 
would be well advised to carry out 
adequate community consultation. 
For a description of the consultation 
process from the District of Saanich, 
see www.saanich.ca/living/community/
chickensurvey.html

Support for community members 
engaging in urban livestock activities will 
likely be required, in terms of education, 
inspection and disposal options.

ANIMAL CONTROL

Community Charter, s.8(3)(k); Local Government Act, ss. 702.1, 703

Local governments have the power to enact bylaws to regulate, prohibit and impose 
requirements in relation to animals. “Wildlife” is subject to concurrent jurisdiction 
with the provincial government, but animals not defined as wildlife in the Wildlife Act 
are under local government jurisdiction.

A number of BC local 
governments have 
animal control bylaws 
that allow citizens 
to keep “backyard 
chickens,” bees and 
other livestock in 
limited numbers.

VANCOUVER CHICKENS 
PHOTO COURTESy BRENT 
GRANBy/FLICKR

53

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia some notes on permitting and enforcement

Local governments have permitting and enforcement powers available to supplement land use and 
other  regulatory  powers  that  may  offer  opportunities  to  support  the  implementation  of  climate 
change adaptation measures.

For example:

•	

As discussed above, trees in urban areas can offer valuable services related to climate 
change adaptation: cooling, reducing soil erosion, and absorbing rainwater, for example. 
Municipalities can establish a system of permitting for tree-cutting activities.

•	 Development permits over a certain value might be used to trigger tree-planting or 
other required green infrastructure measures on existing properties. This approach 
is being explored in the District of North Vancouver.

•	

•	

•	

Soil removal permitting can be used to help control the loss of 
soil where soil stability is a concern.

Climate change impacts that lead to reductions in water 
supply may create greater concern about industrial 
effluent or other waste discharges, or about the rate of 
local consumption of water. Local governments may wish 
to increase enforcement activities related to regulation of 
discharges and consumption.

In some cases local governments can require that covenants 
under s.219 of the Land Title Act be registered before permits 
for new developments are issued.

soil removal 
permitting can be 
used to help control 
the loss of soil 
where soil stability 
is a concern.

•	

•	

The City of Kamloops Community Wildfire Protection Plan describes the city’s 
Wildland-Urban-Interface covenant, which stipulates that landowners must agree 
to wildfire mitigation measures before a building or subdivision permit will be 
issued, and also notes proposed updates to the covenant wording.  
www.city.kamloops.bc.ca/firerescue/pdfs/cwpp.pdf

The City of Surrey uses a suite of restrictive covenants and easements to promote 
water quality and sediment control, storm drainage detention and a combined 
swale and pipe system in new developments. See, for example: www.surrey.ca/
files/Interim_Storm_Drainage_Detention.pdf

54

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia emeRgency mAnAgement PlAnning

Under  BC’s  Emergency  Program  Act  local  governments  are  obliged  to  prepare  a  local 
emergency management plan respecting “…preparation for, response to and recovery 
from emergencies and disasters.” As well, subject to any provincially-directed emergency 
measures, a local authority is at all times responsible for the direction and control of the 
local authority’s emergency response.

While  climate  change  is  not  specifically  mentioned  in  the  Act,  to  adequately  plan  for 
emergences and disasters local governments will have to assess the potential impacts 
of  climate  change  on  their  communities  in  terms  of  changed  and  possibly  increased 
risks. The Local Authority Emergency Management Regulation specifies that the local 
emergency management plan must take into account the “potential emergencies and 
disasters that could affect all or any part of the jurisdictional area for which the local 
authority has responsibility, and the local authority’s assessment of the relative risk of 
occurrence  and  the  potential  impact  on  people  and  property  of  the  emergencies  or 
disasters” and that it must be reviewed and updated periodically.

Why look at emergency planning as part of climate change adaptation:

Climate change will both exacerbate existing risks to people and property and create 
new ones, and local emergency planning needs to be reviewed in light of a hazard risk 
and vulnerability analysis that takes into account climate change impacts in the region.

Some examples of potential climate-related hazards include:

•	 More frequent flooding.

•	

The City of Grand Forks recently experienced two 1-in-100 year floods 
within five years. www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/KImberley_CACCI_
Phase_1_Adaptation_Report.pdf

The Local Authority 
Emergency 
Management 
Regulation 
specifies that the 
local emergency 
management plan 
must be reviewed 
and updated 
periodically.

PHOTO COURTESy PUBLIC 
SAFETy CANADA

55

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

A 2009 hazard and risk analysis for the Regional District of Nanaimo identified 
long term risks related to water supply, increased incidence and severity of 
flooding due to increased precipitation and run-off, and potential compounding 
effects of greater storm surges due to sea level rise, high tides, and increased 
precipitation. Changing weather patterns might also be increasing the risk of 
devastating ice storms similar to those previously experienced in Eastern Canada 
that cut off power supplied from the grid. www.rdn.bc.ca/cms/wpattachments/
wpID141atID2769.pdf

•	

•	

Landslides on steep slopes after heavy precipitation events. Nicholas Heap, Hot 
Properties, How Global Warming Could Transform B.C.’s Real Estate Sector www.davidsuzuki.
org/publications/downloads/2007/DSF_HotProperties_final1.pdf

Increased risk of forest fire, and potential for larger fires of higher intensity. The Kelowna 
area fires of 2003, exacerbated by drought and long periods of hot weather, caused 
$700 million in damage. http://act-adapt.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/PDF-
WeatherSession_SummaryReport.pdf And see Walker, I.J. and R. Sydneysmith. 2008. 
British Columbia in From Impacts to Adaptation: Canada in a Changing Climate 2007, edited 
by D.S. Lemmen, F.J. Warren, J. Lacroix and E. Bush. Government of Canada, pp. 364.

•	 Heat-related stress and illness, particularly for vulnerable members of the population. 
After the heat wave of 2005, Toronto identified heat stress as a major climate change 
impact for its community. http://act-adapt.org/wp-content/uploads/2011/03/PDF-
WeatherSession_SummaryReport.pdf

To consider:

•	

The anticipated frequency and or severity (or both) of extreme weather events and other 
climate-related hazards experienced by a community may increase as result of climate 
change. This in turn means greater demands for personnel, training, equipment, public 
education, etc. Emergency management teams have not traditionally viewed impacts 
as climate change-related and will likely require training to ensure they understand the 
concept and its implications, as well as new response mechanisms and planning. Local 
governments also need to look at the implications for insurance costs and coverage.

•	

•	

•	

•	

The Cariboo-Chilcotin adaptation strategy recommends that human resources 
capacity for emergency services be increased at times in the year when that 
region is most at risk: the wildfire season and during spring freshet. It also 
suggests temporarily reassigning other staff to emergency services during peak 
times and providing necessary training. http://pacificclimate.org/sites/default/
files/publications/RAC.CCCCAdaptationStrategy.Sep2011.pdf

Communications needs will likely be increased, for example to advise the 
community about evacuation notices, water quality issues, road closures, etc. 
There may be opportunities to expand communication capacity through the use 
of social media.

Emergency staff themselves may be affected during extreme heat events, and this 
needs to be taken into consideration in emergency response planning.

The BC Provincial Emergency Program (PEP) has a tool to assess community 
preparedness for emergencies. www.pep.gov.bc.ca/cepr/review.html

The Kelowna area 
fires of 2003, which 
resulted from drought 
and long periods 
of hot weather, 
caused $700 million 
in damage.

KELOWNA PHOTO 
COURTESy AWWS/FLICKR

56

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	 How emergency response measures are delivered should also be considered: for example, 

the location of flooding or wildfire hazards might shift or grow and make planned 
emergency routes impassable or strand fire stations, police stations, hospitals, clinics, 
ambulance stations, care facilities, transition houses, homeless shelters, pharmacies, 
airports, water treatment plants, pumping stations, works yards, utilities and other critical 
facilities.

•	

In Kamloops the Community Wildfire Protection Plan recommends that new 
municipal water systems supplying water to new developments in areas identified 
for wildfire hazard should require emergency generators for all pumps to ensure 
continuous water supply in the event of power loss during a wildfire event. 
Kamloops Community Wildfire Protection Plan www.city.kamloops.bc.ca/firerescue/
pdfs/cwpp.pdf

•	

Certain members of the community might require special consideration.

uBCM provides 
funding for 
interface fire 
prevention planning 
and implementation 
www.ubcm.ca/assets/
Funding~Programs/
LGPS/SWPI/
Applications2011/
swpi-2011-cwpp-
guide.pdf

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Public transit and other needs of low-income, disabled and at-risk persons need to 
be considered in evacuation planning.

Evacuation or other options for vulnerable elderly or sick people living at home 
might need to be considered.

The needs of non-English-speaking members of the community should also be 
considered.

The needs of tourists should be included in emergency planning.

The City of Toronto has developed a “Hot Weather Response Plan” that outlines 
measures to be taken to protect vulnerable community members during a heat 
wave. www.toronto.ca/health/heatalerts/pdf/hwr_plan_2009.pdf

57

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

Potential indirect impacts of increased hazards also need to be considered.

•	

The District of Kimberley is looking at the need to plan for alternative drinking water 
sources in the event of wildfires in local watersheds. www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/
KImberley_CACCI_Phase_1_Adaptation_Report.pdf

•	

The interaction of multiple climate events and other types of hazards needs to be assessed:

•	

•	

•	

•	

Prince George has identified a need to investigate the future impacts on river flood 
flows as a result of the pine beetle infestation, climate change and Nechako Reservoir 
regulation. http://princegeorge.ca/infocentre/communications/Lists/Recent%20
News/Attachments/18/Report_FloodMitigation_StrategicPlan_2010-06-24.pdf

Increased precipitation from storms can lead to greater run-off in rivers, and be 
combined with storm surges from coastal waters to produce more serious flooding in 
some coastal areas.

In Saanich a Hazard, Risk and Vulnerability Analysis concluded that the District was 
reasonably well-equipped to respond to a single event, but if two emergencies 
occurred simultaneously, such as a heat wave and an earthquake, emergency 
response could be compromised. Both Saanich and Prince George recommended 
regional emergency response initiatives with increased resources for training and 
action as a possible solution to limited local capacity. www.saanich.ca/living/climate/
pdf/saanich_adaptation_plan_web_adopted_oct2411.pdf

The City of Vancouver is looking at improving cross-departmental responses 
to emergencies. For example, if the engineering department already has heavy 
equipment out in the City for regular operations and an emergency arises, it may be 
possible to coordinate use of the equipment to move fallen trees and other debris 
from storms.31

•	

Citizen education can play an important role in emergency prevention and response.

•	 Many local governments already have an emergency preparedness guide for 
the community; this can be updated along with the emergency management 
plan. Halifax Regional Municipality has a citizen guide that specifically looks at 
preparing for climate change-related risks. www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/
ClimateSmartGuide_Final_PressRes.pdf

•	

The BC Forest Service — Protection Branch has developed a FireSmart manual for 
homeowners. www.pssg.gov.bc.ca/firecom/pdf/homeowner-firesmart.pdf

•	

Cooperation with other levels of government and responsible agencies will be important, 
particularly for regional scale emergencies.

•	

The District of Saanich climate change adaptation strategy proposes working 
with the Ministry of Health, the Capital Regional District and other municipalities 
to address extreme heat weather events through a health monitoring alert and 
response system. www.saanich.ca/living/climate/pdf/saanich_adaptation_plan_
web_adopted_oct2411.pdf

The BC Forest 
Service — Protection 
Branch has developed 
a FireSmart manual for 
homeowners. www.
pssg.gov.bc.ca/firecom/
pdf/homeowner-
firesmart.pdf

31  Personal communication from Tamsin Mills, Climate Change Adaptation Initiative, City of Vancouver, January 25, 

2012.

58

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia long teRm finAnciAl PlAnning And RePoRting

Local  governments  are  required  to  prepare,  each  year,  a  financial  plan  setting  out  the 
objectives and policies for the planning period as well as the proposed expenditures, pro-
posed funding sources and proposed transfers to or between funds. The planning period 
for a financial plan is five years. Community Charter, s.165, Local Government Act, s. 815.

Municipalities are also required to prepare an annual report that includes both audited 
financial statements and information about reaching the previous year’s objectives and 
measures, and how it will measure progress in meeting objectives for the next two years. 
Community Charter, s. 98.

Why look at long term financial planning part of climate change adaptation:

Dealing with climate change impacts may have significant financial implications for local 
governments, in terms of increased expenditures, whether from managing increased risk 
and occurrence of natural hazards, dealing with greater wear-and-tear on infrastructure 
or the need to increase infrastructure capacity, training staff to understand and manage 
climate change impacts, training staff or hiring consultants to assess risk and vulnerability, 
engaging with the public around impacts and goal-setting, and others. Planning ahead will 
provide opportunities, for example, to identify investments that can enhance resiliency of 
infrastructure to climate change impacts and to identify co-benefits or costs savings.

Climate change may also have an impact, possibly negative, on local government rev-
enues. Areas of fiscal risk and exposure need to be identified as part of the assessment 
of impacts a community will face as a result of climate change. As well, if a local govern-
ment decides to increase property taxes to modify or expand local government services 
to address climate impacts, it will need to ensure that this measure is accompanied by 
adequate public education about the climate impacts that are behind this decision.

Including  financial  planning  in  climate  change  adaptation  strategies  will  allow  decision-
making about adaptation options to be better informed. In choosing adaptation measures 
to  be  implemented,  and  weighing  trade-offs,  a  key  factor  will  be  the  financial  resources 
available, and whether a given measure has any other benefits (e.g. economic development, 
savings on maintenance and operation costs, community liveability benefits.)

Planning ahead will 
provide opportunities, 
for example, to identify 
investments that can 
enhance resiliency 
of infrastructure 
to climate change 
impacts and to 
identify co-benefits 
or costs savings.

MOBERLEy LAKE PHOTO 
COURTESy ENERGETICCITy

59

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia To consider:

•	

•	

•	

There are important links between a financial plan and an OCP. All bylaws enacted after 
the adoption of the OCP must be consistent with the OCP, and, prior to its adoption 
(after first reading of the OCP bylaw), the OCP must be considered in conjunction with 
the financial plan. Local governments should ensure that the financial plan adequately 
addresses the needs created by the climate change adaptation policies and actions set 
out in the OCP.

The City of Victoria has discussed the possibility of updating the procurement and 
tendering process for capital projects to consider climate change impacts and 
adaptation, and requiring an impact and adaptation assessment for internal capital 
projects. www.shapeyourfuturevictoria.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/01/HBLVictoriaCl
imateEnergyEDRevision.pdf

According to the Community Charter, financial plans are only required to have a five-
year horizon, and other fiscal policy and decision-making might be even shorter-term. 
However, climate change impacts, just beginning to be felt, will only intensify for the 
next 50–100 years. Local governments will ideally want to look at financial implications 
beyond five years, to ensure they can support service levels and community quality of 
life into the future.

•	 While there may be little funding available specifically for climate change adaptation 
measures, most communities receive investment from both government and private 
sources for development and redevelopment activities. Incorporating climate change 
adaptation measures into development policies and related regulations will ensure 
that both public and private sector investments contribute to the implementation of 
climate change adaptation strategies. Further, to the extent that a local government 
has a climate change adaptation strategy that favours measures that have multiple 
benefits (for example, water conservation and energy efficiency), and improves the 
overall efficiency and performance of land use and infrastructure, this will increase 

CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTs  
ON LOCAL ECONOMIEs

The Cariboo Regional District has 
concluded that its tax base is likely to 
shrink as a result of climate change 
impacts on the forest industry in 
its region leading to less timber 
available for harvest and reduced 
activity. To deal with this several options have been proposed, such as developing a 
strategic plan to address an evolving tax base or reducing the level of essential services 
provided in the region. http://pacificclimate.org/sites/default/files/publications/RAC.
CCCCAdaptationStrategy.Sep2011.pdf

The City of Victoria 
has discussed the 
possibility of updating 
the procurement and 
tendering process 
for capital projects to 
consider climate change 
impacts and adaptation.

VICTORIA PARKSIDE 
LEED BUILDING, PHOTO 
COURTESy PAUL P/FLICKR

60

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia the resilience of the community to a range of risks, both climate-related and otherwise. 
www.iclei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/Global/Publications/Report-
Financing_Resilient_City-Final.pdf

•	

Financial planning needs to adequately and accurately address the maintenance, 
upgrade and replacement costs for infrastructure, which is part of asset management, 
discussed below. In many cases climate change will increase the rate of deterioration 
of existing infrastructure, and have an impact on infrastructure capacity, design and 
location for the future. There will also be instances where existing infrastructure will 
no longer be sufficient, whether adequately maintained or not, such as the case where 
changed sea level design guidelines apply. See www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/
flood/structural.html#climate

FINANCING  REsPONsEs  
TO CLIMATE CHANGE

When faced with the need to address a 
greatly increased urban/interface forest 
fire hazard due to mountain pine beetle 
damaged trees, the City of Prince George 
negotiated a Community Forest Agreement 
with a five-year replaceable license to 
manage Crown forest lands. While some 
of its “urban” logging was estimated to cost as much as six times as conventional logging, 
Prince George obtained funding from a variety of sources including, UBCM, NRCAN, the 
provincial government and others. www.env.gov.bc.ca/cas/adaptation/pdf/adamson.pdf

While there 
may be little 
funding available 
specifically for 
climate change 
adaptation 
measures, most 
communities receive 
investment from 
both government 
and private sources 
for development 
and redevelopment 
activities.

IMAGES COURTESy CITy 
OF HAMILTON (TOP) 
AND BC MINISTRy OF 
FORESTS (BOTTOM)

61

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Asset mAnAgement

Climate change is likely to have significant impacts on local government infrastructure 
in BC, the largest asset managed by most local governments. At the same time, most 
communities currently have infrastructure assets that are nearing the end of their service 
life,  but  face  challenges  in  renewal  or  replacement  of  those  assets.  It  is  an  opportun-
ity to explore alternative options for renewing infrastructure and at the same time plan 
for climate resilience. One promising approach is to coordinate land use planning with 
longer term financial and infrastructure planning in order to better understand the life 
cycle costs of infrastructure and look at ways to reduce or recover some of the costs.32

Currently, in most communities the initial capital cost of municipal infrastructure related 
to development or re-development is covered by developers and property owners, while 
local governments become responsible for the long term cost associated with operation, 
maintenance and replacement of infrastructure assets. These long term costs are typ-
ically as much as four times the initial capital costs for conventional infrastructure. Green 
infrastructure  options,  which  can  have  important  climate  change  adaptation  benefits 
(see  section  on  Infrastructure),  may  reduce  life  cycle  costs  while  increasing  resilience 
to climate change, and this can be explored in the context of long term planning for 
asset management. See Kim A. Stephens, Integrated Rainwater Management: Move to a 
Levels-of-Service  Approach  to  Sustainable  Service  Delivery.  www.civicinfo.bc.ca/Library/
Asset_Management/Newsletters/AMBC_Newsletter_Issue_No._2--LGAMWG--Jan_2011.
pdf

To consider:

•	

In New Zealand, it is suggested that any significant investment in infrastructure 
should be preceded by a risk assessment that builds in climate change 
implications and a cost–benefit analysis. Climate Change Effects and Impacts 

AssET MANAGEMENT

Asset Management BC defines asset management as:

An integrated approach involving planning, finance, engineering and 
operations to effectively manage existing and new infrastructure to maximize 
benefits, reduce risks and provide satisfactory levels of service to community 
users in a socially, environmentally and economically sustainable manner. 
(Source: assetmanagementbc.ca)

BC  local  governments  are  also  required  to  follow  Public  Sector  Accounting 
Board  Standard  PSAB  3150  –  Tangible  Capital  Assets.  (Community  Charter, 
s.167(2))

32  Asset Management BC, “The State of Asset Management in BC” www.civicinfo.bc.ca/Library/

Asset_Management/Tools_and_Resources/The_State_of_Asset_Management_in_BC--LGAMWG--
September_2010.pdf

For discussion about 
the advantages to 
local governments of 
taking a longer term 
approach to asset 
management in light 
of challenges such 
as climate change, 
see Kim Fowler, Local 
Government Land Use 
and Asset Management 
Planning in BC: Proposed 
Sustainable Service 
Improvements.  
www.waterbucket.
ca/rm/sites/wbcrm/
documents/
media/165.pdf

PHOTO: SEWAGE PIPES TO 
HANDLE CLIMATE CHANGES 
AND EXTREME RAIN, 
COURTESy TOMMELISE84/
DENMARK/FLICKR

62

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Assessment, A Guidance Manual for Local Government in New Zealand, 2nd edition. www.mfe.
govt.nz/publications/climate/climate-change-effect-impacts-assessments-may08/climate-
change-effect-impacts-assessment-may08.pdf

•	 One of the benefits of looking at climate change adaptation through the lens of asset 
management is the increased ability to effectively communicate the longer term costs 
and benefits of action to decisionmakers. Some climate change impacts will only become 
significant over the longer term, i.e. within the next 50–100 years. This is within the life 
cycle of most infrastructure, and, ideally, infrastructure planning should account for climate 
change impacts. However, budget cycles are typically much shorter, making it easy in 
practice to defer action, unless the longer term costs and risks are well understood. Robert 
Hicks, Senior Engineer, Policy and Planning Department, Metro Vancouver. Climate Change: 
Risk Management by Local Governments www.powershow.com/view/14d5ce-NGZjN/
Climate_Change_Risk_Management_by_Local_Governments_flash_ppt_presentation

•	

•	

Canada Mortgage Housing Corporation (CMHC) has designed a tool to compare the life 
cycle costs of different infrastructure options for major community developments, and this 
tool may be useful in the context of climate change adaptation. Life Cycle Costing Tool for 
Community Infrastructure Planning  www.cmhc-schl.gc.ca/en/inpr/su/sucopl/licycoto/
index.cfm

Asset management may also be addressed in other local government planning processes. 
Metro Vancouver’s Integrated Liquid Waste and Resource Management Plan requires that 
asset management plans for wastewater treatment plants be updated to address risks, 
including climate change and seismic events, and maintain performance in wet weather. 
www.metrovancouver.org/about/publications/Publications/ILWRMP.pdf

One of the benefits 
of looking at 
climate change 
adaptation through 
the lens of asset 
management is the 
increased ability 
to effectively 
communicate 
the longer term 
costs and benefits 
of action to 
decisionmakers.

PHOTO COURTESy  
WILL MERyDITH/FLICKR

63

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Existing infrastructure, 
even if well-designed 
to take into account 
historically relevant 
environmental factors, 
may be vulnerable to 
future climate impacts.

PHOTO COURTESy 
DWEEKLy/FLICKR

64

infRAstRuctuRe

Local governments have important responsibilities related to infrastructure within their 
communities, including water supply and treatment, transmission and delivery, storm-
water and liquid waste management, watershed protection, solid waste management, 
roads and other transportation infrastructure, and energy infrastructure.

Why look at infrastructure as part of climate change adaptation:

•	

Existing infrastructure, even if well-designed to take into account historically 
relevant environmental factors, may be vulnerable to future climate impacts.

•	

•	

For example, a study of the Vancouver Sewerage Area System 
identified vulnerabilities related to storm surges and sea level rise at 
the wastewater treatment plant, and the possible need to accelerate 
ongoing work to separate combined sewers and to address increased 
precipitation over time. www.metrovancouver.org/planning/
ClimateChange/ClimateChangeDocs/Vulnerability_climate_change.pdf

Engineers Canada is developing the PIEVC (Public Infrastructure 
Engineering Vulnerability Committee) protocol aimed at obtaining a 
more detailed technical vulnerability analysis for infrastructure:  
www.pievc.ca

•	

Climate change impacts can create potential catastrophic risks to infrastructure 
that arise from inadequate design and vulnerable location — losses associated, 
for example, with flooding, violent winds, temperature extremes and sea level 
rise.

•	

In Kimberley municipal infrastructure including local chlorination plants 
was found to be vulnerable to wildfire. www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/
CACCI_Kimberley_CaseStudy.pdf

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

Climate change impacts may be less dramatic, but still significant in terms of 
infrastructure maintenance and performance.

•	

•	

•	

In Williams Lake, increased freeze-thaw cycles resulted in accelerated road and 
airport runway deterioration, and also required improved ice and snow control 
measures and upgraded equipment.33

Infrastructure is also exposed to risks in a changing climate as a result of 
existing inefficiencies in terms of energy and water use and others. This type 
of “systemic under-performance” means that when the availability of inputs 
like energy and water are decreased due to ecological or economic pressures 
resulting from climate change, the infrastructure is vulnerable to failure. http://
iclei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/Global/Publications/Report-
Financing_Resilient_City-Final.pdf

In Castlegar it was found that decreased summer precipitation and increased 
residential water use could lead to infrastructure malfunction with respect 
to the water supply system. www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/Castlegar_Climate_
Change_Adaptation_Report_Final.pdf

GREEN INFRAsTRuCTuRE REsOuRCEs

•	 Stormwater Planning: A Guidebook for British Columbia www.env.gov.bc.ca/epd/

mun-waste/waste-liquid/stormwater/

•	 Beyond the Guidebook 2010: Implementing a New Culture for Urban Watershed 

Protection and Restoration in British Columbia www.waterbucket.ca/
rm/?sid=45&id=642&type=single

•	 Water Balance Model http://bc.waterbalance.ca/

•	 The Green Infrastructure Guide: Issues, Implementation Strategies 

and Success stories http://wcel.org/resources/publication/
green-infrastructure-guide-issues-implementation-strategies-and-success-storie

•	 Convening for Action on Vancouver Island – Leadership in Water Sustainability 

www.waterbucket.ca/cfa/?sid=19&id=176&type=single

•	 Topsoil-Law and Policy and Technical Primers http://wcel.org/resources/publication/

topsoil-law-and-policy-primer-rainwater-management-and-water-conservation

•	 Water Sensitive Urban Design www.cmhc-schl.gc.ca/en/inpr/bude/himu/coedar/

upload/OAA_WaterSensitiveUrbanDesign_EN_july11_w.pdf

•	 The Value of Green Infrastructure: A Guide to Recognizing Its Economic, 

Environmental and Social Benefits www.cnt.org/news/2011/01/21/
new-guide-helps-municipalities-monetize-the-value-of-green-infrastructure-2/

•	 The Value of Green Infrastructure for Urban Climate Adaptation www.ccap.org/

docs/resources/989/Green_Infrastructure_FINAL.pdf

Climate change 
impacts can create 
potential catastrophic 
risks to infrastructure 
that arise from 
inadequate design 
and vulnerable 
location.

PHOTO COURTESy 
PROVINCE OF BC

33  Presentation by Brian Carruthers, Chief Administrative Officer, City of Williams Lake at PICS Forum on 

Resilient Communities, June 15, 2011, Vancouver

65

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia To consider:

•	 Green infrastructure for stormwater management is a network of engineered and natural 
features that aims to mimic the natural hydrologic cycle and increase onsite capture and 
infiltration, through measures such as topsoil requirements, rain gardens, permeable 
pavement, landscaping, green roofs and others — as contrasted with “grey infrastructure,” 
pipes and drains that remove rainwater from sites and send it directly to watercourses and 
treatment plants. Green infrastructure may offer more climate resilient options for local 
governments and communities, and green infrastructure specifications can be incorporated 
into land use planning and regulation of new developments and areas being re-developed.

•	

Local engineers and planners need to use design values and information that account for a 
changing climate so that they avoid building infrastructure to suit historical conditions that 
will be vulnerable to future realities. Sources to consult for more information include:

•	

•	

Engineers Canada, www.engineerscanada.ca/files/w_Climate_Change_en_2010.pdf

Engineering Assessment of the Vulnerability of Infrastructure to Climate Change: 
Implementing Action at the Local Level, Brent Burton, M. A.Sc./P.Eng. www.env.gov.
bc.ca/cas/adaptation/pdf/burton.pdf

•	

Canadian Standards Association; www.csa.ca/cm/ca/en/standards

•	

In some cases local governments may be lacking the local information needed to adequately 
assess the vulnerability of infrastructure to climate change, and so the first measures 
undertaken will involve research and data collection related to existing infrastructure.

•	

•	

In Castlegar, for example, action items include monitoring flows in its stormwater 
system, and obtaining downscaled information about relevant future climate 
impacts from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium. www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/
Castlegar_Climate_Change_Adaptation_Report_Final.pdf

In Saanich the local government will work with Environment Canada, BC 
Environment, and the Capital Regional District to review the adequacy of 
precipitation monitoring in the district. www.saanich.ca/living/climate/pdf/
saanich_adaptation_plan_web_adopted_oct2411.pdf

•	

Relatively low cost adaptation measures for infrastructure include actions such as analyses of 
infrastructure failures; regular infrastructure maintenance; community disaster management 
planning; updating climatic design values and engineering codes and standards; and 
improving the quality and length of climate data records. Auld, H. and D. MacIver. Cities and 
Communities: The Changing Climate and Increasing Vulnerability of Infrastructure. Occasional 
Paper 3. Environment Canada, Adaptation and Impacts Research Group, 2005) www.ec.gc.
ca/Publications/default.asp?lang=En&xml=6D51BE52-A4CF-4F73-ADF1-818F78E59E47

•	 Mainstreaming climate change adaptation into design, maintenance and restoration 

of infrastructure will require more, and better communication between climate change 
researchers, policy makers, engineers, architects, operators and asset managers. This will 
include both information sharing and education. Adapting Infrastructure to Climate Change 
in Canada’s Cities and Communities. Research & Analysis Division, Infrastructure Canada, 
December 2006. http://ipcc-wg2.gov/njlite_download.php?id=6305

Local governments may 
be lacking the local 
information needed 
to adequately assess 
the vulnerability of 
infrastructure to climate 
change, and so the first 
measures undertaken 
will involve research 
and data collection.

PHOTO COURTESy 
MIKE COGH/FLICKR

66

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia civic Building Policy And Building RegulAtion

Local governments can define acceptable practices and standards for the construction 
and  retrofitting  of  civic  buildings,  either  for  specific  buildings  or  with  a  civic  building 
policy, such as a green building policy.34 

Local governments also have limited authority to regulate private building construction 
activities. A municipality may — with provincial approval (because this is an area of con-
current authority) — use its bylaw powers to establish a standard that exceeds Building 
Code requirements. However, local governments may also indirectly affect private build-
ing design and construction through development permits, development cost charge 
reductions  or  waivers  that  incentivize  specific  practices,  fast  tracking  of  development 
permits where buildings incorporate specific features, or revitalization tax reductions for 
certain types of construction or retrofitting.35

To consider:

•	

There are many ways that buildings can be adapted to a changing climate, and 
made more resilient to higher temperatures, extreme weather events, water 
shortages, flooding and wildfire. See www.buildinggreen.com/auth/article.
cfm/2009/8/28/Design-for-Adaptation-Living-in-a-Climate-Changing-World

34  http://toolkit.bc.ca/tool/civic-green-building-policy
35  Susan Rutherford (2009) Bill 27: Opportunities and Strategies for Green Action by BC Local 
Governments. West Coast Environmental Law. Vancouver. http://toolkit.bc.ca/resource/
bill-27-opportunities-and-strategies-green-action

Local governments 
can define acceptable 
practices and 
standards for the 
construction and 
retrofitting of 
civic buildings.

WHISTLER LEED PUBLIC 
LIBRARy PHOTO COURTESy 
BEN ROTHNIE/FLICKR

67

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

A changing climate will mean that heating and cooling demands will also 
change considerably over the coming 50–100 years, and this should be 
considered in the design of HVAC (heating, ventilation and air conditioning) 
systems for new civic buildings and retrofits. 

•	 Greater demands for energy due to hotter summers and greater cooling 

demands may be offset in part through increased energy efficiency in 
buildings. Improving building energy efficiency and encouraging renewable 
energy use can also decrease the vulnerability of a community to disruptions 
in grid energy as a result of natural disasters and extreme weather events. 

•	 A municipality could create a revitalization tax exemption for buildings 
that install renewable energy sources, such as solar panels. (Community 
Charter, s. 226) www.brownfieldrenewal.gov.bc.ca/docs/community_
charter_revital_tax_exemptions.pdf 

•	 A review of options for local governments to require or incentivize 
renewable energy and energy efficiency in buildings is found here:  
www.greenbuildingleaders.ca/docs/gbl-discussionpaper-withcover.pdf 

•	 Green roofs and onsite rainwater harvesting may assist in managing increases 

in precipitation, as well as improving resistance to drier conditions by 
increasing soil moisture and groundwater recharge levels. As discussed above 
local governments can promote this type of design and construction in their 
communities through development permitting and bylaw powers related to 
run-off control.

•	

•	

Constructing and retrofitting civic buildings and facilities can be an 
opportunity to showcase good practices to the community, generate 
public discussion about preparing for climate change, and encourage the 
development of relevant local expertise.

In many communities there may be a lack of local knowledge about 
alternatives to conventional building practices and the advantages they can 
offer. Local governments can play a role in overcoming these types of barriers, 
by showing leadership with civic building policy, as noted above, and also 
through outreach and support for local training initiatives. 

•	

In its draft OCP (January 2012) the City of Campbell River proposes to 
work with partners to support local training related to green building 
practices, including both information about energy retrofits and 
renewable energy deployment, and the financial analysis to support these 
practices. http://sustainablecampbellriver.ca/?p=633

A municipality could 
create a revitalization tax 
exemption for buildings 
that install renewable 
energy sources, such 
as solar panels.

DOCKSIDE GREEN, VICTORIA PHOTO 
COURTESy JAySCRATCH/FLICKR

68

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia wAteRshed mAnAgement PlAnning

Climate change will significantly affect water resources in most regions of BC, as a re-
sult of increased and more severe storm events, changing run-off patterns, droughts, 
increased forest fires in watersheds, and other impacts. Areas prone to flooding may face 
increased risks, complicated further in coastal areas by sea level rise and storm surges. To 
deal effectively with these challenges local governments may wish to look at how their 
watersheds can be managed more effectively. 

In  some  smaller  watersheds,  local  governments  may  have  jurisdiction  over  most  or 
all  of  the  watersheds  for  their  communities,  and  watershed  management  can  be  ac-
complished using the tools described in Part 2 of this guide, and in particular through 
land use planning. However, many local governments in BC share jurisdiction over their 
watersheds with other local governments, the provincial and/or federal governments, 
First  Nations,  government  agencies,  and  in  some  cases,  private  landowners.  In  these 
cases, watershed management planning can be challenging. Even in Metro Vancouver 
and  the  Capital  Regional  District,  where  most  upstream  areas  of  the  watershed  are 
under regional district ownership or control, there are jurisdictional issues involved in 
downstream areas of the respective watersheds. Watershed management planning thus 
requires coordination and collaboration to be successful.

To consider:

•	 Management at the watershed scale may require new or more detailed 

information than has previously been available. The Okanagan Water Supply 
and Demand Project is using various models and computer technology to 
estimate Okanagan water availability for the future, taking into account climate 
change and population growth. Project partners include the Okanagan Water 
Basin Board, BC Ministry of the Environment, BC Ministry of Agriculture, the BC 
Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development, Environment Canada, 
Agriculture Canada, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, the Okanagan Nation 
Alliance, UBC-Okanagan, SFU, the BC Agriculture Council, and the Water Supply 
Association of BC, www.obwb.ca/wsd/

•	 Watershed management may also require new collaborative forms of 

governance that include not only governments and government agencies, 
but also increased participation of communities and stakeholder groups. 
See, for example, the Cowichan Water Management Plan. www.livingrivers.
ca/dox/081106Cowichan%20Water%20Management%20Plan%20-%20
Wightman%20presentation%20.pdf

•	

Examples of different approaches to watershed management in BC with 
specific reference to the context of climate change adaptation have been 
compiled in a new resource. See Rethinking Our Water Ways: A Guide to Water 
and Watershed Planning for BC Communities in the Face of Climate Change and 
Other Challenges. www.fraserbasin.bc.ca/publications/documents/waterguide_
oct-2011.pdf

Management at the 
watershed scale may 
require new or more 
detailed information 
than has previously 
been available. The 
Okanagan Water Basin 
Board and the Ministry 
of the Environment are 
working to estimate 
Okanagan water 
availability for the 
future, taking into 
account climate change 
and population growth.

PHOTO COURTESy 
MOIZISSIMO/FLICKR

69

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia liquid wAste mAnAgement PlAns

According to the Environmental Management Act, s.24, local governments may prepare 
liquid waste management plans for their jurisdictions.

Liquid waste management plans (LWMPs) can establish long term, integrated strategies 
for rainwater management and the protection of natural watercourses, which will help 
make communities more resilient to the impacts of climate change on water supply and 
precipitation events. LWMPs are an excellent opportunity to provide the framework for 
developing  green  infrastructure.  Green  infrastructure  solutions  generally  have  lower 
maintenance and operational costs, and can also offer greater flexibility compared to 
conventional infrastructure (such as pipes and drains) in the face of uncertainty about 
the  amount  of  change  that  infrastructure  will  need  to  accommodate  as  a  result  of  a 
changing climate.

Examples:

•	

The District of Sooke recently completed the final phase of developing a 
liquid waste management plan and became the first community in BC to 
integrate sanitary and rainwater management plans. www.sooke.ca/EN/main/
government/devservices/environment/lwm_rain.html

•	 Metro Vancouver’s new Integrated Liquid Waste and Resource Management 

Plan includes measures aimed at helping address the impacts of climate change 
and climatic variability on local water resources, and designing and adapting 
infrastructure to address climate change risks. www.metrovancouver.org/about/
publications/Publications/ILWRMP.pdf

To consider:

•	

Climate change may have important consequences for liquid waste 
management plans, which may need to be updated in light of projected 
climate change impacts affecting water supply, precipitation and sea level 
rise, depending on the region. New plans should also take into account these 
impacts.

Green infrastructure 
solutions generally 
have lower 
maintenance and 
operational costs, and 
can also offer greater 
flexibility compared 
to conventional 
infrastructure (such 
as pipes and drains).

70

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia AiR quAlity PlAnning

Regional  districts  may  make  regulations  related  to  emissions  of  smoke,  dust,  gas,  sparks,  ash, 
soot, cinders, fumes or other effluvia (Local Government Act, s. 725(1)(g)) if they provide a related 
service. (s.797.1(1)(d)). The Greater Vancouver Regional District (Metro Vancouver) has a specific 
power to provide the service of air quality management within its jurisdiction (Environmental 
Management Act, s. 31)

Municipalities also have broad powers under the Community Charter (ss. 8(3),(i),(j) and (h) and s. 
64) with respect to public health and public nuisances that can be applied to address air quality 
issues such as backyard burning and wood burning appliances.

Why look at air quality planning as part of climate change adaptation:

•	

Rising temperatures may contribute to increased air pollution and in particular higher 
ozone levels, which in turn may lead to public health concerns. Air quality impacts of 
climate change in the Fraser Valley are currently being studied. http://summit.sfu.ca/
item/2270

Examples:

•	

•	

The Clean Air Bylaws Guide provides a number of examples from across BC of local 
governments taking action to regulate air pollution within their communities. www.
wcel.org/sites/default/files/publications/The%20Clean%20Air%20Bylaws%20Guide.pdf

See also the provincial inventory of air quality bylaws in BC www.env.gov.bc.ca/epd/
bcairquality/topics/municipal-smoke-bylaws.html

To consider:

•	

Air quality planners should be assessing the potential impact of rising temperatures, 
both average and extreme, and applying the information obtained to update or revise 
air quality plans.

The Greater Vancouver 
Regional District 
(Metro Vancouver) 
has a specific power 
to provide the 
service of air quality 
management within 
its jurisdiction.

VANCOUVER 
PHOTO COURTESy 
ECSTATICIST/FLICKR

71

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia T H E   S T E W A R D S H I P   S E R I E S

Green Bylaws Toolkit       

for Conserving Sensitive 
Ecosystems and 
Green Infrastructure

BiodiveRsity And conseRvAtion

PREPARED BY ENVIRONMENTAL LAW CLINIC, UNIVERSITY OF VICTORIA FACULTY OF LAW, AND DEBORAH CURRAN & COMPANY

FOR THE WETLAND STEWARDSHIP PARTNERSHIP,  DUCKS UNLIMITED CANADA, GRASSLANDS CONSERVATION COUNCIL OF BRITISH COLUMBIA,  

ENVIRONMENT CANADA, AND THE PROVINCE OF BRITISH COLUMBIA

Local governments have many options to protect biodiversity and promote conserva-
tion within their jurisdictions, such as park and greenbelt planning; parkland acquisition; 
protection  of  watercourses,  streamside  areas  and  wetlands;  coastal  planning;  urban 
forest  management;  and  the  designation  of  urban  containment  boundaries.  Local 
governments can adopt policies to protect biodiversity and sensitive habitats in their 
OCPs, through the use of Environmental DPAs, zoning, by requiring impact assessments 
for applications for rezoning and development permits, and using bylaw powers related 
to landscaping, tree protection, soil removal and deposit, watercourse protection, alien 
invasive species and pesticide use. A key resource for these measures is the Green Bylaws 
Toolkit. www.greenbylaws.ca

Urbanization has been identified as one of the top contributors to habitat loss and eco-
system degradation affecting species in BC, and climate change will add a further stress. 
Taking Nature’s Pulse, Section 3: Threats to Biodiversity in BC.36 Urban areas may face serious 
consequences related to climate change, some of which include more invasive species, 
loss of urban and park trees, problems with waste water treatment dealing with new 
types of microorganisms, and public health risks associated with diseases transmitted by 
immigrating species like mosquitoes.37 

Local governments can do their part to help species adapt by reducing existing stresses 
related  to  pollution  and  habitat  loss,  by  restricting  or  prohibiting  land  uses  that  may 
contribute to pollution, and expanding conservation and restoration efforts in sensitive 
areas. Maintaining parks and greenbelts can have multiple climate change adaptation 
benefits, providing habitat and connectivity, stormwater and floodplain management, 
infiltration and drainage, and opportunities for public education around climate change. 
www.metrovancouver.org/services/parks_lscr/ParksManagementPlan/Documents/
RegionalParksPlan.pdf

36   Taking Nature’s Pulse, Section 3: Threats to Biodiversity in BC www.biodiversitybc.org/EN/main/

downloads/tnp-3.html#s33 

37   www.countdown2010.net/2010/wp-content/uploads/FS6Climate_small.PDF
 

Local governments 
can adopt policies to 
protect biodiversity 
and sensitive habitats. 
A key resource for 
these measures is the 
Green Bylaws Toolkit. 
www.greenbylaws.ca

BEAR PHOTO COURTESy 
BRUCE MCKAy/FLICKR

72

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia To consider:

•	 Mapping sensitive ecosystems within local government jurisdictions provides information 

that can be used to guide land use policies, such as Natural Environmental Development 
Permit Areas, minimum setbacks, restoration and enhancement activities, and others, and 
can also be used to establish a baseline for monitoring and evaluation of future climate 
impacts.

•	

•	

The City of Kelowna has been recognized for its work in ecosystem mapping and 
inventory. www.iclei.org/fileadmin/user_upload/documents/Canada/Individual_
Cases/Cities_and_Biodiversity_Case_Study_Series_en_kelowna.pdf

The City of Prince George has mapped climate change-related impacts on 
soil moisture and considered forest and sensitive ecosystem resilience. http://
princegeorge.ca/environment/climatechange/adaptation/pages/default.aspx

•	

•	

The Ministry of the Environment has compiled information about species at risk and 
other issues of environmental concern broken down by region, along with guidance 
for environmental planning. Develop with Care: Environmental Guidelines for Urban and 
Rural Land Development in British Columbia www.env.gov.bc.ca/wld/documents/bmp/
devwithcare2006/develop_with_care_intro.html

As populations grow, there is increasing pressure to develop land in urban and agricultural 
areas. Understanding the services that healthy ecosystems can provide in urban areas, 
as well as ways that developed areas can contribute to healthy ecosystems will be key in 
identifying solutions.

•	

•	

•	

The City of Surrey completed an Ecosystem Management Study that included 
a Green Infrastructure Opportunities Map that covers the entire city area. The 
map identifies both “hubs” — intact ecosystems — and “corridors” — physical or 
functional linkages between the hubs — and recognizes that both developed and 
undeveloped parts of the city can contribute to ecological sustainability.  
www.surrey.ca/plans-strategies/1332.aspx

Local governments can increase the resilience and adaptive capacity of ecosystems 
by improving the “connectivity” of natural landscapes within their jurisdictions, and 
allowing species the opportunity to shift to more suitable habitats as the climate 
changes. Biodiversity corridors can be established along rivers, roads, and trails. 
www.countdown2010.net/2010/wp-content/uploads/FS6Climate_small.PDF

Protecting natural ecosystems can help manage risks from natural disasters. A 
healthy forest ecosystem has a high capacity to absorb torrential rain, by reducing 
erosion, slowing run-off and reducing the risk of flash floods and mudslides. 
Natural vegetation and wetlands in coastal areas can reduce the impact of 
storm surges, and vegetation along waterways can help decrease the impact of 
flooding. Healthy forest ecosystems can also protect slopes from erosion and 
lessen the risk of landslides. www.countdown2010.net/2010/wp-content/uploads/
FS6Climate_small.PDF

•	

Climate change will mean increasing problems with invasive species in BC. The Invasive 
Species Council of BC has assembled research about invasive species in BC, and resources 
for community groups. www.bcinvasives.ca/

Mapping sensitive 
ecosystems within 
local government 
jurisdictions provides 
information that can 
be used to guide 
land use policies.

KELOWNA SENSITIVE 
ECOSySTEM MAPPING

73

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia community And economic 
develoPment seRvices

Local governments’ purposes include fostering the economic, social and environmental 
well-being of the community (Local Government Act, s. 2; Community Charter, s.7). To that 
end, communities invest in important infrastructure projects such as the construction of 
airports and public transportation, dedication of parks, building community centres and 
other public facilities, launching programs to support a range of activities in the com-
munity ranging from business to social initiatives to the arts. Some local governments 
develop local or regional economic development plans or strategies.

Changing weather patterns as a result of climate change may open up new economic 
opportunities, or affect the viability of existing economic activities.

•	

•	

BC has already experienced the devastating impacts of the mountain pine 
beetle and the economic and social impacts on forest-dependent communities.

Regions where the winter sports industry and related tourism are an important 
economic driver will particularly want to consider the possible impacts of 
warmer winters. See On Thin Ice: Winter Sports and Climate Change www.
davidsuzuki.org/publications/downloads/2009/DSF-OnThinIce-Web.pdf

•	 Drier summers and water shortages may affect recreational facilities. Penticton 
pioneered the use of water sources other than drinking water for the irrigation 
of parks and recreation areas. www.penticton.ca/EN/main/community/parks-
trails-beaches/xeriscape-garden.html

•	 Warmer, longer growing seasons, or changes in precipitation patterns could 

open up opportunities to grow new kinds of crops in the region, or significantly 
enhance or reduce the ability to irrigate or produce existing crops.  
www.bcagclimateaction.ca/why/adaptation/impacts-on-agriculture/

•	

Some northern locations in BC may become more attractive to human migrants 
than previously as a result of warmer temperatures. See David Dyer, Adapting 
to Climate Change in Prince George. www.obwb.ca/fileadmin/docs/rain_to_
resource/2010_10_29_policy_6_david_dyer_climate_change_adaptation_in_
prince_george.pdf

Measures  to  enhance  food  security  might  include  protecting  agricultural  land  and 
agricultural  uses,  supporting  markets  for  local  produce,  making  land  available  for 
community  gardens,  and  educating  citizens  about  the  benefits  of  supporting  local 
agriculture given future uncertainties around imported food products.38

Climate change impacts may disproportionately affect more vulnerable sectors of the 
population, and local governments will want to develop community services, programs 
and policies accordingly. For example, compromised water quality is a particular concern 
for the young, elderly and those with health conditions, and may result from increased 
run-off, landslides, and warmer water temperatures.39 Elderly, isolated people, particularly 

38  Climate Change and Food Security in British Columbia http://pics.uvic.ca/sites/default/files/

uploads/publications/WP_Food_Security_November2011.pdf

39  Water Quality and Quantity and Human Health: Risk in a Changing Climate in British Columbia  

www.sfu.ca/ccirc/node/5

Regions where the 
winter sports industry 
and related tourism are 
an important economic 
driver will particularly 
want to consider the 
possible impacts of 
warmer winters. 

BIG WHITE PHOTO COURTESy 
HAMEDOG/FLICKR

74

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia in low-income neighbourhoods, are also particularly vulnerable to heat waves. In the case of 
flooding, lower-income households are less able to floodproof their property, purchase insur-
ance, or re-locate.40 Community members with health challenges will be affected differently by 
climate change, and their needs will require special attention.41

Transportation networks and hubs may be in vulnerable locations, meaning that they are sub-
ject to ongoing disruptions from climate change impacts that can have negative consequences 
for  any  economic  or  community  activities  that  rely  on  them.  An  adaptation  measure  might 
involve first identifying these vulnerable locations and then working, together with partners 
(e.g. Ministry of Transportation), as appropriate, to develop responses.

FOOd sECuRIT y

•	 Much of the most productive agricultural land in BC is located in areas that are also 

densely populated, creating pressures on agricultural uses. Through planning and land 
use regulation, local governments can help to protect agricultural 
lands and uses. See Deborah Curran, Protecting the Working Landscape 
of Agriculture www.wcel.org/issues/urban/sbg

•	 Community engagement around local food production is increasing 
in BC. See, for example, the Capital Regional District http://crd.bc.ca/
media/2012-03-06-growing-solutions-for-climate-change.htm; the 
Kaslo Food Security Project http://nklcss.org/food.php; the  City of 
North Vancouver www.cnv.org/CityShaping/papers/Discussion%20
Brief%20-%20Food%20Security.pdf

40  See Climate Change, Justice and Vulnerability www.jrf.org.uk/publications/

climate-change-justice-and-vulnerability

41  See Climate Change Adaptation and Healthy Equity www.cleanairpartnership.org/files/Climate%20

Change%20and%20Health%20Equity%20Summary%20Report%20May%2024%202011.pdf

Compromised water 
quality is a particular 
concern for the 
young, elderly and 
those with health 
conditions, and may 
result from climate 
change impacts such 
as increased run-off, 
landslides and warmer 
water temperatures.

STEWART, BC PHOTO 
COURTESy PROVINCE OF BC

75

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia legAl liABility

This section does not constitute legal advice, nor should it be taken as a description of legal 
liability issues that face any particular local government in BC or elsewhere, or as guidance 
on how to avoid legal liability. It is intended to illustrate some of the areas where there may 
be new or heightened potential for legal liability as a result of climate change and to encour-
age local governments to take steps to evaluate and address their own circumstances. Local 
governments should consult with their own lawyers to obtain legal advice appropriate to their 
circumstances.

How local governments respond to the impacts of climate change is also important from 
the point of view of legal liability. Liability for local governments in the context of climate 
change impacts is most likely to arise in the form of claims against the local government 
for negligence or nuisance.

A local government can be found to be negligent if it can be shown that, in exercising its 
powers, it failed to exercise reasonable care towards people to whom it owes a duty of 
care.42 A key consideration is whether the harm in question was reasonably foreseeable.43 
While there is still some degree of uncertainty associated with future climate change, the 
scientific evidence and related information that is now available make a range of climate 
change impacts increasingly foreseeable for local governments. Accordingly it is becom-
ing less likely that a local government would be able to successfully defend a negligence 
claim if it failed to take those impacts into account when exercising its statutory authority.44

Local governments can also be exposed to nuisance claims, which are based on an inter-
ference with the use or enjoyment of private property.45 A typical example is where a local 
government sewerage or drainage system fails and causes property damage. With climate 
change posing increasing challenges for local government infrastructure, there may be 
more nuisance claims of this type arising.

42  While the courts have made a distinction between policy and operational decisions, holding that 

only operational decisions attract liability, this is a relatively complex area of law and the subject of 
significant litigation. In general, once a local government has decided to offer a program or service, 
it should ensure that the program or service is offered with reasonable care to those likely to be 
impacted by the program or service. 

43  See Mustapha v. Culligan of Canada Ltd., [2008] 2 S.C.R. 114.
44  In Australia, planning tribunals have already recognized that climate change will affect coastal 

developments. In Gippsland Coastal Board v South Gippsland SC & Ors (No 2) [2008] VCAT 1545 (29 
July 2008), an appeal tribunal overturned plans to build six seaside homes partly due to climate 
change considerations. The case summary states: “The case is of particular interest because of 
potential sea level rises due to the effects of climate change. We conclude that sea level rise and 
risk of coastal inundation are relevant matters to consider in appropriate circumstances. We accept 
the general consensus that some level of climate change will result in extreme weather conditions 
beyond the historical record that planners and others rely on in assessing future potential 
impact. The relevance of climate change to the planning decision making process is still in an 
evolutionary phase. Each case concerning the possible impacts of climate change will turn on its 
own facts and circumstances. However, in the present case, applying the precautionary principle, 
we consider that increases in the severity of storm events coupled with rising sea levels create a 
reasonably foreseeable risk of inundation of the subject land and the proposed dwellings, which is 
unacceptable.” Decision is online at www.austlii.edu.au/au/cases/vic/VCAT/2008/1545.html 

45  Lawsuits based on “public nuisance” — the interference with a public right in respect of public 
spaces or resources — are also possible, but less likely due to restrictions on the ability of the 
general public to bring such claims.

A local government 
can be found to be 
negligent if it can be 
shown that, in exercising 
its powers, it failed to 
exercise reasonable care 
towards people to whom 
it owes a duty of care.

VANCOUVER LAW COURTS, 
PHOTO COURTESy ALEX 
MAHAN/FLICKR

76

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia While  in  some  cases  local  governments  can  claim  statutory  immunity  from  nuisance 
claims, the courts have indicated that they will interpret the statutory immunity narrow-
ly.46  Damages  related  to  flooding,  in  particular,  can  be  extremely  costly.  The  City  of 
Stratford, Ontario (with a population of around 30,000) paid $7.7 million to settle a class 
action lawsuit arising from flooding in its jurisdiction in 2002, in addition to $1.3 mil-
lion already paid out as emergency compensation. It will spend around $50 million over 
several years to improve its flood protection measures to meet a 250 year storm event 
standard.47

Local  governments  will  want  to  carefully  review  services,  operations  and  permitting 
processes in light of climate change. Both increased community hazards and heightened 
demands on services and infrastructure should be considered.

Some examples of areas that local governments might wish to review in the context of 
potential legal liability and a changing climate include:

•	

Vulnerability of existing infrastructure — local governments might wish to 
investigate whether rising temperatures or other climate change impacts will 
result in significant infrastructure failures that would not have been predicted 
based on historical data;

•	 New infrastructure — new sewer systems, water or drainage facilities, dikes 

and roads that are insufficiently designed to take into account the impacts of 
climate change could lead to liability for damages in the case of failure;48

•	

•	

Permitting and inspections — failing to take into account the risks associated 
with climate change could potentially lead to liability for any losses resulting 
from permitted construction and other activities; and

Approval of development in areas subject to increased risk of natural hazards 
like flooding, landslides and wildfires linked to climate change impacts — this 
could potentially expose local governments to liability.49

In addition to the possibility that a local government will be liable for failing to adapt 
effectively to climate change, in some cases local governments may have the basis for a 
claim themselves if they suffer losses related to climate change impacts that could have 
been prevented by appropriate adaptation by others.

46  While the Local Government Act, section 288 provides immunity to an action where damages arise 

as a result of a “breakdown or malfunction” of a sewage system, drainage facility, dike or road, 
the courts have held that there is not immunity where damages arise from an insufficient design 
that is simply inadequate for the purpose it was meant to fulfill. See Medomist Farms Ltd. v. Surrey 
(Dist.) (1991), 62 B.C.L.R. (2d) 168 (C.A.)

47  See www.city.stratford.on.ca/documents/press_releases/Stratford_Flood_Settlement_Press_

Release.pdf 

48  See note 46, supra.
49  Philippa England (2006) Climate Change: What are Local Governments Liable for? Urban Research 
Program, Griffith University, Brisbane. www.griffith.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/48566/
urp-ip06-england-2007.pdf 

NATuRAL HAzARds 
MANAGEMENT IN THE 
dIsTRICT OF NORTH 
vANCOuvER

After a landslide in 2005 
in a residential area 
resulted in the death of 
one resident, the District 
of North Vancouver 
developed a Natural Hazards 
Management Program, 
and uses the CAN/CSA 
Q850-97 risk management 
framework. Since 2009 the 
District has had a policy for 
risk tolerance criteria that 
can be applied to building 
permits, subdivision and 
development applications 
for sites exposed to 
landslide and debris flow 
hazards. The District also 
has a GeoWeb Hazards 
application that shows areas 
prone to natural hazards, 
as well as areas where 
hazard and risk assessments 
have been completed. 
The District is developing 
new DPAs for different 
types of natural hazards.

77

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia insuRAnce

Local governments rely on insurance to help cover what may be infrequent or unforesee-
able losses. Natural hazards, like floods and fire, are often the immediate cause of these 
losses. These types of events can cause severe and widespread damage to local infra-
structure and property, particularly when infrastructure fails as a result, not to mention 
the public safety issues. An unusually violent and heavy rain storm in Toronto in August 
2005 was estimated to have cost $547 million.50 Fire services attended to more than 1,000 
calls, and rainfall in North york was measured at 103 mm in one hour, much greater than 
a one in one hundred year storm.51

Because local governments are responsible for local infrastructure, and it would be dif-
ficult or impossible to maintain sufficient financial reserves to account for their losses 
related to these types of catastrophic events, they have traditionally relied on insurance 
to at least partly recover costs.

The insurance industry has been speaking out with respect to the need to take action to 
address climate change. According to the Insurance Bureau of Canada, in recent years the 
frequency and severity of sewer backup damage and claims has risen sharply across the 
country. Water damage is now the leading cause of property damage in Canada, totalling 
around $1.7 billion/year.52

Faced with higher levels of risk, insurers have two options: restrict coverage, or increase 
premiums.  To  maintain  insurance  coverage  at  an  affordable  rate,  local  governments 
would be prudent to review their insured assets in light of climate change and determine 

50  Climate liability: municipal responsibilities in a changing climate www.fcm.ca/home/resources/

multimedia/climate-liability-municipal-responsibilities-in-a-changing-climate.htm 

51  Environment Canada, Ontario’s Most Expensive Weather Disaster, www.ec.gc.ca/meteo-weather/

default.asp?lang=En&n=B0F843F5-1

52  www.ibc.ca/en/Media_Centre/Hot_Topics.asp. See also Institute for Catastrophic Loss Reduction 
for Insurance Bureau of Canada (2012) Telling the Weather Story www.ibc.ca/en/Natural-Disasters/
documents/McBean-Report.pdf

The insurance 
industry has been 
speaking out 
with respect to 
the need to take 
action to address 
climate change.

78

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia how vulnerabilities could be addressed. The Insurance Bureau of Canada is currently 
developing an infrastructure risk assessment calculator aimed at helping local govern-
ments identify areas of greatest weakness and target improvements accordingly.53

If local governments fail to take action to reduce climate change-related risks, there 
could  be  indirect  consequences  if  insurance  coverage  cannot  be  maintained.  It  has 
been noted that areas subject to “non-renewal” of policies by insurers could experience 
a decrease in assessed value, regardless of whether they experience any actual physical 
damage.54

INsuRERs REACT TO CLIMATE CHANGE

Insurance premiums are being affected by climate change. “In the past 
23 years [in Toronto], there has been seven events that are only supposed 
to happen every 50 years and two events that are supposed to happen 
every 100 years. It’s essentially rain intensity,” says Michael Tremblay of the 
Insurance Bureau of Canada, pointing to one flash flood in Toronto in 2005 
that caused $500 million in damage. “The why we don’t know. The climate 
has changed. What fed it? I don’t know. What we do here is risk management 
and the risk is higher.” http://business.financialpost.com/2011/11/17/
climate-change-blamed-for-spike-in-home-insurance-premiums/

Faced with higher levels 
of risk, insurers have two 
options: restrict coverage, 
or increase premiums. 

PHOTO COURTESy IAN BC NORTH/FLICKR

finAl thoughts

Local  governments  already  plan  for  medium-  and  long  term  change,  i.e.  population 
growth, shifting demographics, new economic drivers and changing social needs. More 
recently local governments in BC have been mandated to plan to reduce their green-
house  gas  emissions,  by  setting  greenhouse  gas  reduction  targets.  However,  while 
efforts to slow climate change are critical, it is also necessary to plan for the climate 
change that we already face. 

The basis for good planning about adapting to climate change is good information, 
obtained  through  Plan2Adapt  and  other  sources,  and  updated  regularly.  Each  com-
munity needs to assess and monitor its vulnerabilities in light of the climate information 
it obtains. Climate change means that the past is no longer a good predictor of the fu-
ture. Some impacts, such as sea level rise or increased wildfire risk, may require specific 
responses. Adaptation strategies that enhance overall resilience are also being explored 
in a number of communities, as outlined in this guide. Low impact development and 
green infrastructure, emphasizing efficiencies in operations and the use of resources, 
and finding ways to cooperate and collaborate with neighbouring communities are all 
strategies that may increase community resilience in a changing climate.  

53  20 Canadian municipalities will be involved in collecting data to support the development of 

the tool. www.ibc.ca/en/Natural_Disasters/Municipal_Risk_Assessment_Tool.asp 

54  Nicholas Heap (2007) Hot Properties, How Global Warming Could Transform B.C.’s Real 

Estate Sector. David Suzuki Foundation. Vancouver. www.davidsuzuki.org/publications/
downloads/2007/DSF_HotProperties_final1.pdf 

79

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia APPendix A

further resources

Fraser Basin Council. Retooling for Climate Change [website], www.retooling.ca/

Jenny Fraser and Matthew Strand. Climate Change Adaptation for Local Government: A Resource 
Guide [annotated list of resources for local governments], http://pics.uvic.ca/sites/default/
files/uploads/publications/Adaptation_Resources_June2011.pdf

Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC). Plan2Adapt tool, http://pacificclimate.org/

tools-and-data/plan2adapt

Robert A. Black, James P. Bruce and Mark Egener. Adapting to Climate Change, A Risk-based Guide for 
Local Governments, www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca.earth-sciences/files/pdf/projdb/
pdf/ris_e.pdf

Cindy Pearce and C. Callihoo. Pathways to Climate Change Resilience: A Guidebook for Forest-based 

Communities, www.modelforest.net/pubs/Pathways_to_Climate_Change_Resilience_FINAL_
Feb_2011.pdf

Livia Bizikova, Tina Neale and Ian Burton. Canadian Communities Guidebook for Adaptation to Cli-

mate Change, www.nrcan.gc.ca/earth-sciences/climate-change/community-adaptation/295

Ajit Krishnaswamy, Ellen Simmons and Larry Joseph. Increasing the resilience of British Columbia’s 
rural communities to natural disturbances and climate change. BC Journal of Ecosystems and 
Management 13:1, 2012, p. 1–15, www.jem.forrex.org/index.php/jem/article/view/168/115

Institute for Sustainable Communities. Promising Practices in Adaptation and Resilience, www.iscvt.

org/who_we_are/publications/Adaptation_Resource_Guide.pdf

Engineers Canada. Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability Committee Protocol, www.pievc.

ca/e/index_.cfm

ICLEI Canada. Changing Climate, Changing Communities: Guide and Workbook for Municipal Climate 

Adaptation, www.iclei.org/index.php?id=11710

City of Vancouver, Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. http://former.vancouver.ca/ctyclerk/

cclerk/20120724/documents/rr1.pdf

Columbia Basin Trust. Climate Change. Impacts and Adaptation in the Canadian Columbia Basin, 

From Dialogue to Action. www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/DialoguetoAction_Final_lo-res.pdf

80

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia APPendix B

three land use scenarios: 
Planning for climate change 
in BC communities

Climate  change  is  a  global  problem,  but  the  impacts  of  climate  change  will  vary  regionally,  de-
pending on local weather patterns, natural features, settlement patterns, economic activities and 
other factors. Local governments can help prepare their communities for climate change impacts 
over both the short and long term by making sure that decisions about land use in their jurisdictions 
take these impacts into account. This can be accomplished most effectively by integrating climate 
change adaptation into existing regulatory tools and policies.

What is new about climate change adaptation is the need to look at longer term horizons, and to add 
climate experts and additional public consultation to existing planning processes. There are innova-
tive new tools available to local governments in BC, such as climate projections from Plan2Adapt, and 
new guides and studies that can assist with the place-based analysis that is required to understand 
impacts and prioritize actions. To be effective, adaptation strategies need to be integrated across 
local government areas of responsibility and service, and mainstreamed into practice. It is important 
for local governments to recognize that the uncertainty associated with climate change, as well as 
the need to fully consider the consequences of climate change impacts in their communities will 
necessarily make local government analysis and decision-making more involved than in the past.

Three land use scenarios that look at land use planning in the context of climate change are provided 
below:

1.  Mainstreaming climate change adaptation into land use planning — Example: District of 

Elkford

2. 

Incorporating climate science about natural hazards into land use planning — Example: 
City of Prince George

3.  Using innovative tools to engage the community in understanding and responding to 

climate change — Example: District of Kimberley

81

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia lAnd use scenARio 1: mAinstReAming climAte chAnge 
AdAPtAtion into lAnd use PlAnning

One way for a community to be more prepared for a changing climate is to “mainstream” climate 
change adaptation into key community planning documents such as the Official Community Plan 
(OCP). The OCP is a forward-looking document prepared by local governments that sets out over-
arching policies and objectives that apply to land use and development within their jurisdictions. 
Once the OCP has been adopted in a bylaw, all other bylaws must be consistent with the OCP, such 
as land use and zoning bylaws, for example. The OCP also creates development permit areas (DPAs) 
where specified guidelines for development must be followed. Local governments have the power 
to create DPAs to protect the natural environment, to protect the community from hazardous condi-
tions on land, and to establish objectives to promote conservation of water and energy.

Some  local  governments  that  have  developed  or  revised  their  OCPs  in  recent  times  have  begun 
to expand the timeline covered by the OCP beyond the five- or 10-year planning horizon that has 
previously been more typical. It is possible to consider timelines of 50–100 years. This recognizes 
that decisions about land use, for example, have long term impacts in a community and can benefit 
from a long term vision. This approach is very compatible with preparing for the impacts of climate 
change, which may also be gradual, but significant over the longer term. For example, it is important 
that planning protect the community in areas that may be subject to increased risks of flooding or 
sea level rise over the longer term as a result of climate change.

Using an OCP to help mainstream climate change adaptation into land use planning by a local gov-
ernment is more likely to be successful when climate change adaptation is fully integrated into the 
OCP, and the process and the product linked to different policy areas and objectives. It may be useful 
to discuss climate change adaptation in the opening section of the OCP, to indicate that it is a priority 
across all relevant policies and objectives contained in the OCP. A stand-alone section with climate 
change adaptation goals and policies can provide additional direction.

Source: District of Elkford

WILDFIRES

Elkford Impacts and Opportunities

82

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Another  critical  part  of  the  mainstreaming  process  is  educating  local  government  councils  or 
boards, staff and the community about the projected climate change impacts in their community, 
and having them motivated to develop responses and able to implement them. The consultation 
undertaken as part of the process to revise or develop a new OCP needs to be broadened to include 
education around climate change projections, impacts and strategies, and to include access to cli-
mate scientists and local experts.

Example: District of Elkford Official Community Plan 20101

In 2008, the District of Elkford, a small mountain town in the Eastern Kootenays, was undertaking a 
revision of its OCP. The District decided to integrate climate change adaptation planning into its OCP 
as a result of its participation in an initiative of the Columbia Basin Trust, Communities Adapting to 
Climate Change (CCAC), that aimed to identify projected local climate change impacts and vulner-
abilities, and develop adaptation plans.

With the assistance of funding through the CCAC, Elkford obtained historical and projected climate 
information from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium, and used this information to gather fur-
ther scientific information about how Elkford and region could be affected by climate changes. The 
next step was to develop “impact pathways” showing the chain of impacts that could result from 
climate change and how Elkford could be affected. These impact pathways helped to illustrate how 
many different departments and service areas within Elkford would be affected, and that they all 
needed to be involved in evaluating impacts and developing responses. Results were presented to 
the community, and three priority areas were identified: wildfire, flooding/stormwater management, 
and water supply. This was followed by a vulnerability and risk assessment, and then action planning 
to develop an adaptation strategy.

The consultation undertaken by Elkford was significantly more extensive than what would have been 
considered typical for the development of an OCP. It was felt that this was important for building 
understanding and acceptance in the community and on council for integration of climate change 
adaptation into the OCP. Some of the outreach activities included displays at the mall that included 
a quick survey, a paper and web-based survey, facilitated kitchen table meetings, and an open house 
that was attended by members of the community as well as a number of current and local council 
candidates running for election.

The Elkford OCP explicitly references the integration of the climate change adaptation strategy for 
the community into that document, and notes that the OCP “…guides development for at least the 
next 10-20 years and effectively addresses sound science regarding future changes in local weather 
patterns and climatic variables in the District.”2

The Elkford OCP defines climate change adaptation and integrates adaptation goals and objectives 
throughout the plan, across nearly all areas of policy and decision-making. Some examples include:

1  See Official Community Plan, District of Elkford, 2010 www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan; Karen Gorecki, 
Megan Walsh, Jeff Zukiwsky, District of Elkford: Climate Change Adaptation Strategy www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/
Elkford_CACCI_Phase_1_Adaptation_Report.pdf

2  Official Community Plan, District of Elkford, 2010, s.1.2 www.elkford.ca/official_community_plan 

83

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia •	

•	

The OCP indicates that council may refer to climate change projections prepared by the 
Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium and others in decision-making, and that bids, tenders 
and contracts for planning and development in the District shall make reference to climate 
change and the Elkford Climate Change Adaptation Strategy;

Establishing a District Growth Boundary that will have multiple community benefits, 
including avoiding additional wildfire risks by limiting further development in wilderness 
areas;

•	 Updating the flood plain designation to reflect current science;

•	 Developing a Parks and Trails Master Plan to implement climate change adaptation 

strategies;

•	

•	

•	

Placing new roads and sidewalks in locations where they can act as fire breaks and access 
routes;

Requiring that stormwater be retained on site in new subdivisions; and

Restricting development in areas subject to natural hazards, including flooding, steep 
slopes and wildfire, through DPAs and other measures.

The Elkford OCP also lists bylaws and other District plans and processes that need to be updated 
and harmonized with the OCP, as well as proposing a number of new actions and studies that would 
assist in implementing the OCP and achieving climate change adaptation goals.

Specific monitoring and evaluation of climate change adaptation in the District is also identified as 
necessary.

84

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia lAnd use scenARio 2: incoRPoRAting climAte science 
ABout nAtuRAl hAZARds into lAnd use PlAnning

Local  governments  have  important  responsibilities  to  their  communities  with  respect  to  public 
safety, and the protection of people and property in the face of natural hazards.

Some of the projected climate change impacts for BC, which vary by region, that may be relevant for 
local governments to consider in relation to natural hazards include:3

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

Increased risk of wildfires;

Increased risk of flooding;

Increased risk of landslides on steep slopes;

Sea level rise;

Increased incidence of invasive species; and

Increased incidence of extreme storm events.

To prepare for natural hazards in the context of climate change, local governments need to obtain 
the climate information relevant for their region, quantify risk and assess their vulnerabilities, and 
then determine appropriate responses. Local governments can obtain information about projected 
climate impacts for their regions from Plan2Adapt, by contracting specifically with the Pacific Cli-
mate Impacts Consortium, by working with BC universities, through reviewing scientific literature, 
by enhancing staff capacity through training and collaboration, by hiring technical consultants, and 
other sources.

Applying the information about local risks and vulnerabilities to land use planning is in some ways 
very similar to conventional planning for natural hazards by local governments: land use needs to be 
determined so that the risks faced by different geographic areas within the community are accept-
able in terms of the type of development and permitted uses in that area. Where risks are inevitable, 
planning needs to ensure that emergency responses can be carried out as effectively as possible and 
that key infrastructure functioning is maintained.

What is different about preparing for climate change is that assessments of risk and vulnerability 
based on historical events will not be good predictors of the risks faced in future, unless they factor 
in climate change projections. As well, risks and vulnerabilities should be periodically reassessed to 
incorporate evolving and updated information about climate change impacts.

3  The risks related to natural hazards associated with climate change will be different for every region, and 

each local government should assess its own risks and vulnerabilities, incorporating climate information from 
sources such as Plan2Adapt http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt

85

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Example: City of Prince George

Prince George is a northern BC community that faces significant impacts associated with a changing 
climate.  It  is  located  at  the  confluence  of  the  Nechako  and  Fraser,  with  significant  development 
within the floodplain. It is also surrounded by forests that have been severely affected by mountain 
pine beetle. The Nechako River has historically been subject to ice jams that can cause flooding in 
Prince George. In the winter of 2007/2008 there was a 35 km long ice jam that caused extensive 
flooding.4 Prince George is also in a region affected by the mountain pine beetle epidemic, and both 
surrounding forested lands and trees within municipal boundaries have been damaged.

Faced with questions and potential challenges related to climate change, Prince George has been 
working with the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium and researchers from the University of North-
ern BC5 to assess the climate change impacts faced by the City, and to develop adaptation priorities.

Over the next 50 years, annual temperatures in Prince George are projected to increase by 1.6°C to 
2.5°C, and precipitation is projected to increase by 3% to 10%. The changes are expected to be more 
dramatic in winter, and more precipitation is expected to fall as rain. The result is likely to be more 
flooding and more extreme events such as wildfires, windstorms and extreme precipitation events.6 
Based on these projections Prince George has been taking action to explore and address flooding 
and wildfire risks.

In 2009 Prince George hired technical consultants to prepare a flood risk evaluation that included cli-
mate change projections. While a number of flood control options were identified for Prince George, 
including enlarging existing side channels, building dikes and flood-proofing buildings, changing 
land use in flood prone areas was found to be a potentially cost-effective solution in certain cir-
cumstances. Public consultation about flood control options demonstrated that there was public 
support for proactive measures, largely because of the extensive damage that Prince George had 
experienced in past flood events. In 2011 Prince George adopted a new Flood Plain Regulation Bylaw 

Downstream view of the Nechako River during winter 2007/08 showing the ice-related flooding of the industrial 
area (dashed line) on the floodplain; damage to infrastructure and property. Source: CEBC 2011 Award for 
Engineering Excellence: Managing Price George’s Rising Flood Waters, NHC Consultants and City of Prince George.

4  Environment Canada. Canada’s Top Weather Stories for 2008, Regional Weather Highlights 2008, British Columbia. 

www.ec.gc.ca/meteo-weather/default.asp?lang=En&n=ACC549AF-1 

5  With funding from Natural Resources Canada and assistance from the Fraser Basin Council.
6  See City of Prince George. Prince George Community Climate Change Adaptation http://princegeorge.ca/

environment/climatechange/adaptation/pages/default.aspx, and also http://princegeorge.ca/environment/
climatechange/adaptation/Documents/2012_PGRAC_CaseStudy_Volume3_Forests.pdf 

86

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia that updated flood plain mapping and which regulates all new development in the designated flood 
plain. In a report to council regarding the amendments City staff noted that the mapping would 
likely need to be periodically reviewed and updated.7

As a result of the mountain pine beetle epidemic, Prince George has been working to adapt to the 
impacts of climate change in its forest management and operations for more than a decade. Since 
2006 it has had a Community Forest Agreement with the provincial government, which has allowed 
it to manage areas of forested Crown land within City limits. The City has engaged in fuel treatment 
activities including salvage harvesting and thinning operations to reduce wildfire hazards, and has 
funded these activities through grants from NRCAN and UBCM. Prince George has also developed 
a Community Wildfire Protection Plan that includes measures such as guidelines for new develop-
ments, identifying fire hazard areas and public education.8

While it has been an early leader in climate change adaptation at the local government level, Prince 
George is continuing to develop and implement strategies to address the changing climate.

7 

8 

Ibid. A short video about Prince George’s climate adaptation actions with respect to flooding is found here: 
www.youtube.com/watch?v=ObMuDOVHHQo&list=PLC9CCE982F121480C&index=1&feature=plpp_video 
Implementing Climate Change Adaptation in Prince George, BC, Volume 3: Forests http://princegeorge.ca/
environment/climatechange/adaptation/Documents/2012_PGRAC_CaseStudy_Volume3_Forests.pdf 

87

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia lAnd use scenARio 3: using innovAtive tools to 
engAge the community in undeRstAnding And 
ResPonding to climAte chAnge

Robust community engagement in developing and implementing climate change adaptation strat-
egies is important, because some of the responses will require significant investment of tax dollars 
and local government resources. Citizens and elected officials will need to have a basic understand-
ing  of  the  climate  change  projections  and  impacts  in  their  communities  so  that  they  can  make 
informed decisions. There may also be cases where priorities with respect to land uses are at issue. 
In areas subject to increased risks with respect to natural hazards as a result of climate change, for 
example, a community might need to weigh the costs and benefits of protection versus relocation. 
However, the implications of climate change at the local level can be complex, and challenging for 
communities to understand.

The  Collaborative  for  Advanced  Landscape  Planning  at  the  University  of  British  Columbia9  has 
developed an innovative visioning tool that has proven effective in helping communities to under-
stand  the  impacts  of  climate  change  in  their  region,  to  appreciate  the  urgency  in  certain  cases, 
and to prioritize actions. The tool brings together climate data with visual representations of local 
geography and neighbourhoods, and allows community members to see vivid representations of 
potential climate impacts. Some of the impacts modeled to date include snow pack reductions on 
the North Shore mountains (District of North Vancouver); sea level rise and flood adaptation (City of 
Delta) and wildfire events (City of Kimberley). The tool has been used in interactive public settings in 
a number of BC communities, and has received very positive feedback from community members.

There is a guidance manual for the tool for BC local governments that is available free of charge. The 
tool can be used with existing planning resources including Google Earth, GIS and CommunityViz 
capabilities.10 Three additional training modules for the use of the tool are being developed.

Example: City of Kimberley

The City of Kimberley in southeastern BC is a small community that relies on tourism and outdoor 
recreation. It faces potential climate change impacts that include flooding, wildfire, water supply 
issues, and others.

As part of the Kimberley Climate Adaptation Project supported by the Columbia Basin Trust, Kim-
berley  worked  with  CALP  to  pilot  a  climate  change  visioning  process,  that “use[d]  tools  such  as 
GIS mapping and 3D visualizations to localize, spatialize and visualize climate change impacts and 
solutions.”11 In particular, the visualizations gave community members the opportunity to ask “what 
if” questions and see the outcomes modeled before them.

9  With support from the Ministry of Community, Sport and Cultural Development.
10  www.calp.forestry.ubc.ca/news/viz-guidance-manual/ 
11  CALP Visioning and Visualizations: Kimberley Climate Adaptation Project, Final Project Report to the Real Estate 

Foundation Communities in Transition Program http://cfubc.ehosting.ca/wp-content/uploads/2010/02/REF-
CALP-Kimberley-Report2.pdf 

88

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia The mapping and visualizations that were produced included vulnerabilities to wildfire and flood-
ing. Options for reducing vulnerabilities or adapting to changes were also provided. A summary of 
the visualizations was presented to an open house in Kimberley.

The strongest audience response came from the virtual fire tour which situated the projected 
forest fire season extension under climate change within a localized “fire story”. First, a 3D 
historical fire map showed the last 100 years of fires around Kimberley. Further mapping 
displayed in the virtual globe illustrated that the forest ecosystems around Kimberley are 
both fire-dependent, and heavily fuel-loaded due to fire suppression. Then, fire modeling 
results for a simulated current forest fire that starts southwest of the City were shown: each 
hour of the fire was layered on the virtual landscape in a time sequence, showing the fire 
cutting off the Highway access in three hours and reaching the City of Kimberley in four 
hours. The audience visibly responded by sitting up and there was an audible intake of 
breath in the room. The virtual tour then illustrated how the fire season could extend under 
climate change: currently starting in May, it could be starting as early as mid-March by the 
2040s, and mid-February by the 2080s. Again, the time slider in Google Earth was used to 
show the possible future shift, and again the audience visibly and audibly reacted as they 
absorbed the information.12

Surveys conducted among attendees following the Open House indicated that the visualizations 
had been useful in helping people to understand the link between climate change and land use 
decisions. Reduction of wildfire risk and a fuel treatment program were among the recommended 
actions in the report prepared for the City.13

Historic fire map: Google Earth image of previous forest fires around Kimberley  
(data source: Bob Gray). Source: Collaborative for Advanced Landscape Planning, UBC.

Ibid.

12 
13  Adapting to Climate Change in Kimberley, BC, Report and Recommendations June 2009 (Prepared by Ingrid Liepa)

www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/Kimberley_CACCI_Phase_1_Adaptation_Report.pdf 

89

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia APPendix c

Developing Climate Change 
adaptation Strategies:  
Checklist for local governments

The purpose of this checklist is to assist local governments in exploring the entry points for integrat-
ing climate change adaptation into policy and operations, as well as the scope of responsibilities 
that may be affected. It is meant to trigger further investigation and discussion about adaptation 
options and strategies. Occasional references to further resources are included. Because adaptation 
is an ongoing process, many of these questions will ideally be revisited over time. This checklist is 
meant to be a practical supplement to the information provided in Part 1 of this guide, and to help 
local governments move to the stage where they are ready to implement climate change adaptation 
strategies as discussed in Part 2.

As described in Part 2, the Official Community Plan (OCP) will be one of the main tools used to imple-
ment adaptation strategies, together with a number of local government bylaw powers and other 
activities that can be used to make communities more resilient to a changing climate. However, prior 
to updating an OCP it is important to start assessing potential climate change impacts, as well as 
options for addressing impacts based on community vulnerability, resources, capacity, local context 
and other factors. Even where local governments have limited resources available for climate change 
adaptation, there are ways to begin preparing, as described in Appendix D — Considerations for Local 
Governments with Limited Resources.

While efforts have been made to include as many useful questions as possible, the checklist is not 
exhaustive. Extra space has been provided so that users can add their own questions.

There will be overlap among the topic areas set out below. A good way to start a review of the check-
list is to establish an inter-departmental committee, have a meeting, and go through the questions 
together in order to explore different viewpoints and start to understand the linkages. It is also use-
ful to review the questions for each of the different types of impacts and to ask “what if…” questions.

90

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia MAKING THE MOsT OF THE CHECKLIsT:  
uNdERsTANdING  CLIMATE CHANGE ANd AdAPTATION

Making the most effective use of this checklist will require a basic understanding of cli-
mate change and adaptation, local impacts, and how to assess risks and vulnerabilities. 
In particular, the following background would be considered helpful:

a.  Climate change adaptation — an understanding of the difference between climate 
change mitigation and adaptation is necessary. See, for example, the diagram and 
discussion on pages 10-12 of this guide.

b.  Climate change projections (how will the global climate change?) — basic knowledge 

might be acquired, for example, through a review of resources such as:

•	

•	

The	Columbia	Basin	Trust	Climate	Basics	(video)	www.youtube.com/
watch?v=ECJtF7CfycA

PICS	Climate	101	series	(videos)	http://pics.uvic.ca/education/
climate-insights-101

c.  Climate change projections at the regional level (how will the climate change in BC 
communities?) — climate  change  information  for  BC  regions  is  available  from  the 
Plan2Adapt tool http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt including:
•	
•	
•	 management	considerations	for	each	impact.

climate	projections;
related	impacts;	and

d.  Risks and vulnerability — Adaptation is place-based. Each community will need 

to review its particular situation, identify what the local government controls, and 
how planning and operations might be affected by climate change. The questions 
below are aimed at helping local governments begin to work through this process, 
and explore some of the options for adapting. It is important to plan for multiple 
events, e.g. unusually high temperatures and power outages. See Appendix A: 
Further resources for help with assessing risks and vulnerability.

Note:  Understanding that the past will no longer be a good predictor of the future is 
a  key  part  of  adapting  to  climate  change.  Local  government  staff  and  elected  repre-
sentatives will need to be aware of the “new normal”: the climate of the future will be 
different than the climate of the past. For example, extreme weather events such as heat 
waves, drought and storms may become more frequent and more severe. Flooding and 
wildfires may be more frequent or extensive, or both, than previously experienced. As a 
consequence, it is important to recognize that what worked in the past to address these 
types of challenges will not necessarily work for the future.

91

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia getting started on climate change adaptation

 F Has the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) Plan2Adapt modeling (http://

pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt) for the region been accessed to gain an 
understanding of the projected climate scenarios and impacts?

 F Has a review of climate change impacts and management considerations (for the local 

government) been completed?

 F If appropriate, has locally relevant, downscaled climate modeling been obtained?

 F Is council/board well-briefed on climate change impacts in the community and the 

rationale for action?

 F Has the community engaged in a climate change assessment process that has identified 

vulnerabilities, quantified risk, and decided on priority areas for action?

 F Has local knowledge about climate change and its impacts been included in the 

assessment process?

 F If a climate change assessment process has not yet been undertaken, could this process be 

linked to OCP review and updating?

 F Has a list of key stakeholders for consultation and possible partners for implementation 

of adaptation strategies been identified (noting that this list needs to include climate 
scientists, emergency personnel, and others who might not typically be consulted)?

 F Have any important information gaps related to climate change impacts and adaptation 

been identified, and a course of action determined?

 F Has a scan of programs, policies and bylaws that could be affected by, or could include 

climate change adaptation, been carried out?

 F What actions are already in place that can be considered adaptation?

 F Given the projected climate change impacts in the community, what level of resources is it 

appropriate to commit for staff, and/or consultants?

 F Which staff representatives (area/level) should be on an interdepartmental climate change 
adaptation committee — finance/ asset management, engineering/operations and works, 
planning, parks and recreation, emergency preparedness, communications, etc.?

 F Should a select, standing or advisory committee be established?

 F Are there currently in-stream applications or proposed developments or civic projects that 

should be re-evaluated in light of climate change impacts?

 F ____________________________________________________________

 F ____________________________________________________________

 F ____________________________________________________________

 F ____________________________________________________________

92

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Regional and provincial context

 F Are there any existing or proposed provincial guidelines that require consideration 
of climate change impacts relevant to the community? (For example, Ministry of the 
Environment, Climate Change Adaptation Guidelines for Sea Dikes and Coastal Flood Hazard 
Land Use. www.env.gov.bc.ca/wsd/public_safety/flood/structural.html)

 F Have adaptation strategies of other local governments in the region been considered? Is 

the regional board advocating action? Are municipal councils within the region identifying 
issues or already taking action? What can be learned from them? Are there opportunities to 
work collaboratively?

 F Have opportunities to work with universities and colleges, non-governmental 

organizations, businesses and/or others to develop climate change adaptation strategies 
been explored and pursued?

 F Have roles and responsibilities of local, provincial and federal levels of government with 
respect to assessing and responding to climate change impacts been determined, and 
areas of cooperation identified?

 F Has the relationship of local adaptation action to regional adaptation action been 

considered, and roles and areas of potential cooperation identified? Have opportunities 
to work with First Nations been explored? (See Regional Climate Adaptation Planning 
Alliance, Report on Climate Change and Planning Frameworks for the Intermountain West. 
www.parkcitygreen.org/Files/USDN-Inter-Mountain-West-Report_Final-Aug-2011.aspx)

 F Is there potential to create regional partnerships to obtain climate impacts information 
or seek guidance on developing adaptation plans (e.g, from ICLEI www.iclei.org/index.
php?id=611, Columbia Basin Trust www.cbt.org/Initiatives/Climate_Change/?Adapting_to_
Climate_Change) or other external services)?

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

93

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia official community Plan (ocP)

 F Is there an opportunity to mainstream climate change adaptation into the OCP through 

a revision? (See pages 30-34 of the Guide, and note that some local governments have 
chosen to develop stand-alone climate change adaptation plans).

 F Have all existing policy areas within the OCP been reviewed through the lens of climate 

change impacts in the community/region, both long and short term, and appropriate 
revisions considered?

 F Where an OCP includes a Sustainability Checklist for reviewing applications for OCP 

amendments, zoning changes, new developments, etc., has it been reviewed and revised in 
light of climate change adaptation priorities (both vulnerabilities and opportunities) for the 
community? (See Halifax Regional Municipality, Developers Guide to Risk Management  
www.halifax.ca/climate/documents/DevelopersGuidetoRiskManagment.pdf )

 F Have any new policies and objectives identified for the OCP with respect to climate change 

adaptation been considered in conjunction with the financial plan?

 F Has council/board met its statutory requirements for consultation with respect to any 

changes to the OCP that it intends to make related to climate change adaptation?

 F Does the current OCP indicate the need to act to address climate change impacts within 

the current time-frame, even though impacts may not be significant until later iterations of 
these planning documents?

 F Have projected climate change impacts such as changes in water supply, run-off (e.g. 

reduced snowpack volume/earlier spring snowmelt), and temperature; increased intensity 
and frequency of extreme weather events and forest fires; increased occurrence of invasive 
species; and others been taken into account in developing new OCP policies?

 F Have low-impact development and the use of the Water Balance Model to support 

community resilience in the face of climate change been explored? (See City of Courtenay 
OCP, www.courtenay.ca/planning/official-community-plan.aspx)

 F Has mapping of specific climate change impacts and related hazards been carried out, and 

can this be incorporated into the OCP along with appropriate policy direction? Note: This 
may be a big topic that requires separate discussion. For example, What sort of mapping is 
most appropriate? Risk and/or vulnerability mapping? Overlaying hazard and vulnerability? 
What sort of accuracy/ precision is appropriate? Would visualization techniques be useful? 
(See page 34 of the Guide)

 F If mapping has been carried out, has a timeframe been identified for review and updating?

 F Have existing Development Permit Areas related to natural hazards been reviewed, and 

updated with current and projected climate information relevant to the region?

 F Does the OCP address community safety and social planning issues related to climate 

change?

 F Has the need for further outreach and public education related to new policies and 

objectives related to climate change adaptation been considered? Have business and 
industry been included?

94

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia  F Have processes for monitoring and assessing the adaptation strategy outlined in the OCP 

been put in place?

 F How and when will progress on climate change adaptation be measured and reported?

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

Land use and zoning

 F Has the community engaged in a climate change assessment process that has decided 

community priorities for action? If not, could this process be linked to OCP updates, zoning 
bylaw updates, applications and other land use activities?

 F Where are the high, medium and low risk areas in relation to a changing climate (e.g. valley 
bottoms, steep slopes, areas near rivers, coastlines subject to sea level rise, areas near dams, 
high hazard fire risk areas, etc.)?

 F In areas where wildfire risks currently exist, have risks been re-evaluated to account for 

climate change impacts (such as, potentially, reduced precipitation and a longer dry 
season)? See UBCM’s Strategic Wildfire Prevention Initiative for funding opportunities: 
www.ubcm.ca/EN/main/funding/community-safety/strategic-wildfire-prevention.html14

 F Are there specific types of land uses that may be at risk? (e.g. areas subject to hazardous 

conditions that may become more severe or widespread as a result of climate change, 
environmentally sensitive areas, etc.)

 F Are there risks based on socio-economic factors, income levels, density and specific 

location (e.g. sea level rise planning areas)?

 F How will land uses change over time (e.g. increased use of parks during hotter periods and 

more demand for shade)?

 F How will building uses change over time (e.g. increased need for cooling centres at 

recreational facilities or community halls)?

 F Are there locations with equipment, tools or facilities that will be helpful or essential during 
an emergency event (e.g. public works yards and equipment, trucking/car rentals, refueling 
stations, private businesses, schools, churches, community centres, provincial /federal 
facilities, etc.)?

14  In Kimberley historical fire strikes were plotted on a computer visualization (a map) based on local knowledge 
and historical records. This was combined with the climate projections from Plan2Adapt, expertise from CALP 
and local knowledge about fire behaviour to estimate future risks. See www.planningforclimatechange.ca/
wwwroot/Docs/Presentations/SE06%20-%20Ellen%20Pond.pdf 

95

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia  F How may climate change affect the community given its particular geography and 

historical development patterns (e.g. heritage buildings, transportation systems, industrial 
areas, topography, geology, hydrology, windward/leeward location, community plan vision 
and goals)?

 F What is the community context within the region (e.g. economic drivers, community 
values, regional services, relations with First Nations) and how will this be taken into 
account when planning for climate change?

 F Where are vulnerable populations and associated services (e.g. hospitals, medical clinics, 
pharmacies, seniors homes, transition houses, group homes, homeless shelters, schools, 
universities, correctional facilities)?

 F What developed areas are likely to be subject to increased risks over time (e.g. due to sea 

level rise, steep slopes or increased flood or wildfire hazards)?

 F What undeveloped areas are likely to be subject to increased risks over time?

 F Where does the OCP indicate new development will be located and should it be re-

evaluated in light of projected climate impacts?

 F Are there potential implications for new or existing development from climate change 

impacts on aquifers (e.g. lower rates of re-charge, salt-water intrusion)?

 F Will an increasing urban heat island effect be a problem?

 F Is there a Tree Management Inventory, Plan or Bylaw? Does there need to be a balance 
between increasing the number of trees for shade and/or removing or pruning trees to 
reduce the risk of wildfire?

 F Are there ecosystems that will require additional protection as a result of climate change? 

Will protected areas and corridors need to be expanded or shifted?

 F Do wetlands need to be protected and expanded (in light of sea level rise and increased 

storm surge)?

 F Are there opportunities to support agriculture and improve food security in the community 

through changes to zoning and other bylaws to protect farmland, promote local food 
production, processing and sales (such as community food gardens, farmers markets, agri-
tourism, etc.)?

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

96

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia community infrastructure

 F Has the frequency and intensity of climate change impacts (e.g. severe storms) been 

reviewed and updated?

 F Has community infrastructure been assessed in light of climate change?

 F Is climate change factored into the development of all new facilities and systems? Is it 

considered in procurement processes?

 F Does the community’s application for federal or provincial funding for infrastructure 

require consideration of climate change impacts?

 F Are projected climate change impacts being taken into account in decisions to replace or 

upgrade infrastructure?

 F Have agricultural and other industries that rely on community infrastructure, such as 

drainage and transportation infrastructure, been consulted about the impacts of climate-
related disruptions and failures on their operations?

 F Have water or sewage treatment plants been assessed for vulnerability to climate impacts 

(e.g. more intense storm events; increased risks related to flooding, water shortages; 
disruption of power supply associated with natural hazards, etc.?) Are backup generators 
needed?

 F Is community infrastructure at risk from increased landslide activity (e.g. water quality 

impacts as measured by TSS — total suspended solids)?

 F If higher storm surge, scour or sea level rise are projected impacts of climate change, then:

 F Are intakes and outfalls or linear infrastructure at risk?

 F Are bridges, roads, railways, or airports at risk?

 F Are wells and septic systems at risk from increased precipitation or water shortages 

resulting from climate change?

 F How will warmer water affect water quality (e.g. algae blooms)?

 F How will available water supply be affected by more severe droughts? Can consumption 
be reduced through demand management and leak detection programs? Is there storage 
capacity available?

 F Is there a watering restriction bylaw in place?

 F Will a universal water metering program help manage water resources more effectively in 

the future?

 F In regions where the frequency and intensity of extreme precipitation events are projected 

to increase:

 F Is the capacity of drainage infrastructure adequate? Are board/council and the 

public willing to accept a reduced level of flood protection or should upgrades be 
considered?

97

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia  F Are there initiatives to reduce the volume and rate of surface water entering the 

drainage system (e.g. source controls, bylaws and policies that minimize the creation 
of impervious areas)?

 F Have incentives for disconnecting downspouts been explored, and is this practice 

viable (i.e. does the soil have adequate capacity to absorb water) and have other 
mitigative measures like topsoil requirements and rain gardens been evaluated?

 F Have design criteria been adjusted to address climate change (e.g. updated 

Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves)?

 F If there is a combined stormwater sewer system, how will climate change affect 

overflows? Is there increased risk to the environment or public health? Will upgrades 
such as sewer overflow tanks or a sewer separation program be considered?

 F In areas vulnerable to increased flooding as a result of climate change:

 F Would measures to promote the installation of backflow valves by residents and 

businesses be appropriate?

 F Is there a flood plain management bylaw and should it be updated to reflect 

changing precipitation patterns?

 F Are issues related to increased debris and sediment accumulation being considered?

 F Will waterlogged soils need to be addressed?

 F Are tools such as the Water Balance Model’s climate change module being used to assist in 

adaptation planning? http://bc.waterbalance.ca/

 F If alternate water supply sources are being planned for, will there be adequate energy 

available for increased pumping demands?

 F Will street lighting and public waste and recycling receptacles be vulnerable to climate 

change (e.g. increased wind and more severe storms)?

 F Are homeowners and businesses aware of the actions they can take in light of climate 

change impacts affecting water supply? (See Okanagan Homeowner’s Guide to Using Rain as a 
Resource www.okwaterwise.ca/pdf/HomeDrainageGuide_Okanagan.pdf)

 F Are urban trees at increased risk from wildfire, invasive species, water shortages, extreme 
weather events, etc.? Should other species that are more heat/drought/moisture tolerant 
be considered for future plantings? Is a greater diversity of tree species needed to assure 
resilience to pests and invasive species that might be associated with climate change? (See 
Urban Forests: A Climate Adaptation Guide www.retooling.ca/_Library/docs/Urban_Forests_
Guide.pdf)

 F _______________________________________________________________

 F _______________________________________________________________

 F _______________________________________________________________

 F _______________________________________________________________

98

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Transportation systems and connectivity  
(Roads, trails, railways, airports, marine transportation, communications, utilities, etc.)

 F Has the community engaged in a climate change assessment process that has identified 

vulnerabilities, quantified risk, and decided on priority areas for action with respect to 
transportation systems and connectivity?

 F Is the local road network vulnerable to climate-related emergencies (e.g. increased risk of 

flooding or wildfire) or longer-term gradual impacts (e.g. sea level rise)?

 F Are there specific assets such as bridges and culverts that are particularly vulnerable to 

climate change impacts?

 F Are there pipes or conduits located under or alongside bridges that need to be relocated?

 F Is consultation and coordination required with other authorities and operators (e.g. Ministry 

of Transportation and Infrastructure, railway companies, port authorities)?

 F Will more freeze-thaw cycles or increased summer temperatures result in higher 

maintenance demands for roads and sidewalks?

 F In the event of a climate-related emergency (e.g. flooding) will there be impacts on the 

transportation network?

 F Are there secure emergency access and evacuation routes?

 F Will there be missing transportation links, gaps or dead end roads?

 F Are any emergency facilities likely to be cut off during a climate-related emergency 
(e.g. fire, emergency, ambulance, police/RCMP, helicopter pads, public works yard, 
coast guard station)? If so, do they need to move over the long term or is there an 
alternative access (i.e. right of way)?

 F Would the transportation system function well if there was more than one extreme 
event happening at the same time (e.g. windstorm and flooding)? Will the transport 
of food and supplies, as well as business continuity (e.g. transport of industrial and 
commercial goods, employee travel to and from work) be affected?

 F Are gas, diesel and electrical vehicle fueling stations and distribution facilities at risk?

 F Are there back-up options/plans for hydro, gas and telecommunications in the event of 

disruptions (e.g. generators or solar facilities for running and recharging communications 
devices such as cell phones and radios)?

 F Is there an up-to-date emergency plan in place for transportation (with contacts, phone 

numbers and protocols)?

 F ________________________________________________________________

 F ________________________________________________________________

 F ________________________________________________________________

 F ________________________________________________________________

99

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Asset management

(For additional resources see: Asset Management BC www.assetmanagementbc.ca/)

 F Have local government assets and property been assessed for vulnerability to climate 

impacts anticipated during their lifetime?

 F Have the assets and property found to be vulnerable been assessed and ranked in terms 

of how critical their functions are (e.g. a bridge that also carries water, sewer, gas lines 
and communication lines will likely be more critical than a bridge that only serves road 
transportation needs)?

 F Has appropriate action been taken in terms of policy and investment to reduce 

vulnerability of critical assets?

 F When taking into account the impacts of climate change over the longer term, have 
life cycle costing methods been used to understand the real costs of improvements 
or alterations required to infrastructure (i.e. including not only capital investment, but 
operation and maintenance costs)? Have the life-cycle costs associated with green 
infrastructure solutions or low-impact development been compared?

 F Have changed levels of service because of climate change impacts been incorporated into 

planning and communicated to the public?

 F Does the community have a formal asset management program and can future 

replacement programs be used to adapt to climate change?

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

financial plan, strategic plan and budget

 F Has the five-year financial plan been reviewed and revised in light of short to medium term 

costs associated with climate change assessments and adaptation planning?

 F Does the five-year financial plan include costs associated with implementing adaptation 

actions to reduce vulnerability to climate change?

 F Have possible effects of climate change impacts on the tax base been considered?

 F Have the longer term financial implications of climate change been explored in the context 

of maintaining service levels and community quality of life into the future?

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

 F _____________________________________________________________

100

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia emergency planning

(For additional resources see: Emergency Management in BC: Reference Manual, Emergency Man-
agement BC, 06/08/2011. Note that not all emergencies are eligible for emergency funding.)

 F Has the Emergency Response Plan and related planning and policies been reviewed and 

updated to take into account projected changes in climate?

 F Will effective emergency planning require consultation with other local governments 
in the region, other government agencies and authorities? (e.g. port authorities, public 
transportation authorities, utility companies, railway companies, RCMP, Coast Guard, 
Ministry of Transportation and Infrastructure, meteorological services, etc.)

 F Are there opportunities to partner with neighbouring communities and First Nations with 

respect to emergency planning and response?

 F Will the central business area and commercial and industrial activities that the community 

relies on be able to continue functioning during a climate-related emergency?

 F Where are hazardous materials located in the community?

 F Where are the vulnerable populations (i.e. seniors, homeless, street workers, low income 

areas)? Are they able to evacuate easily? Is there dependence on public transit?

 F Are there specific land uses that may need additional attention in a climate-related 

emergency (i.e. hospital, care facilities, seniors homes, group homes, transition houses, 
shelters, schools, pharmacies, emergency gathering centers)?

 F Are there special communications considerations in resorts or major tourist areas where 

visitors’ primary language may not be English?

 F Where are the contamination risks (sewage lagoon, landfill, groundwater, commercial or 

industrial uses)? What mitigation is needed?

 F What would happen if farm animals needed to be moved? Is there a plan to deal with dead 

or injured livestock?

 F Do local emergency response teams have the capacity to deal with multiple disasters 

occurring at the same time, e.g. an extreme precipitation event and a severe windstorm? 
Note that some areas are also subject to earthquakes and tsunamis.)

Please see, also, emergency-related questions under “Transportation, systems and connectivity.”

 F ____________________________________________________________

 F ____________________________________________________________

 F ____________________________________________________________

 F ____________________________________________________________

101

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia insurance

 F Does insurance coverage need to be updated in light of local climate change impacts? 

What potential climate-related losses will be covered by insurance? What losses would not 
be covered?

 F Are insurance premiums being affected by exposure to risks associated with climate 

change? Are there actions that can be taken to address these risks?

 F Are businesses and residents encouraged to minimize their risks associated with climate 

change impacts? 

 F ___________________________________________________________

 F ___________________________________________________________

 F ___________________________________________________________

 F ___________________________________________________________

staff training

 F Have staff and community training needs with respect to climate change adaptation been 

evaluated, and steps taken to identify and implement training options?

 F Have partnering or mentoring options been considered?

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

 F ______________________________________________________________

102

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia APPendix d

Considerations for local 
governments with limited resources

Assessing climate change impacts and prioritizing actions

It is very important for local governments, whether small or large, to start assessing the impacts of 
climate change in their communities and developing adaptation strategies. BC’s climate is changing, 
and scientists who study the climate are projecting further changes over the next decade. The deci-
sions that are being made today by local governments will critically affect the ability of their com-
munities to manage the impacts of many of these changes in the future.

Part 1 of this Guide presents some high level information about climate change in BC, and back-
ground about adaptation and how communities can obtain scientific information relevant to their 
communities, assess their vulnerabilities and risks and prioritize actions. These steps are necessary 
before climate change adaptation strategies can be developed. While some local governments might 

Source:   Pathways to Climate Change Resilience: A Guidebook for Forest-based Communities  

 

www.modelforest.net/pubs/Pathways_to_Climate_Change_Resilience_FINAL_Feb_2011.pdf

103

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia be hesitant to begin in light of challenges with resources and capacity, Appendix C — Developing 
Adaptation Strategies — Checklist for Local Governments provides a series of key questions that can 
help to get started.

As well, a resource developed specifically for smaller BC communities offers helpful guidance about 
assessing impacts and prioritizing actions. The six step process set out in Pathways to Climate Change 
Resilience: A Guidebook for Forest Based Communities15 is reproduced on page 103. It is hoped that 
this material might help some local governments be in a better position to begin implementing the 
climate change strategies described in Part 2 of this Guide. Further guidance with respect to assess-
ing impacts and prioritizing actions is also provided below, and in Appendix C.

learning about climate change impacts

•	

•	

•	

•	

•	

A Columbia Basin Trust video (5.41 minutes) provides an introduction to climate change 
from the perspective of a City Councillor, elementary school student, retired mill worker 
and gardener, and scientist. www.youtube.com/watch?v=ECJtF7CfycA

Pacific Institute for Climate Solutions (PICS) has a series of short videos and lessons on 
climate change. http://pics.uvic.ca/education/climate-insights-101 An Introductory Climate 
Insights Trailer (2.50 minutes), Climate 101 module (about 10 minutes) and a series of four 
Climate Lessons: 1. Carbon Dioxide and Greenhouse Gasses; 2. Mother Nature’s Influence; 3. 
Observable Changes and 4. An Introduction to Climate Modeling.

Plan2Adapt is a (free) online tool that offers climate projections by region, and some 
description of impacts. The tool is from the Pacific Climate Impacts Consortium (PCIC) 
at the University of Victoria. http://pacificclimate.org/tools-and-data/plan2adapt The 
projections are at a regional scale, however some communities have contracted with PCIC 
to get information scaled down to a local level, where possible.

The City of Prince George has prepared a series of short videos about climate change 
impacts in their region and some of the actions they are taking. www.youtube.com/playlist
?list=PLC9CCE982F121480C

Local observations can be an additional source of information about changing weather 
patterns in the community. Consider and discuss the ways the climate has changed in the 
community over the last 30+ years;  for example, it is no longer cold enough for an outside 
skating rink; the wind comes from a different direction and trees have blown down; there is 
increased and earlier spring flooding/ summer droughts/ heat waves; there is increased risk 
of wildfire; there are more intense storms/ ice jams/ high water threats to bridges and water 
pipes/sewage lagoon flooding/dike breaches or overtopping; there are more/different pest 
outbreaks, or they occur at different times. Newspaper stories and pictures from previous 
events may be helpful to catalyze discussion.

Note: The information obtained from community observations can be compared with the scientific 
information obtained about climate change. Both areas of overlap as well as areas where scientific 
information suggests potential risks not anticipated based on anecdotal information alone should 

15  With thanks to Cindy Pearce. See Pathways to Climate Change Resilience: A Guidebook for Forest-based 

Communities www.modelforest.net/pubs/Pathways_to_Climate_Change_Resilience_FINAL_Feb_2011.pdf 

104

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia be explored. Local governments should be aware that an accurate understanding of the climate 
impacts in their region will likely require expert assistance, whether from PCIC, through BC universi-
ties, or possibly through provincial or federal government departments or agencies.

Some ways to increase local capacity for climate change adaptation

•	

•	

•	

Engage community stakeholders and experts in consultation (e.g. community leaders, 
businesses, local scientists, university/college representatives, utilities, non-governmental 
organizations, recreation groups, and interested stakeholders).

Check in with neighbouring communities, regional districts and First Nations to see what 
they have done, and where there may be opportunities for partnership or cooperation.

Consider creating a citizens advisory committee on climate change adaptation to act as 
an ongoing resource and sounding board for staff as climate change impacts are assessed, 
priorities identified, and adaptation strategies are developed and implemented.

 
Assessing risk and vulnerabilities, and prioritizing actions

•	

Adaptation is place-based so each community will have to assess its own unique situation.

•	

•	

Review the community’s local geography, environmental and regional context 
for climate change impacts. Some of the typical impacts facing BC communities 
(depending on where they are located in the province) include: increased risk 
of riparian flooding; sea level rise and erosion in coastal areas; increased wildfire 
risk; changes in wind patterns and tree blow down; aquifer and water supply 
issues. Community risk and vulnerability to these impacts are important factors in 
prioritizing action. For example, if the climate change impact is a high risk of sea 
level rise of 1 m by 2100, but the local topography is 5-meter rocky bluffs along 
the shoreline, then the community likely has a low vulnerability to coastal erosion. 
By contrast, a community with low-elevation coastal areas may be extremely 
vulnerable if faced with the same risk.

Review land use development patterns, locations of key facilities (e.g. hospitals, 
emergency facilities, works yards etc.), transportation/ emergency routes and check 
for connectivity and stranding in the case of emergencies arising from natural 
hazards associated with climate change such as flooding or wildfire, green space 
and sensitive habitats and check demographics, socio-economic factors, housing 
(location, age, rental) to identify vulnerable populations, etc. Part 2 of this Guide has 
further information about climate change adaptation considerations with respect to 
many of the services and responsibilities of local governments.

•	 Use the risk evaluation matrix to help prioritize actions.

105

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia sample Risk evaluation matrix which may help in prioritizing actions16

Source:   Robert A. Black and James P. Bruce, Adapting to Climate Change: A Risk-based Guide for Local Governments, 

Volume 1, October 2010.

•	

•	

Think about how to address in-stream applications and identify any big projects that may 
be at very preliminary stages. Consider prioritizing a review of climate change adaptation 
considerations for these projects.

Community engagement is very important. Some climate adaptation strategies will require 
significant investment of tax dollars and local government resources. Citizens and elected 
officials will need to have a basic understanding of the climate change impacts in their 
communities so that they can make informed decisions. In areas subject to increased risks 
with respect to natural hazards as a result of climate change, for example, a community 
might need to weigh the costs and benefits of protection versus relocation. See Land use 
scenarios #1 and #3 in Appendix B for further ideas about community engagement.

•	

In communities where funds are not available for adaptation planning, review the checklist 
in Appendix C in light of risks and vulnerabilities that have been identified.

16  Note that time is also an important variable to be considered — when will consequences be felt, and how long 

does it take to address them or put in place measures to anticipate them?

106

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia APPendix e

BC regional adaptation 
Collaborative (raC) resources

This Guide was produced with funding from the BC RAC. The list below highlights a number of re-
ports, guidelines, case studies and other documents also produced under the RAC. For a complete 
listing of all the documents and related links, please go to www.retooling.ca

Okanagan Water Supply & Demand Project 

Summary Report, Summit Environmental 
Inc.

Tutorial video for Okanagan Water Viewer, 

Okanagan Basin Water Board (OBWB)

Slow it, Spread it, Sink it! An Okanagan 
Homeowner’s Guide to Rainwater 
Management, Insight Environmental 
Ltd.

Rain to Resource 2010 Report, Insight 

Environmental Ltd.

Agricultural Water Demand Model Reports for 
Nicola Basin, Similkameen Basin, Kettle 
Basin, Okanagan Basin, Ted Van der 
Gulik, BC Ministry of Agriculture

Nicola Water Use Management Plan (NWUMP), 
NWUMP Multi-Stakeholder Committee

Evaluating the Vulnerability of Pacific Salmon in 

the central interior of BC to the effects of 
climate change, ESSA Technologies Ltd.

Groundwater Habitat Interactions for Interior 

Fraser Coho Salmon, Nicola Tribal 
Associations

Preliminary Technical Summary: Assessing 
Effectiveness of Climate Adaptation, 
Steve Conrad

Public Infrastructure Engineering Vulnerability 

Committee (PIEVC) Workshop Report, 
OBWB & Jacquie Belzile

Green Bylaws Workshop, OBWB & Jacquie 

Water Balance Model Technical Guide, HB 

Belzile

Lanarc

Erosion Assessment, Kerr Wood Leidal 

Associates Ltd.

Water Balance Model Workshop, Guide to 
Workshop Process, OBWB & Jacquie 
Belzile

Theodosia Watershed Climate Adaptation Plan, 

Advancing Adaptation in the Basin (for 

Patrick Little for BCFF

Rethinking Our Water Ways: A Guide to 

Water and Watershed Planning for BC 
Communities in the Face of Climate 
Change and Other Challenges, Fraser 
Basin Council (FBC) staff

Okanagan Basin, Somass Basin, & San 
Jose Basin) Cindy Pearce, Mountain 
Labyrinths Inc.

Stream and Riparian Area Checklist for 

Assessing the Health of Stream Reaches, 
D. Tripp

107

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia Climate Change Adaptation Planning for Northwest 
Communities — Project Update, Project Team 
& Brinkman Group

Urban Forests – A Climate Adaptation Guide, Judith 

Cullington & Associates and Jeremy Gye & 
Associates Urban Forest Consulting

Designating “Temperature Sensitive” Streams in 

BC, A Discussion Paper, Lars Reese-Hansen 
BC Ministry of Forests, Lands and Natural 
Resource Operations, Marc Nelitz, ESSA 
Technologies Ltd. & Eric Parkinson

Preparing for Climate Change: An Implementation 
Guide for Local Governments in BC, Deborah 
Carlson, West Coast Environmental Law and 
Cathy LeBlanc, BC Ministry of Community, 
Sport & Cultural Development

Skeena River Water Conservation Project Overview, 

City of Prince George. The Effects of Climate Change 

Cortex Consultants

Climate Change Adaptation Planning for Northwest 
Skeena Communities, Dirk Brinkman, James 
Casey, Stewart Cohen et al.

Coastal Floodplain Mapping Guidelines, Kerr Wood 

Leidal

Campbell River Floodplain Map, Kerr Wood Leidal

Professional Practice Guidelines for Legislated Flood 

Hazard & Risk Assessments in a Changing 
Climate in BC, Association of Professional 
Engineers & Geoscientists of BC (APEGBC)

Sea Dike Coastal Guidelines: Policy Discussion Paper. 
Sea Dike Coastal Guidelines. Sea Dike Coastal 
Guidelines: Guidelines for Management of 
Coastal Flood Hazard Land Use, Ausenco 
Sandwell

Delta – RAC Sea Level Rise Adaptation Visioning 

Study, Policy Report, Sea Level Rise Adaptation 
Visioning Study Technical Report, Dr. Stephen 
Sheppard, Ellen Pond, David Flanders, Sara 
Barron, Kristi Tatebe, Glenis Canete, Sara 
Muir Owen, Jeff Carmichael (University of 
BC Collaborative for Advanced Landscape 
Planning – CALP)

Online Training Modules (for Visualizations), CALP

Delta Adaptation Website, CALP

A Primer of Options for Adapting to Climate Change 
Impacts on Canada’s Southern Coasts, Graham 
Farstad, Sally Elford, Arlington Group

Cost of Adaptation – Sea Dikes & Alternative 

Strategies. Technical Memorandum: 
Recommendations for Developing A Holistic 
Flood Risk Management Strategy, Delcan

on Natural Area Ecosystems, Ecora Resource 
Group Ltd. & H. Griesbauer. Precipitation & 
Freeze-Thaw Assessment, Kerr Wood Leidal

City of Prince George. Implementing Climate 

Change. The myPG Integrated Community 
Sustainability Plan, I. Picketts. The Draft 
Official Community Plan, I. Picketts and 
City staff. Forests, C. Coady. Natural Areas 
& Ecosystems, C. Coady. Transportation & 
Infrastructure, I. Picketts. Precipitation & 
Freeze-Thaw, I. Picketts. Ongoing & Future 
Initiatives, I. Picketts. Flooding, I. Picketts 
& D. Dyer. myPG Integrated Community 
Sustainability Plan, HB Lanarc

City of Prince George. Terrestrial Ecosystem 

Mapping & Sensitive Ecosystem Mapping, Bio-
Geo Dynamics, Ltd.

Cariboo-Chilcotin Climate Change Adaptation 

Strategy. Cariboo Regional District Case Study, 
Mike Simpson, FBC

Climate Change Adaptation Case Study for Xat’sull 
First Nation (Soda Creek), Donnella Sellars, 
FBC

Columbia Basin Trust. Planning for Change. Local 
Impacts of Climate Change. Video- Climate 
Change Science 101 for the Columbia Basin. 
Summary Report- Getting Started with 
Climate Adaptation Workshops, Learning 
Network Reflection Webinar, Learning Network 
Newsletter, Michelle Laurie & Rachael Roussin

Columbia Basin Trust Case Studies. Adaptation 

Action Plans for the City of Rossland, the 
Regional District of Central Kootenay Area D & 
the Village of Kaslo, & the City of Castlegar

Saanich Adaptation Plan, District of Saanich & 

Stantec

108

PREPARING FOR CLIMATE CHANGE: An Implementation Guide for Local Governments in British Columbia West Coast Environmental Law
200 – 2006 West 10th Avenue, 
Vancouver, BC Canada
V6J 2B3

www.wcel.org

